AN INTRODUCTION·.TO .· 
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINE.ERING 
Second Edition 
Robert D. Holtz, Ph.D., P.E., D.GE 
University of Washingt()n 
William D. Kovacs, Ph.D., P.E., D.GE 
. University of Rhode Island .. 
· 
Thomas C. Sheahan~ Sc.D.,' P.E. 
Northeastern University · 
· 
PEARSON 
' Upper Saddle River Boston Columbus San Francisco New York · 
. , 
. Indianapolis. London Toronto Sydney Singapore Tokyo Montreal 
· ; Dubai , Madrid. Hong Kong · Mexico City .. Munich· . Paris Amsterdam Cape Town 
Vice President and Editorial Director, ECS: Marcia Horton 
Vice-President, Production: Vince O'Brien 
Executive Editor: Holly Stark 
Editorial Assistant: Keri Rand 
Marketing Manager: Tim Galligan 
Marketing Assistant: Mack Patterson 
Permissions Project Manager:Karen Sanatar 
Senior Managing Editor: Scott Disanno 
Production Project Manager: Clare Romeo 
Senior Operations Specialist: Alan Fischer 
Operations Specialist: Lisa McDowell 
Cover Designer: Susan Behnke 
Cover Photo: Joy M. Prescott I Shutterstock 
Manager, Rights and Permissions: Zina Arabia 
Manager, Visual Research: Beth Brenzel 
Image Permission Coordinator: Debbie Latronica 
Manager, Cover Visual Permissions: Cathy'Mazzucca 
Composition: Laserw~rd~ Private Limited, Chennai, India 
Cover Printer: Lehigh Phoenix Color I Hagerstown 
Full-Service Project Management: HaseenKhan 
· Printer/Binder: Courier/Westford 
· 
Typeface: 9/11 Times Ten 
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this textbook appear on 
appropriate page within text. 
Copyright© 2011, 1981 by Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, 07458. All rights reserved. Manufactured in 
the United States of America. This publication is protected by Copyright and permission should be obtained from the 
publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use materials from this work, please 
submit a written request to1Pearson Higher Education, Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ 07458. 
~ 
. 
Many of the designations by manufacturers and sellers to' distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where 
those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim; the designations have been 
printed in initial caps or all caps. 
1 
{ 
-
' 
' 
The author and publisher of this book have u~ed th~i~ best efforts in prep~r'ing thls 'bo~k. These efforts include the 
development, research, and testing of theories and pi:ogra~s to determine their eff~ctiveness. The author and publisher make 
no warranty of any kind, expressed or implied, with regard to these programs or the documentation contained in this book. 
The author and publisher shall not be liable in any event for'incidental'or consequential damageinvith, or arising out of, the 
furnishing, performance, or use of these programs. 
- ' 
' 
' 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Holtz, R. D.. (Robert D.) 
An introduction to geotechnical engineering I Robert D. Holtz, William D. Kovacs, Thomas C. Sheahan.-- 2nd ed. 
p.cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-13-031721-6 (alk. paper) 
1. Soil mechanics--Textbooks. 2. Rock mechanics--Textbooks. I. Kovacs, William D. II. Sheahan, Thomas C. III. Title. 
TA710.H564 2011 
624.1'51--dc22 
2010028254 
Prentice Hall 
is an imprint of 
PEARSON 
· www.pearsonhighered.com 
10 9 " 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
·rsB~-13: 978-d-13-249634-6 
ISBN~10: 0-13-249634-8 
(p 7.-t.( •151 3 
H7Lf5.i 
~t'J I), 
Contents 
Preface 
viii 
Chapter 1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 
Chapter 2 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
2.9 
2.10 
Chapter 3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
Introd~ction to:<Jeotec~nicalEngineering. 
1 
Geotechnical Engineering. 
1 
The Unique Nature of Soil and Rock Materials 
3 
Scope of this Book · · '4 : 1 : 
• ' : ''; 1 ' • 
.• 
· • 
• 
Historical Development of Geotechnical' Engineering... , 5 . 
Suggested Approach to the Study of Geotechnical Engineering . 
Notes on Symbols and Units 
6, 
·· 
.·. 
Some Comments on.How to Study in GeneraL .. .7; .. 
Problems 
8 
· 
· 
· · · · · · 
· . 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils .· ·· · 9. 
• 
• 
" 
' 
• 
. 
. 
~ ' 
l • . 
' 
•• 
,' 
. ' 
' 
' 
• ' ~ • • 
':. ' ; 
' • 
' 
' -
• 
Introduction • '· 9 
:l: ·; 
Basic Definiti~ns and Phase Relations for Soils 
· ·10'' 
S~lution of Ph~se Problems 
15 
SOil Texture 
31-' 
:·;' 
Grain Size and Grain Size Distribution .. · 
32 
Particle Shape 
39 
Atterberg Limits @) · : 
Introduction to Soil Classification 
.47 
Unified Soil Classification System(USCS). 
48·.· 
AASHTO Soil Classification System·. 
61 
Problems · 
61 ' 
· · .· 
· · · · 
·. · · 
. 
. ' 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geom.aterials , 
Importance of Geology to Geotechnical Engineering · 
· 69 
The Earth; Minerals, Rocks, and Rock Structure 
71 · · , 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
76 
Sources of Geologic Information 
117 
Problems 
119 
6 
69 
iii 
iv 
Contents 
Chapter 4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, · 
and Rock Classification 
122 
4.1 
Introduction 
122 
4.2 
Products of Weathering 
122 
4.3 
Clay Minerals 
123 
4.4 
Identification of Clay Minerals and Activity 
131 
4.5 
Specific Surface 
133 
4.6 . Interaction Between Water and Clay Minerals 
134 
4.7 
Interaction of Clay Particles 
138 
4.8 
Soil Structure and Fabric of Fine-Grained Soils 
· 139 
4.9 
Granular Soil Fabrics 
147 
4.10 
Soil Profiles, Soil Horizons, and Soil Taxonomy 
150. 
4.11 
Special Soil Deposits 
151 
4.12 
Transitional Materials: Hard Soils Versus Soft Rocks 
152 
4.13 
Propertie~, Macrostnicture, a~d Classification of Rock Masses 
154 
Problems 
161 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils • 163 
5.1 
Introduction · 
163 
'. 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
Compaction and Densification ·. ' 164 
. 
Theory of Compaction for Fine~Grairied Soils · · 164 · 
Structure. of Compacted Fine~GraineciSoils · · 172 
Compaction of Granular Soils 
173 
Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
178 
Specifications and Compaction Control' · '190 
··' 
Estimating Performance of Compacted Soils 
.. • 206 · 
Problems 
210 
.... :. 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
214, 
6.1 
Introduction 
214 
6.2 
Capillarity 
215 
6.3 
Groundwater Table and the Vadose Zone 
.· · 227 
6.4 
Shrinkage Phenomena in Soils 
230. 
· · · · 
6.5 
Expansive Soils and Rocks· · · · 236 ' 
. 
6.6 
Engineering Significance'of Shrinkage and Swelling 
6.7 
Collapsible Soils and Subsidence 
246 
6.8 . Frost Action 
249 · 
. 
6.9 ' Intergranular 'or Effective Stress 
257 
I ; 
~ 
6.10 · Vertical Stress Profiles 
262 
244 
6.11 
RelationshipBetween Horizontal and Vertical Stresses , · · 266 
Problems 
267 
/ 
Contents 
v 
Chapter· 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock. · · 272 
7.1 
Introduction 
272 
7.2 
Fundamentals ofFluidHow 
273 
7.3 
Darcy's Law for Flow Through Porous Media· · .. 275 
7.4 
Measurement of Permeability or Hydraulic Conductivity 
277 
7.5 · , Heads and One-Dimensional Flow · 
285 ·. · •·. 
· 
7.6 
Seepage Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
'294 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
306 · · 
7.8 
Seepage Toward Wells. 
321 
. 
7.9 'seepage Through Dams and Embankments 
· 325 
7.10 
Control of Seepage and Filters 
327 · 
Problems 
· 338 , 
Chapter 8 
Compressibility of Soil an~ Rock 
345 
8.1 
Introduction 
345 
• 8.2 
Components of Settlement 
347 
8.3 · Compressibility of Soils 
. 347 · 
8.4 
One-Dimensional Consolidation Testing 
350 
8.5 
Preconsolidation Pressure and Stress History 
352 
8.6 · Consolidation Behavior of Natural and Compacted Soils · 
357 
8.7 
Settlement Calculations 
364 
8.8 
Tangent Modulus Method .· 
377 
" , . , .. 
8.9 
Factors Affecting the Determination of a~ '· 
380. · 
8.10 
Prediction of Field Consolidation Curves · · 380 
8.11 ' • Soil Profiles . 
388 • . 
· 
' . 
· · , 
'8.12 
Approximat~ Methods a~d Typi~al Values of Comp~ession Indices 
8.13 
Compressibility of Rock andTransitionalMaterials 
, . 395 
8.14 
Burland's Intrinsic Compressibility Properties 
395 
8.15 
In,Situ Determination.of,Compr~ssibil~W.·. ·· .. 398 · ... ·.· 
Problems 
399 
· 
Chapter 9 
· Time R~ti of Corisolidatib~ · :.·, 404 
9.1 ' Introduction . · 404 
9.2 
The Consolidation Process 
405 
9.3 
Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
· 407 
9.4 
Determination of the Coefficient of Consolida'tion Cv. 
•• 427 : 
9.5 , Determination of the Coefficient of Permeability ·. • · 432 
9.6 
Typical Values of the CoeffiCient of Consolidation c~ 
433 .· 
9.7 
In Situ Determination of Consolidation Properties 
-434 
9.8 
Evaluation of Secondary Settlement · •• • 435 
· · ' 
Problems 
442 
394 
vi 
Contents 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis, • 
450 . · 
10.1 
Introduction 
450 
,, • 
10.2 
Settlement Analysis of Shallow Foundations .· · • 451 
10.3 
Stress Distribution .. 454 • 
:·: 
, .; . 
10.4 
Immediate Settlement : 472;: .. • .. 
10.5 
Vertical Effective Overburden and Preconsolidation Stress Profiles 
477 
. 
. 
. 
10.6 
Settlement Analysis Examples i. :· 479,: 
, . 
Problems 
492 
· 
Chapter 11 
The.Mohr Cirde, Failure Theories;'~~cl Str~engthTesting 
of Soil and Rocks 
497: l, · 
·,, 
11.1 
Introduction 
497 
11.2 
Stress at a Point 
· 498 . 
. 
. 
· · .· .. 
11.3 
Stress-Strain Relationships·and Failure Criteria : · 507 · 
11.4 The Mohr-Coulomb Failure Criterion · 508 
11.5 
Laboratory Tesfs for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
· 516 
11.6 
In Situ Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
. 526 
Problems. . . 536 : ,, 
·. : :: ·. 
· 
.-., 
~ 
/'-
~ 
' 
" ' ' ' ' 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to ShearStrengthof Soils and Rock. 
540 
12.1 
Introduction 
540 
:.: 
' 
· : 
12.2 
Angle of Repose of Sands • 
542 · . 
. 
12.3 
Behavior of Saturated Sands During Drained Shear 
543 
12.4 
Effect of Void Ratio and Confining Pressure on Volume Chan.ge 
545 
12.5 . Factors that Affect the Shear Strength ofSands ·. . 553 . 
. . 
• 12.6 
Shear Strengthof SandsU sing In SituTests : .· 
1.558 ··. . . 
12.7 The CoeffiCient of Earth Pressure at'Restfor Sands' : ,· 560 
12.8 
BehaviorofSatunited'coh.'esive Soils Du'rin'g 'shear·· ··•·.'563 
12.9 
Consolidated-Drained Stress~ Deformation .and Strength · 
Characteristics 
564 
· · 
· ' ; ' 
12.10 
Consolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation,and Strength .. 
Characteristics ·' 570 
·• '· • · 
' '' · · 
::• 
· 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength;, . 
Characteristics 
578 . ·. 
· , , 
12.12 
Sensitivity 
• 591 . 
12.13 ·.The Coefficient of Earth Pressure at Rest for Clays.; .. , 592 
12.14 
Strength of Compacted Clays . · 596 · 
12.15 . Strength of Rocks and Transitional Materials . . 600 
12.16 
Multistage Testing 
601, 
.. , < 
12.17 
Introduction to Pore Pressure Parameters 
. 606 • . 
Problems 
610 
., 
Contents 
vii 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
614 
13.1 
Introduction 
614 
13.2 
Stress Paths 
616 
13.3 
Pore Pressure Parameters for Different Stress Paths 
627 
13.4 
Stress Paths During Undrained Loading_:Normally and Lightly 
Overconsolidated Clays · 
629' 
· 
· 
13.5 
Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-Heavily 
Overconsolidated Clays 
644 
· · 
13.6 
Applications of Stress Paths to Engineering Practice 
647 
13.7 
Critical State Soil Mechanics · 
652 
· 
13.8 
Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
663 
13.9 
Fundamental Basis of the Drained Strength of Sands 
675 
13.10 
Behavior of Saturated Sands in Undrained Shear 
682 
13.11 
Plane Strain Behavior of Sands 
696 
13.12 
Residual Strength of Soils 
702 · · · 
13.13 · Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topies 
· 705 
13.14 · Strength of Unsaturated Soils 
731 
· 
13.15 
Properties of Soils Under Dynamic Loading 
737 
· 13.16 
Failure Theories for Rock 
750 
Problems 
754 
Appendix A 
· Application of the SI System of Units 
to Geotechnical Engineering 
765 
.Appendix 8.1 
Derivation ofLaplace's Equation 
778 
Appendix 8.2 
Derivation arid Solution of Terzaghi's . 
One-Dimensional Corisolidatiori TheorY 
· 780 
· Appendix 8.3 · · Pore Pressure Parameters 
786 · 
Appendix( .· · The .Method of Fragme~ts 
795 · 
References 
806 
•. 
. 
Index 
840 
viii 
Preface 
,•'t_, 
It has been thirty years since the publication of the first edition of An Introduction to Geotechnical 
Engineering. During those years, the practice of geotechnical engineering has greatly changed, but the 
fundamentals of soil mechanics and soil properties have remained essentially the same. Engineering 
·education also has changed during that time, mostly for the better. On the other hand, reduced gradu~ 
ation requirements and the increased use of computations instead of the laboratory experience have 
often resulted in a tendency toward reduced rigor arid over-simplification of some undergraduate edu-
cation and textbooks. 
· · 
· 
. We still believe that there is.· a need for more detailed. and moder~· coverage. of the engineering 
properties of geo-materials than is found in most undergraduate texts. This applies to students who 
concentrate in geotechnical engineering as well as the general civil engineering undergraduate student. 
Our students will be involved in increasingly more complex projects, esp_ecially those in transportation, 
structural, construction and 'environmental engineering.' Those projects will increasingly involve envi-
ronmental, economic and political constraints that will demand innovative solutions to civil engineer-
ing problems. Modern analytical techniques using digital computers have had a revolutionary effect on 
engineering design practice. However, the validity of the results from these computational procedures 
(which typically include 'striking graphical output) is highly dependent on the quality of the geotechni-
. cal engineering design parameters as well as the geology and site conditions. . . . . 
Like the first edition, this ~dition is intended for use in the first of a two-~ourse sequence in geotech-
nical engineering usuallytinight to third~ and fourth~yea~ undergraduate civil engineering students. We 
· assume the students have a working knowledge of undergraduate mechanics, especially statics and 
mechanics of materials, including fluids. In the first course we introduce the ''language" of geotechnical 
engineering-that is, the classification and engineering properties of soils and rocks. Once the student 
has a working knowledge of the behavior'of geo-materials, he/she can begin to 'predict soil behavior 
and, in the second course, carry out the design of simple foundations and earth structures. 
We have tried to make the text easily readable by the average undergraduate. To this end, An 
Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering is written at a rather elementary level, although the material 
covered may at times be quite sophisticated and complex. Involved derivations are relegated to appen-
dices, where they are available to the interested student. 
·The emphasis throughout is on the praCtical, and admittedly empirical, knowledge of soil and 
rock behavior required by geotechnical engineers for the design and. construction of foundations, 
embankments, and underground structures. Most of the material in the text is descriptive, since most of 
the engineering design applications are usually left to the second course in foundation engineering. 
Consequently, in order to strengthen this connection between the fundamental and applied, we have 
tried to indicate wherever possible the engineering significance of the property being discussed, why the 
property is needed, how it is determined or measured, and, to some extent, how it is actually used in spe-
cific design applications. We illustrate some simple geotechnical designs-for example, determining the 
;.; 
Preface 
ix 
··flow, uplift pressures;and exit gradients in•2-D seepage problems, and estimating the settlement of 
shallow foundations on sands and saturated clays. 
. ' ' . 
· One thing that has not changed in thirty years is tliat units remain a problem with U.S. geotech-
nical'engineers. In line with the rest· of the world, the 'American Society of Civil Engineers, and the 
American Society for Testing and Materials, we have used the S.l. System of Units in the text. Most stu-
, dents are conversant in both the U.S. customary (or British) engineering units and S.l., but readers 
unfamiliar with S.l. may find Appendix A helpful. We have examples and problems in both systems, 
and we have been careful to use the correct definition of density (mass/unit volume) in phase relation-
ships as well as in geostatic and hydrostatic pressure computations. 
· 
We consider the laboratory component of the first course to be an essential part of the neophyte 
. engineer's experience with soils as a unique engineering material. How else is the young engineer to begin 
:' to develop a "feel" for soils and soil behavior, so essential for the successful practice of geotechnical engi-
.. neering? An emphasis on laboratory and field testing is found throughout the text. The organization and 
development of the material iri the text is traditional and generally follows the order of the laboratory por-
tion of our first courses. The early chapters introduce the discipline of geotechnical engineering, phase rela-
tionships, index and classification properties of soils and rocks, geology, landforms, and the origin of 
geo-materials, clay minerals, soil and rock structures, and rock classification. Chapter 3, "Geology, Land~ 
forms, and the Origin of Geo-Materials," has been added to this edition because these topics are so critical 
·. to understanding the properties and subsequent behavior of geo~materials under. various loading condi-
.. tions. These chapters provide the background and terminology for the remainder of the text.. 
· .. ·Following a very practical discussion of compaction in Chapter 5, Chapters 6 and 7 describe how 
water influences. and affects soil behavior. Topics presented in Chapter 6 include groundwater and 
vadose water, capillarity, shrinkage, swelling, and. collapsing soils; frost· action, and effective stress. 
Chapter 7 discusses permeability, seepage, and seepage control.· , . · 
· 
. 
. The last six chapters deal with the compressibility and shear strength of soils and rocks. The 
treatment of these topics is quite modern and has been updated considerably. We now have stress dis-
tribution and settlement analyses, including immediate settlement, in. a: new ChapterlO to separate 
these practical procedures from the more basic time-rate and compressibility behavior of natural and 
· , , compacted soils and rock,masses described in Chapters 8 and 9. In these latter chapters we have 
. ,included new material on Janbu's tangent modulus method, in situ determination of compressibility of 
soil and rock, Burland's intrinsic compressibility of soils, and finite difference solution to the Terzaghi 
. consolidation equation. We have extended. the. Schmertmann method for prediction of field compres-
sion curves to overconsolidated soils, and we have updated Mesri's work on secondary compression. 
We received much criticism about the length of Chapter 11 on shear strength in the first edition, 
so now shear strength properties of soils and rocks are discussed in three new chapters. New Chapter 11 
. on the Mohr circle, failure theories; and strength testing of soil and rocks has new material on the obliq-
uity relations and in situ tests for shear strength. Chapter 12 is an introduction to shear strength of soils 
and rock and is primarily suitable for undergraduate students. More advanced topics in shear strength of 
soils and rocks are discussed in Chapter 13, which graduate students and practicing geotechnical engi-
.neers should find useful. New material in Chapter·12jncludes multistage testing, in situ tests for the 
. shear strength of sands and the strength of compacted clays, rocks, and transitional materials. We now 
.. have the stress-path method in Chapter 13, which also includes sections on critical-state soil mechanics 
and an introduction to constitutive models. We then discuss some advanced topics on the shear strength 
: .· of sands that start with the fundamental basis of.their drained, undrained, and plane-strain. strengths . 
• . The residual shear strength of sands and clays provides a transition into the stress-deformation and 
. 'shear strength of clays, where we discuss failure definitions, Hvorslev strength parameters, stress history, 
:the·· Jurgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, consolidation methods.· to overcome sample . disturbance, 
anisotropy, plane-strain strength, and strain-rate effects. We .. end. Chapter 13 with sections on the 
. strength of unsaturated soils, properties of soils up.der dynamic loading, and failure theories for rock. 
x 
Preface 
Even though it is primarily for the beginning student in geotechnical engineering, advanced stu-
dents in other disciplines and engineers desiring a refresher in engineering properties may find the 
book helpfuL Because of the many fully worked example problems, the book is almost "self-teaching." 
This aspect of the text also potentially frees the instructor in a formal· course from the necessity of 
working example problems during lectures. It allows the instructor to concentrate on explaining basic 
principles and illustrating specific engineering applications of the points in question. From the first edi-
tion, we know that many practicing geotechnical engineers will find this book useful as a refresher and 
for the typical v~lues given for classification and engineering properties for a wide variety of soils; we 
have found such a compendium very useful in our own engineering practice. · 
The solutions manual and test manual as well as PowerPoint figures of all images and tables 
from this book can be downloaded electronically from our Instructor's Resource Center located at 
www.pearsonhighered.com. The material available through the Instructor Resource Center is provided 
solely for the use of instructors in teaching their courses and assessing student learning. All requests for 
instructor access are verified against our customer database and/or through contacting the requestor's 
institution. Contact your local sales representative for additional assistance or support. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
To acknowledge all who have contributed to this book is a formidable task. We have tried whenever 
possible to indicate by references or quotations, concepts and ideas originating in the literature or with 
our former teachers, especially Profs. B. B. Broms, A. Casagrande, R. J. Krizek, C. C. Ladd, J. K. Mitchell, 
J. 0. Osterberg, and H. B. Seed. Others have made helpful suggestions or reviewed portions of the text, 
resulting in improvements to the final pr'oduct. These include Roy Borden, David Chang, Herbert 
Einstein, Milt Harr, Vic Kaliakin, Jerry Leonards, Bill Likos, Harry Stewart, Dayakar Penumadu, Siva 
Sivakugan, and Tom Zimmie, and countless others who have made comments about the first edition 
over the years. The comments of Dick Galster; Teresa Taylor, and Hank Waldron significantly improved 
· early drafts of Chapter 3. 
.. · · 
· 
· We'are grateful to our Production Project Manager, Clare Romeo, for the patience, diligence and 
humor she exhibited in the face of many challenges, imd for her help in ensuring the quality of the fmal 
product. We also acknowledge those who assisted in the development of the 2nd edition through contribu-
tions of figures, reports, and administrative assistance. Figures and other resources were graciously supplied 
by John Burland, Don DeGroot, and Paul Mayne, among others·from the 1st edition. At·Northeastern, 
·Joan Omoruyi, Ed Stevens, and Brett McKiernan provided research and administrative assistance. 
Thank you to the reviewers of this edition: Kamal Tawfiq, Florida State University; Monica 
Prezzi, Purdue University; Jay DeNatale; California Polytechnic State University; Robert Mokwa, 
Montana State University; Balasingam Muhunthan, Washington State University; Trevor Smith, Port-
land State University; Tom Zimmie; Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute; Scott Ashford, University of 
California:...san·Diego; Robert D'Andrea, Worcester Polytechnic Institute; Samuel Clemence, Syracuse 
University; Dave Elton, Auburn University; and Khaled Sob han, Florida Atlantic University. 
· On a personal note, we wish to thank our respective spouses, ·cricket, Eileen and Maryrose, who 
endured from a few to several years of delays, sporadic periods of stress, and many evenings and week-
ends that should have been spent with their husbands instead of sharing their marriages with this book. 
R.D.HOLTZ 
SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 
W.D.KOVACS 
KINGSTON, RHODE ISLAND 
T. C. SHEAHAN 
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 
1.1 
'I')' • ., 
' 
·C · H A · P ·. T · E R 
1 ·. 
• 
I, 
. 'lntrod'uction to·.Geote:chnical 
Enginee~ing. 
,'!; 
GEOTECHNICAl ENGINEERING , 
. Geotechnical engineering is concerned with .the application of civil· engineering technology to some 
aspect of the earth, usually the naturalmaterials found on.ornear the'earth's surface. Civil engineers 
call these materials soil and rock. Soil, in an engineering sense,·is.the:relativelyloose agglomerate of 
mineral and organic materials and sediments found above the .bedrock. Soils can be relatively easily 
broken down into their constituent mineral or organic particles. Rock, on the other hand, has very 
;strong internal cohesive and molecular forces which hold its constituent mineral grains together. This is 
true for massive bedrock as well as for a piece of gravel found in a clay soil. The dividing line between 
. soil and rock is arbitrary, and many.natural materials encountered in engineering practice cannot be 
· ;easily classified. They may be either a "very soft rock",or a "very hard soil.'.'.. 
. . 
. , . . 
Other scientific disciplines have different meanings .for the terms soil. and rock; In geology, for 
example, rock means all the materials found in the earth's crust, including what most of us would call 
soil. Soils to a geologist are just decomposed and disintegrated rocks found in the very thin upper part 
of the crust and usually capable of supporting plant life. Similarly, pedology (soil science) and agron-
. '•, • omy are concerned with only tlie very uppermost layers of soil-that is, those .materials important to 
·.agriculture and forestry. Geotechnical engineers can learn much· from both. geology and pedology . 
. Geotechnical engineering has considerable overlap with.these fields, especially with engineering geol- .. , 
ogy and geological engineering. But beginning students should remember that these fields may have 
different terminology, approaches; and objectives than geotechnical engineering .• · .. · 
·Geotechnical engineering has several different aspects or emphases. Soil mechanics is concerned 
. i with the engineering mechanics and properties of soil, whereas rock mechanics is concerned with the 
: •. engineering mechanics and properties of rock---: usually, but not limited to, the bedrock. Soil mechanics 
applies to soils the basic principles of mechanics including kinematics, dynmpics, fluid mechanics, and 
the mechanics of materials. In other words, soil-rather than.water, steel, or concrete, for example-is 
the engineering material whose properties and behavior we niust understand in order to build with it 
or upon it. A similar statement could also be made for rock mechanics. However, because in significant 
,ways soil masses behave differently from rock masses, in practice thereis not much overlap between 
1 
2 
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering 
the two disciplines. This divergence is unfortunate from the viewpoint of the practicing civil engineer. 
Inconveniently, the world does not consist only of soft or loose soils and hard rock, but rather, most 
geo-materials fall somewhere between those extremes. In your professional practice you will have to 
learn to deal with a wide range of material properties and behaviors. 
' 
Foundation engineering applies engineering geology, soil mechanics, rock mechanics, and struc-
tural engineering to the design and construction of foundations for civil engineering and other struc-
tures. The foundation engineer must be able to predict the performance or response of the foundation 
soil or rock to the loads the structure imposes. Examples include foundations for industrial, commer-
cial, and residential buildingS, bridges, towers, ~nd retaining walls, as well as foundations for oil and 
other kinds of tanks and offshore structures~ Ships must have a drydock during construction or repairs, 
and the drydock must have. a foundation. During construction and launch, rockets and appurtenant 
structures must be safely supported. Related geotechnical engineering problems the foundation engi-
neer faces are the stability of natural and excavated slopes, the stability of permanent and temporary 
earth-retaining structures, problems of construction, control of water movement and water pressures, 
and even the maintenance and rehabilitation of old buildings. Not only must the foundation safely sup-
port static structural and construction loads, but it must also adequately resist dynamic loads due to 
wind, blasting, earthquakes, and the like. 
If you think about it, we cannot design or construct any civil engineering structure, whether built 
on the earth or extraterrestrial, without ultimately considering the foundation soils and rocks. The per-
formance, economy, and safety of any civil engineering structure ultimately are affected or even con-
trolled by its foundation. 
Earth materials are often used as a construction material because they are the cheapest possible 
building material. However, their engineering properties such as strength and compressibility are often 
naturally poor; and measures must be taken to densify, strengthen, or otherwise stabilize and reinforce 
soils so that they will perform satisfactorily. Highway and railway embankments, airfields, earth and 
rock dams, levees,· and aqueducts are· examples of earth structures, and the geotechnical engineer is 
responsible for their design and construction. Dam safety and rehabilitation of old dams are important 
aspects of this phase· of geotechnical engineering. A related consideration, especially for highway and 
airfield engineers, is the design of the surface layer on the earth' structure-the pavement. Here the 
· overlap between the transportation and geotechnical disciplines is apparent. 
Rock engineering, analogous to foundation engineering for soils, is concerned with rock as a 
foundation and construction material. Because most of the earth's·surface is covered with soil (or 
water), rock engineering usually occurs underground (tunnels, underground power houses, petroleum 
storage rooms, mines; yours, and so on). But some rock engineering problems occur at the surface, such 
as in the case of building and dam foundations carried to bedrock, deep excavations to bedrock, stabil-
ity of rock slopes, and the like. 
In recent years, geotechnical engineers have become increasingly involved in the solution of 
environmental problems involving soil and rock. This developing interdisciplinary field is called 
geoenvironmental engineering or environmental geotechnics. Especially challenging are problems of 
polluted groundwater, proper disposal arid containment of municipal and industrial wastes, design and 
construction of nuclear waste repositories, and remediation of hazardous· waste repositories (aka 
dumps) and other contaminated sites. Although all these problems have a major geotechnical engi-
neering component, they are interdisciplinary in nature, and their solutions require that geotechnical 
engineers work together with environmental and chemical engineers, environmental and public health 
. specialists, geohydrologists, and regulatory agency personnel. 
· 
· · 
In presenting some of the typical problems facing the geotechnical erigineer, we wanted you to 
see, first, how broad the field is and, second, how important it is to the design and construction of civil 
engineering structures, as well as to the basic health and safety of society. In a very real sense, geotech-
. nical engineering combines the basic physical and mathematical sciences, geology, and pedology, with 
1.2 The Unique Nature of Soil. and Rock Materials 
3 
~nviron~ental, hydraulic, structural, transportation, construction, and mining engineering. It truly is an 
. exciting and challenging field. 
1.2 
THE UNIQUE NATURE OF SOIL AND ROCK MATERIALS 
. ' " 
•,··· 
.f,"-; 
We mentioned earlier that soil.,..-:from a civil engineering point of view-is the relatively loose agglom-
eration of mineral and organic materials found above the bedrock. In a broader sense; of course, even 
shallow bedrock is of interest to geotechnical engineers, as illustrated by examples given above. 
The nature and behavior. of soil and rock are discussed in greater detail throughout this text. For 
now, we want just to set the.stage for what you are about to study. We assum(! you understand that rock 
refers to any hard solid aggregate or mass of mineral matter found in the earth's crust. You also already 
have· a layperson's idea about soil. At lea~t you know in general ~hat sand and gravel are, and perhaps 
you even have an idea about fine-grained soils such as silts and days. These terms have quite precise 
engineering definitions, as we shall later see, but for now the general concept that soils are particles will 
: suffice.' · 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Soils are particles of ~hat? Well; usually particles of mineral niatt~r or, more simply, broken-up 
· · pieces of rock that result from weathering and other geologic processes ( desciibed in Chapter 3) acting 
on massive rock deposits and layers. If we talk for the moniellt about the 'size of the particles, gravels 
are small pieces ofrock and typically contain several minerals, whereas sands are even smaller pieces, 
·· and each grain usually consists of only a single mineraL If you cannot se~ each individual grain of a soil, 
.:thenthe soil is either a silt or a clay or a'mixture of each. In fact, natural soils generally are a mixture 
of several different particle sizes and may even contain organic' matter. Some soils, such as peat, may be 
almost entirely organic: Furthermore; bee~ use soils are a particulate material, they have voids, and the 
·voids _are usiuilly filled with water and air; The physical and chemical interaction of the water and air in 
the voids with the partiCles of soil, as well as the interaction of the 'particles themselves,'makes soil's 
behavior complicated and leads to some of its unique propeities. . ' 
. 
· ·' · ' · 
. . 
Because' o(the nature of soil and rock materials an·d the' complexity of the geological environ-
. illent, geotechnical engineering is highly empirical. It is_ perhaps much more of an "art" than the other 
disciplines within civil engineering:' Soils and rocks are often highly variable, even within a distance of 
. a few millimeters. Iri other words, soils and rocks are h~tero'geneous rather thanhomoge~ious materi-
als. That is, their material or engineering properties may vary widely from point to point within a soil or 
'rock mass. Furthermore,· these materials in general-are nonlinear; their stress-strain curves are not 
· straight lines. To furthefcompliciitethirigs (as well asi:llake them interesting!); soils especially are non-
- conservative materials: That is, they have' a fantastic meinoiy-they remember almost everything that 
· ever happened to thein; a~d this fact strongly affects their engineering behiwior. Instead of being 
' isotropic; soils and rocks are typically anisotropic, which means that their material or engineering prop-
erties are not the same in all directions. ' 
. 
' 
.. _ ' 
· Most of our theories about the mech~mi6al behavior of engineering materials assume that they 
are homogeneous and isotropic and. obey linear stress-strain laws. Common. engirieeriilg 'materials 
such as steet'_and concrete do notaeviate too significantly from these ideals, so' we can,use, with dis-
cretion, simpldinear, theories to predictthe response of these materials_ to engineering loads. With 
soilsand rock, we are riot so fortunate. Weinay· assume a linear stress-stniin response, but then we 
''must apply large empirical correction or ~·safety" factors to our designs to accoundor the real mate-
rials' behavior. Furthermore, the behayior of soil androck-·inaterials in.siti1 is often controlled by 
·joints Gust dori't inhale), fractures, weak layers and zones, and other .','defects" in the material, which 
' ' ) . ; our laboratory tests 'and simplified methods of analysis often do not. or are unable to take into 
account. That is why the practice of geotechnical engineeiing is more an "art" than a science. Success-
ful practice depends on the good judgment and expedence of the designer, constructor, or consultant. 
4 
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering 
1.3 
. • 
Put another way, the successful geotechnical engineer must develop a "feel" for soil and rock behav-
ior before a safe and economic foundation or tunnel design can be made, 'an earth structure can be 
safely built, or an environmentally sound waste containment and disposal system or a site remedia-
tion plan can be developed. 
In summary, because of their nonlinear, nonconservative, and anisotropic mechanicaL behavior, 
plus the variability and heterogeneity of natural deposits due to' the capriciousness of nature, soils and 
rocks are indeedcomplex engineering and construction materials. Helping you find some order in this 
potential chaos is our primary objective in this book. 
· 
SCOPE OF THIS BOOK 
In this intr~ductory text, rather than attempt an all-inclusive appr~ach to geotechnical engineering, we 
' ·. put primary emphasis. ori th~ cla~sification and engi~eering belz.avior of soil and rock materials. The rea-
son is that successful practiCe of geotechnical engine~ring requires a thorough knowledge and under-
standing of the engineering properties and behavior of soils and rocks in situ.,-that is, when they are 
' subjected to engineering loads and environinent~l con.diiions. Therefore the beginning student must 
first develop an appreCiation. for the engineering properties of geo-materials as distinct from other 
common civil engineerhig materials b'efore 'learning how to analyze and design foundations, earth-
works, tunnels, imd the like. ; 
' ' . 
.· 
' 
. 
' . 
' 
Actually, this first pa~t isthe hard part. Most engineering students (and e_ngineers) are very good 
at analysis and performing design calculations. But these are worthless if an incorrect picture of the site 
geology has been assumedorthe:wrong.ellgineering properties assumed for the design. · 
. 
As much ofthe practice of geotechnical engineering depends on the site geology, landforms, and 
the nature of the soil and rock deposits at a site, we have included an 'optional Chapter 3 on geology 
and landforms--:'-just in case you haven;t had a basic courseiil geology. If you have had such a course, 
you can skip this chapter. If you haven't, you are strongly encouraged to take a physical geology or an 
'engineering geology C()UrSe in ,connection With your studies of geotechnical engineering . 
In the. early chapters; we introduce some. of the basic definitions, index properties, and classifica-
.. tion schemes for geo-matedals which are used throughout the book. Classification of soils and rocks is 
important because it is the ''language" engineers use to communicate certain general knowledge about 
' the engineering behavior of the materials at a particular site.' 
. 
' 
' 
· 
The rest of the book is concerned with the' engineering properties of soils and rocks-properties 
' that are' necessary for the design offoundations, earth and underground structures, and geoenviron-
mentarsystems. We describe how water affects soil and rock behavior, including hydraulic-conductivity 
. and seepage characteristics. Then 'we get ~nto compressibility, the important engineering property we 
· need to understand in order to p~edict the settlement of structures constructed on soil and rock masses . 
. Finally, we describe some elementary strength characteristics of both soils and rocks. Strength is very 
important for the stability of, for exampleifoundations, retaining walls, slopes, tunnels, and waste con-
. • tainment systems: 
. . 
· 
· 
· 
· . 
· · 
· 
· 
. Keep in mind that this is an elementary text that emphasizes the fundamentals, but with an eye 
toward the practical applications that you as a civil engineer are likely to encounter. Having studied 
this text, you will be well prepared for follow~up courses in foundations and earthwork engineering, 
environmental geotechnics, ~ock' mechanics, and engineering geology. You should have a fairly good 
idea of what to look for at a site and how to obtain the soil and rock properties required for most 
designs. If you are able to accurately classify the materials, you will know the probable range of values 
for a given soil or rock property. Finally, we hope you will learn enough about soils and rocks to be 
aware of your own limitations, and to avoid costly and dangerous mistakes in those aspects of your pro-
fessional career that involve soils and rocks as engineering materials. 
1.4 .. Historical Development of Geotechnical Engineering 
5 
1.4. 
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT.OF GEOTECHNICAL EN(jiNEERING 
As long as people have been building things, they have us~d.soils androcks as a foundation or con-
struction material: The ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese, and Indians knew about constructing 
.. dikes and levees out of the soils found in river flood plains. Ancient temples and monuments built all 
around the world involved soil and rock in some way: The Azie~s constructed temples and cities on the 
very poor soils in the Valley of Mexico long before the Spaniards arrived in the so~called New World. 
European architects a~d builders during the Middle Ages learned about the problems 'cif ~ettlements 
of cathedrals and large buildlngs. The most noteworthy example is,' of course, the LeanihgTower of 
. Pisa. Vikings in Scandinavia used timber piles to support houses. and wharf stru~ttiies' on. their soft 
clays~ The "desig~" offoundations and otn~r constructions involving: soil and rock; was by rule of 
thumb, arid very little theory as such was developed until the mid~1700s.'·' ' 
. 
Coulomb is the most famous 'engineering name of that era. He investigated the problems of 
earth pressures against retaining walls, al,ld some of his calculation procedures are still in use today. The 
most common theory for the shear strengtli ofsoils is"rianied after hini (Coulomb, 1776rDuring ilie 
next century, the French engineers Collin and Darcy and the Scotsman Rankine madeimportant dis-
coveries. Collin (1846) was the first engineer to systematically examine failures in clay slopes as well as 
the measurement of the' shear strength of clays. Darcy (1856) established his law for the flow of water 
through sands. Rankine (1857) developed a method for estimating the earth pressure against retaining 
walls. In England, Gregory (1844) utilized horizontal sub drains and compacted eaith-fill buttresses to 
stabilizerailroadcut slopes. 
· · 
· · 
. f 
By the turn of the century, important developments in the field' were occurring in Scandi-
navia, primarily in Sweden.Atterberg (1911) defined consistency limits for days that are still in use 
today. During the period 1914-1922, in connection .with investigation~ of failures in harbors and 
railroads, the Geotechnical Commission of.the Swedish State Railways (Statens Jarnvagers Geot-
ekniska Kommission, 1922) developed manyimport!mt concepts arid apparatuses in geotechnical 
engineering. They developed methods for calculating the stability of slopes as· well as subsurface 
investigation techniques such as weight sounding and piston and other types of siunplers. They 
•· understood important concepts such as sensitivity of clays and consolidation, whiCh is the squeezing 
of water out of the pores of the clay. Atthat time, clays were thought to be absolutely impervious, 
but the Swedes made field measurements to show they weren't. The Commission was the first to 
·· use the word geotechnical (Swedish: geotekniska) in todaY's sense: the combination of geology and 
civil engineering technology. · 
. 
. · . 
. · 
. 
· 
Even with these early developments in Sweden'; the true father of soil mechanics is an Austrian, 
. Prof. Karl Terzaghi. He pubiished the first modern textbook on soil mechanics in 1925, and in fact the 
name "soil· mechanics" is a translation of the German word Erdbaumechanik; which was part of the 
title of that book (Terzaghi, 1925a). Terzaghi was an outstanding and very creative' engineer. He wrote 
several other important books (for example, Terzaghi, 1943;Terzaghi and Peck, 1967; aridTerzaghi, 
Peck, and Mesri, 1996) and over 250 technical papers and articles. His mime will appear often in this 
book. He was a professor at Robert College in Istanbul, at TechnischeHochschule in Vienna, at M.I.T., 
and atHarvard University from 1938 until his retirement in 1956. He continued tcibeactive as a con~ 
sultant until his death in 1963 at. the age of 80. An excellent ref~rence about his life and e~gineering 
,.careei-is thatof Goodman (1999) arid is well worthreading._ . · ·. • 
, · .. ··· ' 
·. · ·, , 
, . 
. Another importantfigure is Prof. Arthur Casagrande,' who. was .at Harvard University from 
'.1932 'until1969. You will see his name often in this book, because he· made many import1mt contri-
. • buti~ns to the aft and schince of soil mechanics and fo~~dation· engineering. Since-the 1950~ the field 
has grown substantially, and rmul.y peopl~ha~e beeri responsible for its rapid advancement. Impor-
tant contributors to the field irid.ude Taylor, Peck, Tschebotarioff, Skempton, Bjerrum, Seed, Ladd, 
and Leonards. 
· 
· · · 
·. 
· 
· · 
''', 
6 
Chapter 1 · 
Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering 
Both Terzaghi and Casagrande began the teaching of soil mechanics and engineering geology in 
North America. Before the Second World War, the subject was offered only at a very few universities, 
mostly as a graduate course. After the war, it became commori for at least one course in the subject to 
be required in most civil engineering curricula. In recent years graduate programs in geotechnical engi-
neering have been implemented at many universities: Finally, there has been a real information explo-
sion in the number of conferences, technical jounials, and textbooks published on this subject during 
the past three decades. 
. 
Important recent developments you should know about i~clude soil dynamics and geotechnical 
earthquake engineering,. the use of computers. for . the solution. of complex engineering problems, 
deformation-based analyses and designs, the introduction of probability and statistics irito geotechni-
cal engineering analysis and design: and geo-enviro. nmental engineering and technology.·· 
' 
! 
,' 
' 
' 
'• 
' 
• 
1.5 
SUGGESTED. APPROACH TO THE STUDY OF GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING 
Because of the nature of soil and rock materials, both laboratory and field testing are very important in 
geotechnical engineering. Student engineers can begin to develop a feel for soil and rock behavior in 
the laboratory by performing the standard tests for classification and engineering properties on many 
different types of soils and rocks. In this way the novice can begin building up a "mental data bank" of 
how certain soils and rocks actually look; how they might:behave with varying amounts of water in 
them and under different types of engineering loads, and the range of probable numerical values for 
the different tests. This is sort of a self-calibration process, so that when you are faced with a new soil 
. deposit or.rock'type,,y(m will in advance have some.idea as to the engineering problems you. will 
encounter at that site; You can also begin to judge, at least qualitatively; the validity of laboratory and 
field test results for the materials at that site . 
. Also important is a knowledge of geology. Geology is; of.course, the "geo" part of geotechnical 
engineering, and you should get as much exposure to it as you can during your academic career. After 
· •, 
a basic course in physical geology, coursesin.geomorphology and engineering geology are recom-
mended. Geomorphology is concerned with landforms, which are important to geotechnical engineers 
because the soils androcks at a site (and therefore the engineering problems) are strongly related to 
·the particular landform. Engineering geology is concerned with the applications of geology to primar-
, · ily civil engineering and has considerable interaction and overlap with geotechnical engineering. 
The theoretical and analytical aspects of geotechnical engineering design also require a sound 
knowledge of engineering mechanics, including strength of materials and fluid mechanics. It also helps 
if you are familiar to some extent with basic structural analysis,reinforced concrete and steel design, 
hydraulic engineering and hydrology, surveying and engineering measurements, basic environmental 
. engineering, and civil engineering construction -in other words, just about all the courses in a typical 
·undergraduate civil engineering curriculum. · 
1.6 
. NOTES ON SYMBOLS AND UNITS 
At the beginning of each chapter, we list the pertinent symbols introduced iri the chapter. As with most 
disciplines, a standard notation is not universal in geotechnical engineering, so we have tried to adopt 
the symbols most commonly· used. For ·example, the American Society for Testing and. Materials 
(ASTM, 2010) has a list of Standard Definitions oLTerms and Symbols Relating to Soil and Rock 
Mechanics, Designation D 653, which was' prepan!d jointly some years ago with the American Society 
of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and 'the International Society of Rock Mechanics (ISRM).·The Interna-
. tional Society for Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering (ISSMFE, 1977) published an extensive 
list of symbolS. Although we sometimes deviate from these recommendations because of our personal 
preference, we have generally tried to follow them. 
1.7 Some Comments on how to' Study in Gener~l 
7 
Units used in geotechnical engineering can be politely called a mess, and, less politely, several 
worse things. There has developed in practice, at least in the United States, a jumbled mixture of cgs-
metric, Imperial or British Engineering units, arid hybrid Europe~m rrietricunits. With the introduction 
of the universal and consistent system ofunits; "Le Systeme Internation~l d'Unites',~ (SI) in the United 
Statesand Canada, the profession has a wonderful opportunity to bring some. coherence to units in 
geotechnical engineering practice. However, since British Engineering units are still rather commonly 
· used inthe United States, American students need to be familiar with the typicalyalues in both sets of 
; units.To assist you with unit conversion where necessary, we have included a brief explanation of SI 
··.:units as applied to geotechnical engineering in Appendix A. 
1.7 r SOME COMMENTS ON HOW TO STUDY IN GENERAL 
It takes a while to learn how to study most effectively.' You are probabiy using the .study habits that you 
got by with in grade school and high school. As you progress professionally, things are going to get much 
harder, starting in your third year of university or college, when you take mostly preprofessional courses. 
We have all used the following methods to do homework assignments. (1) Just read the assign-
ment to satisfy the moral obligation to do so. (2) Go further by underlining or highlighting passages to 
emphasize the main points. Consider what you are doing physically: the information goes through the 
eyes, down your neck and arm into the writing fingers, completely bypassing the brain! Both (1) and 
(2) are pretty much a waste of time unless you have a photographic memory. If we are really going to 
learn anything, most of us need to study a third way: (3) Read a few pages and then close the book. 
Write down in your own words what the main concepts are; a "bullet" format is OK. In order to do this, 
you must have the material in the brain to begin with. If youcan't write down anything about the pages 
you have just read, go back and read again, perhaps fewer pages this time. Repeat. Close the book and 
write in your own words the main points. Yes, this will take more time than "studying" using methods 
(1) and (2),but you will not be wasting your time. 
A useful argument for doing it the recommended way is that you will have already started 
preparing for the exams, because'now you know the material. The rest of the time, you are brushing up 
or reviewing the material, so you won't need to cram. 
· 
· 
. One big problem is that there may not be enough time in the.week to use method (3) when you 
are taking three or four other courses. However, follow it as much as you can. You have invested a lot 
in your education. Don't waste time with methods (1) and (2). 
Don't ask us to tell you how long it took for us to learn the correct way to study (it's too 
·embarrassing). 
Our suggested approach will help you prepare for the Fundamentals of Engineering (FE or 
EIT) exam and later the PE or PEng (professional engineer's exam). We strongly encourage you to 
take (and pass) the FE exam before you graduate and receive your engineering degree~· 
I'M HAVING TROUBLE 
GETTING STARTED WITH 
HOMEWORK .. 
WELL, SOMETIMES VOU JUST 
!-\AVE TO OPEN THE BOOK, 
AND GO RIGHT AT IT .. 
© 2010 Peanuts Worldwide LLC, dist by UFS, Inc .. · 
8 
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Geotechnical Engin.eering 
PROBLEMS 
· I 
1
L1 Interview a faculty member (other than your instructor) or a practicing engineer in Geotechnical Engineer-
ing. Ask him or her how they became involved with this specialty and what education is necessary these days 
to practice. (You will be surprised how much help you will receive, because we all like to talk about our "life's 
work"!) Ask about the importance of taking the FE examination and obtaining the PE (or P.Eng.) license and 
their influence on one's salary and promotion. 
1.2 Get on 'the WWW and, using a search engine, type in the following letters: USUCGER. Report on the mean-
ing of the letters; list the various links that you find in terms of subject matter or key words. Comment on the 
number of cross links found. Finally, select a web page and explore it; prepare a short summary of your find-
ings in grammatically correct sentences (the hardest part of the question!). 
1.3 Contact the Board of Registration for Professional Engineers in your state or province and find out the 
requirements for becoming a registered professional engineer. Start pl!inning to take the FE examination 
when it is given in your area next year. 
', [· ' ~ ,_ 
I
•• _l 
Index- an·d. Cl-assification 
ProJl'erti·es of Soi Is • 
" 
r 1 
· 
2.1 
'·INTRODUcTION 
In this chapter we introduce the basic terms and definitions used by geotechnical engineers to index 
and classify soils. The following notation is used in this chapter. 
, .. 
Symbol 
Cc 
Cu 
.. Dio 
· D3o 
D6o 
',. 
e 
FB 
G 
·a~ 
Gs 
Gw 
g 
Llor h 
LLorW£· 
M'·· 
Mt• 
Ms· ;. 
Mw 
N 
,, .. ,. 
·'• ' 
. 
' 
.. ,; 
·Dimension 
'L 
.L 
. 'L:i·•. 
,..· 
J• 
··Mi 
:M· 
'M 
·M.·· 
Unit 
mm 
.mm 
mm 
c 
decirri~l) 
N 
. 
g's 
:. Definition 
Coefficient of curvature - Eq. (2.36) 
Coefficient of uniformity - Eq. (2.35) 
Diamet~r for 10% finer by weight 
riiaineter 'for 30% ·finer by. weight 
• Diameter for 60% finerby weight 
. Void ratio: Eq. (2.1)' ;· 
• . 
.. 
· Buoyant force · 
· · · · 
'··specific gravity- Eq. (2.24) 
..... 
Bulk specific gravity- Eq: (2.25)" ·' 
.. Specific gra~ity' of solids - Eq. (2.26)' 
Specific gravity of water- Eq. (2.27) 
Acceleration of gravity 
. l.jquidity index- Eq:(2.40) · ; , 
Liquid limit - Eq. (2.38) 
·Submerged (net) mass (Sec. 2.3.1) 
Total mass · 
·' 
Mass of solids • ' · 
J 
Mass of water 
·· ,··: 
· 
~ 
Blow count in liquid limit test- Eq. (2.38) 
Porosity.: Eq. (2.2) 
; ..... 
(Continued) 
9 
10 
2.2 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Symbol· 
Dimension 
Unit 
Definition 
Pc 
-
-
Phnarg coefficient 
PI or lp 
-
-
Plasticity index- Eq. (2.39) 
PLorwp 
-
-
Plastic limit - Eq. (2.37) 
s 
-
(%) 
Degree of saturation- Eq. (2.4) 
SLorws 
-
(%) 
Shrinkage limit 
v,; 
L3 
m3 
Volume of air 
v. 
L3 
m3 
Volume of solids 
Vr 
L3 
m3 
Total volume 
Vv 
L3 
m3 
Volume of voids 
Vw 
L3 
M3 
Volume of water 
w 
M 
kg 
Weight (Sec. 2.3.1) 
W' 
M 
kg 
Submerged (net) weight (Sec. 2.3.1) 
w 
-
(%) 
Water content- Eq. (2.5) 
Yd 
ML-21
2 , 
kN/m3 
Dry unit weight- Eq. (2.28) 
Ym ory1or y 
ML-Zr-2 
kN/m3 
Moist or total unit weight - Eqs. (2.20), (2.30) 
Ys 
ML-2T-2 
kN/m3 
Solids unit weight- Eq. (2.22) 
Ysat 
ML-Zr-2 
kN/m3 
Saturated unit weight- Eq. (2.33) 
Yw 
ML-21 2 
kN/m3 
Water unit weight- Eq. (2.23) 
y' 
ML.:..z12 
kN/m3 
Buoyant unit weight- Eq. (2.34) 
p 
M/L3 
kg/m3 
Total, wet, or moist density - Eq. (2.6) 
p' 
M/L3 
kg/m3 
Buoyant density- Eq. (2.11) 
· Pd 
M/L3 
·kg/m3 
Dry density- Eq. (2.9) 
Ps 
M/L3 
kg/m3 
Density of solids- Eq. (2.7) 
M/L3 
kg/m3 
Saturated density- Eq. (2.10) 
M/L3 
kg/m3 
Density of water- Eq. (2.8) 
In this list, L = length; M. = mass, and T = time. When densities of soils and water are 
expressed in kg!rp3 , the numbers are rather large. For instance, the derisity of water Pw is 1000 kg/m3. 
Since 1000 kg = J Mg, to makethe numbers more manageable, we will often use Mg/m3 for densities. 
If you are 'unfamiliar with SI metric units and their conversion factors, it would be a good idea to read 
Appendix A before proceeding with the rest of this chapter. 
For each of the p notations, there is a corresponding y notation, which denotes unit weight, rather 
than density. This y notatio~should be used when units of force (F) are used (for example, lb or kN) 
instead of units of mass. This is described further in Sec. 2.3.2. 
· 
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND PHASE RELATIONS FOR SOILS 
In general, any mass of soil consists of solid particles with voids in between. The solids are small grains 
of different minerals, whereas the voids can be filled with either water or other fluid (for example, a 
contaminant) or with air (or other gas), or filled partly with some of each (Fig. 2.1). Also, as noted in 
. the introduction, while we can have units of either mass or weight, we will assume that our problems 
·are in mass units. 
So, the total volume Vr ·of the soil mass consists of the volume of soil solids V. and the volume of 
.voids Vv. The volume of voids is in general made up of the volume of water Vw and the volume of air Va. 
·'\ 
· 2.2.; Basic Definitions arid Phase Relations for Soils 
11 
w 
A phase diagram (Fig; 2.2) shows the three phases separately. 
It's as if we could "melt down" all the solids into a single layer 
at the bottom, then have the water sit on top of that, and finally 
h~ve the air in a single layer at the top. The phase diagram 
helps us solve problems involving soil phase relationships. On 
the left side we usually indicate the volumes of.the three 
phases; on the right side we show the corresponding masses. 
Even though the diagram is two dimensional, it is understood 
· ,. that the volume shown is in units of L 3, such as cm3 or ft3• Also, 
since we're not chemists or physicists, we assume that the mass 
, 
of air is zero. 
· 
' 
, .· : 
· 
FIGURE 2.1 
Soil skeleton containing 
solid particles (S) and voids with air (A) 
and water (W). 
1. The void ratio1 e is defined as 
Volume 
In engineering practice, we usually measure the total vol-
ume Vr, the mass of water Mw, and the mass of dry solids Ms. 
Then we calculate the rest of the values and the mass-volume 
relationships that we need. Most of these relationships are 
independent of sample size, and they are often dimensionless. 
They are 'very simple and easy to remember, especially if you 
draw the phase diagram. 
Three volumetric ratios that are very useful in geotech-
nical engineering can be determined directly from the phase 
diagram (Fig. 2.2). 
Mass 
'' 
, ,, 
') '. 
(2.1) 
1 Readers with British backgrou~ds will note that the correct terminology is voids ratio. 
I 
'
12 
Chapter 2 .• • · Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2. The porosity n is defined as · 
n =~X 100(%) 
(2.2) 
where Vv = volume of voids, and · 
~ = total volume of soil sample. 
. 
. 
. 
Porosity is traditionally expressed as a percentage. The. maximum· range of n ·is between 
. 0 and 100%. 
•;.; · ,. 
· 
· 
· 
and 
From Fig. 2.2 and Eqs. (2.1) and (2.2)1it can beshown that 
" ·· 
e 
n=1+e 
n 
e=--
. 
1 :..._ n 
3 •. Thedegre~ ofsat~ration Sis defined as 
v: 
. 
S = V.w X 100(%) 
v 
(2.3a) 
(2.3b) 
(2.4) 
The degree of saturation tells us what percentage of the total void space contains water. If the soil is 
completely dry, then S = 0%, and if the pores are completely full of water, then the soil is fully satu-
rated and S = 100%. 
Now let us look at the other side, the mass side, of the phase diagram in Fig. 2.2. First, we define 
a mass ratio that is probably the single most important thing we need to know about a soil. It is also the 
only strictly mass-based parameter that we'll define for phase relationships. We want to know how 
much water is present in the voids relative to the amount of solids in the soil, so we define a ratio called 
the water content w as 
· · .. 
where Mw = mass of water, and 
Ms = mass of soil solids. 
M 
.. 
, . 
w =·_____!£X 100(%) 
Ms 
' 
(2.5) 
The ratio of the amount of water present in a soil .volume to the amount of soil grains is based 
on the dry mass of the soil and not on the total mass. The water content; which is usually expressed as 
a percentage, can range from zero (dry soil) to several hundred percent. The natural water content for 
most soils is well under 100%, although in some marine arid organic soils it can range up to 500% or 
·higher.. . 
· 
· 
· . 
The water content is easily determined iri the laboratory. The standard procedure is detailed 
in ASTM (2010) standard D 2216. A representative sample of soil is selected and its total or wet 
mass is determined. Then it is dried to constant mass iri. a convection oven at 110°C. Normally a con-
. stant mass is obtained after the sample is left in the' oven overnight. The mass of the drying dish must, 
. 2.2. :Basic.Oefinitions and Phase Relations for Soils 
13 
of course,.be subtracted from both the wet and dry masses .. Then the water.content is calculated 
according to Eq. (2.5). Example 2.1 illustrates how the calculations for water content are actually 
done in practice. 
· · ' 
', t•:;' 
Example 2.1 
Given: 
A specimen of wet soil in a drying dish has a mass of 462 g. After drying in all oven at 110°C 
overnight, the sample and dish have a mass of:364 g. The mass of the dish alone is 39 g ... 
Required: 
Determine the water content of the soil. 
Solution: Set up the following calculation scheme; fill in the "given'' or measured quantities a, b, and d, 
. and make the calculations as indicat~d for c, e, and f. 
· 
a. · Mass of total (wet) sample·:+- dish'=· 462 g 
. b .. Mass of dry sample + dish = 364 g 
c;. Mass of water (a- b) = 98 g 
d. Mass of dish = 39 g 
e: Mass of dry soil (b - d) = 325 g 
f. 
Water c9nt~nt' ( c/e) X 100% ~30.2% 
. ·.:In the laboratory, masses are usually, determined in grams (g) on· an ordinary . balance. The 
required sensitivity of the balance depends on the size 9f the specimen, and ASTM D 2216 gives 
· some recommendations. 
· 
'' • : 
· 
The water content may also be determined using an ordinary microwave oven. ASTM (2010) 
standard D .4643 explains the procedure. To avoid overheating the soil specimen, microwave energy 
is applied for only bdef intervals and repeated until the mass becomes nearly constant. A heat sink, 
such as a glass beaker filled with water, helps. to prevent overheating of the soil by absorbing 
microwave energy after water has been removed from the soil pores. Otherwise, the water content is 
determined exactly as indicated above. Note that the microwave water content is not a replacement 
for the oven dry(D 2216) water content but is used when the water content is needed quickly. Other 
methods sometimes used in the field for water content determination are described in Chapter 5, 
. Sec. 5.7. 
, 
· , . 
, : , .· It is easy. to be confused by the concepts of mass and weight. From physics, you know that the 
mass of an object is a measure of how much matter the object contains, while the weight of an object is'':-
.. determined. by the gravitational force that causes its downward .acceleration. Recall that weight W 
equals mass m times g, the acceleration due to gravity, or W · = mg; As noted in Appendix A, when we 
. weigh something in: the :laboratory,· we really are .determiningits mass-either by comparing two 
masses on a balance or by using a device calibrated against objects of known mass. It is basically an 
English-language.problem; we really should say ~'we massed it" when we determine the mass of an 
14 
Chapter 2. 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
object in the laboratory.Another very useful concept in geotechnical engineering is density. You 
know from physics that density is mass per unit volume, so its units are kg/m3• (See Appendix A for 
the corresponding units in the cgs and British engineering systems.) The density is the ratio that 
connects the volumetric side of the phase diagram with the mass side. Several densities are com-
monly used in geotechnical engineering practice. First, we define the total, wet, or moist density p; 
the density of the particles, solid density Ps; and the density of water Pw· Or, in terms of the basic 
masses and volumes of Fig. 2.2: 
· 
· 
Mt 
Ms + Mw 
p==-== 
~ 
~ 
, ·Ms 
Ps = V s 
Mw 
Pw == Vw 
(2.6) 
(2.7) 
(2.8) 
In natural soils, the magnitude of the total density p will depend on how much water happens to 
be in the voids as well as the density of the mineral grains themselves. Thus, p can range from slightly 
above 1000 kg/m3 to as high as 2400 kg!m3 (1.0 to 2.4 Mg/m3). 
'!Ypical values of Ps for most soils range from 2500 to 2800 kg/m3 (2.5 to 2.8 Mg/m3). Most sands 
have p8 ranging between 2.6 and 2'.7 Mg/m3• For example, a common mineral in sands is quartz; its 
Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3• Most clay soils have a value of Ps between 2.65 and 2.80 Mg/m3, depending on the 
predominant mineral in the soil; whereas organic soils may have a Ps as low as 2.5 Mg/m3• Conse-
quently, for most phase problems, unless a specific value of Ps is given, it is usually close enough for 
geotechnical work to assume a Ps of 2.65 or 2.70 Mg/m3• The density of water varies slightly, depending 
on the temperature. At 4°C, when water is at its densest, Pw exactly equals 1000 kg/m3 (1 g/cm3), and 
this density is sometimes designated by the symbol p;. For ordinary engineering work, it is sufficiently 
· accurate to take Pw :::; p0 == 1000 kg/m3 == 1 Mg/m3• 
Three other densities very useful in soils engineering are the dry density Pd, the saturated density 
Psat' and the submerged or buoyant density p' or Pb· 
Ms 
Pa ==-
~ 
Ms.+, Mw(TT = o' s. == 100%) 
-
Ya 
' 
Psat -
. ~ ·. 
· 
' 
" 
· 
p' == Psat ; Pw 
(2.9) 
(2.10) 
(2.11) 
Among other uses, the dry density Pais a common basis for judging a soil's degree of compaction after 
we have applied some mechanical energy to it, for example by using a roller or vibratory plate 
(ChapterS). The saturated density Psat' as the name implies, is the total density of the soil when 100% 
of its pores are filled with water; in this special case, p == Ps~t· The concept of submerged or buoyant 
density p; is often difficult for students to understand, so it is discussed later after we have done a few 
example problems. However, you may be familiar. with this concept from studying aggregates, where a 
"basket" of aggregate is weighed while it is submerged under water. Typical values of pa, Psat> and p' 
for several soil types are shown in Table 2.1. 
From the basic definitions provided in this section, other useful relationships can be derived, as 
we show in the examples in the next section. 
.· 2.3 ··Solution of Phase Problems 
15 
TABLE 2.1 
Some 1)'pical Values for Different Densities of Some Common Soil Materials 
Soil1)'pe 
Psat 
Sands and gravels 
Silts and clays 
Glacial tills 
Crushed rock 
Peats 
Organic silts and clays 
Modified after Hansbo (1975). 
2.3 
SOLUTION OF PHASE PROBLEMS: 
1.9-2.4 
1.4-2.1 
2.1-2.4 
1.9...:.2.2 
1.0--1.1 
1.3-1.8 
Density (Mg!m3) 
Pd 
.p' 
1.5-2.3 
0.9-1.4 
0.6-1.8 
0.4-1.1 
. 1.7-2.3 
1.1-1.4 
. 1.5-2.0 
0.9-1.2 
0.1-0.3 
0.0-0.1 
0.5-1.5 
0.3-0.8 
Phase problems are very important in soils engineering. In this section, with the help of some numeri-
cal examples, we illustrate how most phase problems are solved. As in many disciplines, practice helps; 
the more problems you solve, the simpler they are and the more proficient you become. Also, with 
practice you soon memorize most of the important definitions and relationships, so you save time by 
not having to look them up. 
· 
· 
Probably the single most important thing you can do in solving phase problems is to draw a phase 
diagram. This is especially true for the beginner. Don't spend time searching for the right formula to 
plug into. Instead, always draw a phase diagram and show both the given values and the unknowns of 
the problem. For some problems, simply doing this leads almost immediately to the solution; at least the 
correct approach to the problem is usually indicated. Also, you should note that there often are alterna-
tive approaches to the solution of the same problem, as'illustrated in Example 2.2. The following steps 
are recommended to solve these problems: , 
,::. 1 
1. List the information you kno':" (from the problem narrative). 
2. Draw phase diagram, fill in the knowns and the unknowns. 
3. Try to avoid big formulas. 
4. If no masses or volum'es are given, you ~a~ assume either one volume or one mass. 
5. Fill in one side of the diagram until you get stuck or completely solve it, then "cross over" to the 
other side using one of the p's or G •. 
6. Write out equations in symbol form. Then place the numerical value along with its units in the 
same order, and solve. 
· 
7. Check units and reasonableness of your answer. 
Example 2.2 
·Given:· 
p = 1.76 Mg/m3 (total density) 
w = 10% (water content) 
Ps = 2.70 (assumed) 
16 
Chapter 2 
· Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Required:· 
Compute Pd (dry density), e (void ratio); n (porosity), S (degree of saturation), and Psat (satu-
rated density). 
· 
Solution: Draw the phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.ia ). Assume that v;. == 1 m
3
• 
FIGURE Ex. 2.2a 
Volume (m3) 
Mass (Mg) 
VF 
·. ;l' 
' '·A 
.. 
. . +:-
. 
--::::-1. · .•...•...... 
w 
W 
M,;,, 
· 
. 
v,,,.o +--
:-] M,,1.76 
Us3J 
From the definiti~ri ofw~ter ~~riterit [Eq. (2.5)] and totai density [Eq. c2~6)] we can solve forMs 
and Mw· Note that in the computations water contentis expressed as a decimal. 
· 
.. • M M 
w .== 0.10 == : Mg 
s . g 
. 
· 
· · . 
3 · 
Mt' . (Mw + Ms) Mg 
p == 1.76 Mg/m == -
== 
. 
· ·. • 
··· ·· · v; · 
1.0 m
3 
Substituting Mw == O.lOMso we get 
. 
• • ' 
1 ·~ ~: ~'(O.lOMs + Ms) Mg: 
1.76 Mg/m -
. . 
. 3 
. . . . 
l.Om 
Ms == 1.60 Mg and Mw ~ 0.16 Mg 
• 
. 
' 
., 'I I 
. 
·.. 
. 
' 
These values are now placed on the mass side of the phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.2b ), and the rest of the 
desired properties are c!llculated. 
. , , 
FIGURE Ex. 2.2b 
Mass (Mg) 
Volume (m3) 
l V, }0.247 
- .... 
I 
Vv = 0.40
7 
=. too 
w 
"~ :. 
M 
. . ~ .. = t 
\ 
· M , 1.6 
. 
.• 
. 
. s 
. 
s 
. 
Vs;;, 0.593 
A 
\i 
I 
I 
I , 
or 
.•. · 
2.3 
Solution of Phase Problems 
17 
From the definition of Pw [Eq. (2.8)] we can solve forYw· 
, 
Mw· 
p =-
w 
.Vw. 
· 
Mw 
0.16 Mg :.._ 
· 
3 
Vw = -
= 
3 - 0.160 m 
Pw 
1Mg/m 
'i', 
Place this numerical value on the phase diagram (Fig: Ex. 2.2b ): 
To calculate V,, we must assume a value of the density 'of the solids Ps· Here assume 
Ps = 2.70 Mg/m3. From the definition of Ps [Eq:' (2.7)] we can solve for V. directly, or 
: 
' 
I 
' 
i 
• 
: M, . '1.6 Mg I' 
. . 
3 
V.'=- = 
= 0.593m 
l 
Ps 
2.70 Mg/m3 
.· 
· 
Since l~ = Va + Vw + V,, we can solve for Va, since we know the other terms. 
Va =. Vr - Vw _;_ V. = 1.0 '-- 0.593 . .::.: 0.160 '== 0.247 m3 ' 
' 
; 1 • ' 
• , ' ' 
: 
· 
, 1 ; 
r : ~ l ; · · ; , ' 
· 
' 
· 
, ~ ; : ·, 
· 
Once the phase diagram has been filled in, solving the rest of the problem involves just plugging 
the respective mimbers into the appropriate definition· equations.· We recommend; that; when you 
make the computations, you write out the equations in symbol form and then· insert the numbers in the 
same order as written in the' equation. Also, it is a good idea to have the units accompany the calculations . 
. Solving for the remainder of the required item~ is easy. 
From Eq. (2.9), 
· 
M, 
1.6 Mg 
3 
Pd ~ -
= --3- = 1.6 Mg/m 
· .. Vr 
1m 
.. 
From Eq. (2.1), 
FromEq.(2.2), • .. ,; '· 
v~ 
Va + v~' ; (O.Z47'.;: 0.166') hi' 
'l 
• 
' 
.. ' 
n = -
= 
100 = 
3 
100 = 40.7% · 
Vr 
Vr 
1.0 m 
· Froin Eq. (2.4), 
S = Vw = 
Vw 
100 =; 
1.160 m3 
3100 = 39.3% 
Vv 
Va + Vw 
(0.247 + 0.160) m 
,, · ·· · 
-
. 
-
/ 
.. 
. 
. 
At the saturated density Psat ~11 the v6ids are filled ~th\vat'er_: that is, S ,;, 100% [Eq. (2.10) ]. There-
fore, if the volume of air Va were filled with water, it would weigh 0.247 m3 X 1 Mg/m3 or 0.247 Mg. Then 
·' 
. 
_ Mw + M, _ (0.247 Mg + 0.16 Mg) +. 1.6 Mg _:_ 
3 
Psat -
Vr 
-
, 
1 m3 
-, ~.01 Mglm , .... ; 
18 
Chapter 2 . Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Another, and perhaps even easier, way to solve this example problem is to assume V, is a unit 
volume, 1m3. Then, by definition, Ms = Ps = 2.7 (when Ps is assumed equal to 2.70 Mg/m3). The 
completed phase diagram is shown in Fig. Ex. 2.2c. · 
Volume (m3) 
Mass (Mg) 
FIGURE Ex. 2.2c 
Va=0.418 
A 
~ 
_ v.la,7 
w 
-:J 021 f, . 
Yt ~ 1."688: . -t-
--t M 1 ~ 2.97 
'l_f·. 
~=1.0• 
< 
: 
s 
ill=2.70' 
' . : '' ~ '· 
- .. ' 
·,~ - s 
-
' 
' 
' . -. 
I .~ :. 
' 
;';• 
. 
~-. ' 
· 
Since w = MwiMs .= 0.10, Mw =:= 0.27 Mg and M, = Mw + Ms = 2.97 Mg. Also Vw = Mw 
numerically, since Pw ·,;, 1 Mg/m3; that is, 0.27 Mg of water occupies a volume of 0.27 m3. Before we can 
, proceed, two unknowns remain to be solved: .Va and Yt. To obtain these values, we must use the given 
.~ infonnatio~ that p = 1.76 Mg/~
3.Fromthe definition of total density [Eq. (2.6)],. 
P ='·i:76Mg/m3:: Mt = 2.97Mg. 
Yt 
Yt 
Solving for Yt, 
·! 
. 
Mr 
• 2.97 Mg 
·~ 1.688 m3 
Yt = P = 1.76 Mg/m3 
' 
,-~, 
". 
~' 
Therefore 
.. 
--- -
. 
'·-· 
-~ 
--
-. 
-
'.\ 
3 
Va = Yt - Vw - V, = 1.688 '- 0.27 .:.... 1.0 = 0.418 m 
You can use Fig. Ex. 2.2c to verify that the remainder of the solution is identical to the one using the 
data of Fig. Ex. 2.2b. This example illustrates that there often are alternative approaches to the solution 
of the phase problems. 
· • ' 
_: 
·• 
' ·. '_' · 
. • ' 
i 
1 
•·. 
i)_: 
Example 2.3 
Given: 
~ l ; 
Equations (2.3a) and (b)relating the yoid ratio e(lnd the porosity n, 
Required: 
Express the porosity n in terms of the void ratio e [Eq. •(2.3a)] and the void ratio in terms of the 
porosity [Eq. (2.3b)]. 
'1 
1 
t 
~ 
= 1 + e 
j + 
FIGURE Ex. 2.3a 
1 
t 
Vv = n 
r= 1 -+--
j v.+, 
v: 
FIGURE Ex. 2.3b 
Example 2.4 
Given: 
A 
w 
s 
A 
w 
S .. 
· • 2.3 · Solution of Phase Problems 
19 
Solution: Draw a phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.3a). 
For this problem, assume V. = 1 (units arbitrary). 
From Eq. (2.1), Vv = e, since V. = 1. Therefore Vr = 1 + e. 
. From Eq. (2.2), the definition of n is VJVr, or 
e 
n=--
1 + e 
(2.3a) 
Equation (2.3b) can be derived algebraically or from 
the phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.3b ). For this case, assume 
Vr=l. 
From Eq. (2.2), Vv = n, since Vr = 1. Therefore 
V. = 1 - n. From Eq. (2;1), the definition of e = VJV,. So 
·n 
e=--
1- n 
(2.3b) 
e = 0.62, w = 15%, Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3. 
Required: 
a. 
Pd 
b. p 
c. wforS = 100% 
d. 
Psat for S = 100% 
Solution: Draw phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.4). 
Mass (Mg) 
1 . J.62 
A 
+ 
=1.62. -+--
w 
· Mw = 0.3 
+ 
j v+o 
s 
M8 = 2.65 
! 
98 
0 
FIGURE Ex. 2.4 
·' 
a. 
Si~ce no volumes an! spe~ified, ~ssu~e V, ~ 1 m3• Just as in Example 2.3, this makes the 
Vv = e = 0.62 m3 and Vr = 1 -i- e = 1.62 m3• From Eq. (2.9), 
· 
Ms 
Pd=-
Vr 
20 · Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
andMs = PsV. [from Eq. (2.7)]. So 
P~V. 
Ps 
Pd=-.=-_-, 
i 
'. ;V, . _ ··l+ ~. 
• since V. ~ 1 m3 in Fig; Ex. 2.4 
c 
·-
2.65Mg 
(1 + 0.62) m3 = ,L636Mg/m3 
Note: The relationship, 
r, 
, 
l 
', 1 
is often very useful in phase problems. 
Ps 
Pd ~ L+ e 
b. 
Nowf~r p: 
','J 
M1 
(Ms + M,;,) Mg 
P = V, = . 
V,m3 
We know that 
Mw = wMs [from Eq. (2.5)] and Ms = PsV. 
PsV. + WPsV. 
Ps(1 + w) 
p= 
V, 
= 
l+e ' 
since V. = 1 m3 
Plug in the numbers. 
2.65 Mg (1 + 0·15) = 1.88 Mg/m3 
P = 
(1 + 0.62)m3 ·· 
. 
The following relationship is often useful to know. 
Check: 
Ps(l + w) 
p = 
(1 + e) 
" . ~ 
,'.>,) 
p 
Pd = 1: w 
,. 
1.88 = 1:63-Mg/m3 
~ 1.15 
J.! 
(2.12) 
(2.13) 
(2.14) 
You should verify that Pd = p/(1+'-·w), which is another very useful relationship to 
remember. 
-· · 
· ' 
• 
I' 
. 
: • 
~ ... •' ·, • : 
c. Water content for S ='100%: 
. 
·. . From Eq. (2.4), we know that Vw .::: Vv = 0.62 m3. From Eq. (2.8), Mw = VwPw = 
0.62 m3 x (1 rvlgh:~3 ) -~• 0.62 Mg. Therefore w for s,=: ·lOOo/o_ must be · · 
· . 
. · . 
Mw 
.0.62 
W(s=lOO%) = Ms = 2.65 = 0.234 or 23.4% 
2.3 
Solution of Phase Problems 
21 
d. Psat: 
From Eq. (2.10), we know Psat = (Ms + Mw)fVr, or 
~ (2.65 + 0.62) Mg _ 
3 
Psat-
3 
- 2.019 or 2.02 Mg/m 
1.62m . 
Check, by Eq. (2.13): 
_ Ps(1 + w) _ 2.65(1 + 0.234) _ 
· • ' 3 
Psat -
1 + e 
-
1.62 
- 2.02 Mg/m 
Example 2.5 
Given: 
The definitions of the degree of saturation S, void ratio e, water content w, and the solid 
density Ps [Eqs. (2.4), (2.1), (2.5), and (2.7), respectively]. 
L 
'', 
Required: 
Derive a relationship between s; e, w, and Ps· 
Solution: Look at the phase diagram with V.· = 1 (Fig. Ex. 2.5): 
Volume 
Mass 
t 
A 
v = e 
f 
f 
! 
V. = Se 
w 
M =w 
w t 
+ 
= 1 
s 
Ms = PsV. 
st 
i 
v. 
s 
FIGURE Ex. 2.5 
From Eq. (2.4) and Fig. Ex. 2.5, we know that Vw = SVv = Se. From the definitions of water 
content [Eq. (2.5)] and Ps [Eq. (2.7)], we can place the equivalents forMs and Mw on the phase diagram. 
Since from Eq. (2.8), Mw = PwVw, we now can write the following equation: 
Mw = PwVw = wMs ==: WPsV. 
or 
PwSe = WPsV. 
Since V. = 1 m3, · 
(2.15) 
Equation (2.15) is among the ~ost useful of ~11 equations for phase pioblems. You can also verify 
its validity from the fundamental definitions of Pw• S, eiw, and Ps· 
· · 
22 
Chapte~2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Note that, using Eq. (2.15), we can write Eq. (2.13) another way: 
( 
PwSe) 
'Ps 1 + --
. · 
Ps 
P = · 
l+ e 
Ps + PwSe 
1 + e 
When S = 100%, Eq. (2.16) be~omes 
Ps+'pwe. 
Psat = 
1 + e 
Example 2.6 
Given: 
(2.16) 
(2.17) 
A soil contaminated with gasolih~·(specific gravity = 0.9) with the follo~ing characteristics: 
Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3, w = 25%, volume of the gasoline is 20% of the volume of the water, and 85% of the 
void space is filled with gasoline and water (after T. F. Wolff). 
Required: 
IL Complete the phase diagram in Fig: Ex. 2.6a. 
b; Find the void ratio and porosity of the specimen. 
c. Find the total and dry density of the specimen. 
Volume (m3) 
Ps(Mg/m3) 
.Mass(Mg) 
Va=--
Air 
I 
V i . 
~~;:;·,·.~~~-.=~:~-,.:.~;,·.;;:;·,·.~~;~·.; ~M 
. 
9 = -·-·-. 
·:;·;~-:-:v:Gasoline';';' • .,:.;v':•,' 
g = __ 
Vv = _ r- ?~:;~~~:;~~~~~ ~ 
v = 
=-=-::water=-=-=-= 
M = 
w .. . -
:~~~f,~~~;(.f~;~. ~-
Vr=_· 
M,=_' 
...................... ,...... .· I . 
/~~f:-~~;(~~:\~~~~;;~t;{\;~/K~~-
Ms =l-
l 
}~=r/tt:/~~~:;/W/K:~=:t?;:~ 
. 
~----------------J-----
Vs= --
FIGURE Ex. 2.6a 
Solution: 
IL As we did with Examples 2.3 and 2.4, assume V5 = 1m3• Then; using the basic definitions for 
water content, deilsity, and degree of saturation, fill in the bla~ks as shown in Fig. Ex. 2.6b. 
1 2.3 Solution of Phase Problems 
23 
Mass,(Mg) 
Vv = 0.93 
M1= 3.43. 
FIGURE Ex. 2.6b 
' 
. 
1 ' 
. ( 
'~ :: 
b. Again, use the basic definitions of e and n. We find that e = 0.93 and n = .48.2%. 
c. For both pi a~d Pd; ~imply take the values for M1 (3.43 Mg) and Ms (2.65 Mg) and divide each 
by 1.93 m3 to obtain p1 = 1.78 Mg/m3 and Pd = 1.37 Mg/m3. Note that using Eqs. (2.13) and 
(2.14) will give you erroneous results. 
Here are the details: Calculate the mass of water by noting that Mw = wMs = 0.25 X 2.65 Mg 
of solids. (We assumed that Vs = 1m3, remember?) So, Mw = 0.66 Mg. Add that to the phase dia-
gram. Also, the volume of water is MwiPw = 0.66 Mg divided by 1 Mg/m3, or V. = 0.66 m3. Then the 
volume of gasoline = 20% of Vw ,;,; 0.2 X 0.66 m3 = 0.13 m3. Because the specific gravity (Sec. 2.3.2) 
of gasoline is 0.9, its density is 0.9 X Pw· So the mass, oLthe. gasoline Mg = 0.9 X Pw X Vg = 
0.9 Mg/m3 x 0.13 m3 = 0.12 Mg. Add these items to the phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.6b). 
Because 85% of the voids are filled with water and gasoline, the ,total amount of voids is 
(Vw + Vg)/0.85 = (0.66 + 0.13)/0.85 = 0.93 m3. · Subtracting Vw + Vg 
from V,, we find that 
Va = 0.14 m3. Now all the "holes" on the phase diagram are filled. The rest is a piece of cold apple pie 
(parts b and c). 
' 
1 , 
, 
e = Vv = 0.93m: = 0.93 
. V. 
LOOm 
Yv 
0.93 
· 
n = - = -
X 100 = 48.2% 
v, 
'1.93 
M1 
3.43Mg 
Mg 
Pt = V, = 1.93m3 = 1.78 m3 
Ms 
2.65Mg 
Mg 
, , 
Pd = V, =: 1.93 m3 ;=: 1.37 m3 . 
In summary, for the easy solution of phase problems, you don't have to memorize lots of com-
plicated formulas. Most of the formulas you need can easily be derived from the phase diagram, as 
illustrated in the preceding exainples. Just remember the following simple rules: 
1. Draw a phase diagram. 
2.· Remember the basic definitions of w, e, p;, S, and so on. 
24 
Chapter 2 ·. · . Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
3. Assume either V, = .1 or Vr = 1, if no masses or volumes are given. 
4. Write out equations in symbol form. Then,place the numerical value along with its units in the 
' 
1
same order, and solve. 
'· 
5. Check units and reasonableness of your answer. · 
. 
': ·>: .. 
_,._ 
' 
... · .. -
2.3.1 
Submerged or Buoyant Density 
In Eq. (2.11),we simply defined the submerged or buoyant density as p
1 = 'Psat- Pw• without any 
explanation other than giving some typical values of p
1 in Table '2.l.Strictly speaking, the total p 
should be used instead of Psat in Eq.{2.11), but in mostcases' submerged soils are also completely sat-
urated, or at least that is a reasonable assumption.::· ... ·, • 
. 
, 
: • _So when ·a.· soil is submerged, the total density as 
---
-¥-rh"' ~ M,g 
v,TF:~v.M 
FIGURE 2.3a 
Free-body diagram 
of a submerged soil particle. · 
Thus, the submerged (net) mass 
expressed hy Eqs. (2.13) and (2.16) is partially balanced by the 
buoyant effect 'of the water. You will recall from Archimedes' 
principle thai the buoyancy effect is equal to the weight of 
water displaced by the solid particles in the soil mass. This is 
shown in Fig. 2.3(a), where the submerged (net) weight is 
·' 
. 
w' = Ws __:.· Fb 
. ' 
' 
· In terms of masses, 
W 1 = Msg- V,pwg ~ M
1g 
", i> 'Jc 
. ·~ ~ 
;,•,· 
: 
';:.::.... . .....:,· 
M - 1\!s- V.pw 
We obtain de'nsities by dividing by the total volume Yt: :·. 
" • 
~ 
' • • 
_! •• 
M! 
· 1
' .Ms .. Vs 
-.=p =---p 
, Vr 
· 
.. · · Vr 
'Vr ~ 1 
Becauseps= Ms!Vs[andu~i~~Eq.(2:i2)];weobtain;;" · · 
1 
• Ms 
Ms Pw 
( 
p,;;) 
P :.V~s~ (Vf.Plp:)P: 1- p;. 
1:+ e 
Ps 
Ps- P:.V 
· 1 + e 
I';, 
There are several oth~r ways to get Eq: (2.18). One way is to use Eq. (2.13). 
'~ •• 
< 
ps(1 + w) 
PI =· 
1 + e ' - Pw 
· Using Eq.'(2.15), PsW =: Pwe(S ~ 100% ), · 
';t 
· 
1 
• ··'ps +·pwe .,-:_ Pw. -:-·Pwe ·. 
p= 
· 
1+e 
1 
Ps- Pw 
p = 1 +e 
\: 
(2.18) 
(2.19) 
Saturated mass 
Buoyant mass 
: 2.3 
Solution of Phase Problems 
Marbles in bucket 
with holes in it, dipped 
· into water. 
FIGURE 2.3b .. Schematic showing the relevant change in mass due to buoyancy. 
25 
Note carefully the different meanings of the densities described above. The saturated density is 
· · the total soil and water density whenS = 100%, while the submerged density is really abuoyant or an 
effective density. Note, too, that the difference between the saturated and: submerged densities is 
exactly the density of water [Eq. (2.11)]. 
Some physical examples will help you understand the concept of submerged or buoyant density. 
First, consider a bucket full of marbles; the relevant density is, of course, the dry density. Then fill the 
bucket with water, and the relevant density is Ps~t· If the marbles are now placed in a bucket that has 
numerous holes in it so that water can move freely into and out of the bucket submerged in a tank of 
water, then the correct density of the marbles is the submerged or buoyant density p' [Fig. 2.3(b )]. If we 
remove the bucketfrom the tank but keep it completely saturated, then the appropriate density is 
again Psat• 
d· ',' 
' 
A second, more realistic example is the case. ()f rapid drawdown, which occurs when the water 
level in a reservoir, canal, or river is quickly lowered. The result is that the density ofthe ~oils in the 
adjacent dam or slope increases from submerged or buoyant to saturated. This is a critical case for the 
stability of the dam or slope; because the gravitational forces acting on the embankment approxi-
.. ·mately double in magnitude. Therefore the factor ofsafety against slope instability is approximately 
cut in half. See Table 2.1 for typical values of Ps~t and p'; · 
Example 2.7 
Given: 
. , A silty clay soil with Ps = 2700 kg/m3, S = 100%, and water content w = 46%. 
Required: 
Compute the void ratio, the saturated density, and the' buoya~i ~r submerged density in kg/m3• 
Solution: Place the given information on a phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 2.7). 
26 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Volume (m3) · 
Mass (kg)· 
t 
t 
Vv =: fw= 1.24 
w 
Mw = 1242 
~ .. 
~ 
. 
~ -- - -
-
r 
T 
v. = 1.0 
s 
M5 = 2700 
L 
' 
_j_ 
FIGURE Ex. 2.7 
.S = 100% 
Assume Vs = 1m3; therefo~e Ms = V.Ps =:2700 kg. From Eq. (2.15a),we can s?lve fore directly: 
WPs 
0.46 X 2700 kg/ni.J 
e = -
= 
. 
. 
= 1.242 
PwS 
1000 kg/m3 X 1.0 
But e also equals Vv, since V,: .= 1.0; likewise Mw_:';. 1242kg,.since Mw is numerically equal to Vw, 
because Pw = 1000 kg/m3. Now t)lat all the unknowns have been .found, we may readily_ calculate the 
saturated density [Eq. (2.19)]: . 
_ M1 _ Mw + Ms _ (1242 + 2700)kg·_ ' · . 
_3 
Psat ---
·-
3 
-
1758 kg/m 
. 
v; · . , 1 + e .. . . > , ( L + 1.24) m 
. 
We c~uld also use Eq.{2.i7) directly; • .. . . 
' ·· · 
. 
' 
-
,., 
·. · -~ Ps + Pwe ~ [2700 +1000(1.242)] kg _. 
• ,. 
'3 
Psat-
1.+ e 
-:-
. 
(1 + 1.242)m3 
-. -1758kg/m 
The buoyant density p' from Eq. (Z.i1).is: 
-,; 
' ; 
~ ' ; . 
' , 
; 
_· ~ ' ~ ' ; . ' ,.' ' 
· p' = Psat :.:. Pw ,;; 175S kg/rri3 :_ 1000 kg/m3 ~ 758 kglm3 
·' ·-
In this example, p'•is less than the density of water. Go back and look at Table 2.1 for typical values of p'. 
The submerged or buoyant density of soil will be very important later on in our discussion of consoli-
dation, settlement, and strength properties of soils. 
2.3.2 
Unit Weight and Specific Gravity· 
In geotechnical practice it is oft~n con~enient to use unit weight rather than density in engineering 
calculations. Unit weight 'Y is simply weight per unit volume; thus its SI units are N/m3, because the 
Newton (N) is the SI unit of force, and in British units it is typically expressed in lb/ft3, sometimes 
abbreviated pcf. Recall that the weight of an object is d~e to the force exerted by the earth's gravita-
tional field, or W = mg, where g is the acceleration due to gravity. Then to get unit weight 'Y we simply 
divide the weight by the unit volume V, or: 
· 
'• ' 
. 
• 
~ • 
' 
' 
':0 • 
•. j 
C 
• 
' 
' 
L. 
•• • C ~ 
W 
-m 
'}' -~ v ~ v g .= pg 
(2.20) 
2.3 
Solution of Phase Problems 
27 
As noted in Appendix A, the value of g varies slightly with latitude and elevation, but for ordinary 
engineering purposes we usually assume it is a constant (standard g = 9.807 m/s2) for most places on 
the Earth. 
The unit weights analogous to the ~ensities described earlier [Eqs. (2.6), (2.7), and (2.8)] are the 
total, wet, or moist unit weight y, the unit weight of solids y s, and the unit weight of water y w. In terms 
of the basic weights and volumes, they are' 
Wr 
y=-v; 
w. 
Ys = V. 
' s 
(2.21) 
(2.22) 
(2.23) 
To convert between density and unit weight, use Eq. (2.20) and g · = 9.81 m/s2• If you round off g 
to 10 m/s2, the error,is only 2%.; 
· 
-Example 2.8 
Given: 
The densities p., Psat• and p' in Example 2.7. 
'Required: 
',' 
,. 
Compute the equivalent unit weights, using 
a. SI units, 
b. British engineering units. 
Solution: 
a. SI units: 
From Example 2.7: 
Ps = 2700 kg/m3 = 2.7 Mg/m3 
Psat = 1758 kg/m3 = 1.76 Mg/m3 
p' = 758 kg/m3 = 0.76 Mg/m3 
From Eq. (2.20), y = pg, we obtain: . 
Ys = 2.7 Mgim3 X 9.81 m/s2 = 26.5 kN/m3 (Note: 1 kg X m/s~ = 1 N) 
Ysa; = 1.76 Mg/ni3 X 9.81 m/s2 = 17.2 kN/m3 
' 
y' = 0.76 Mg!m3 X 9.81 m/s2 = 7.4 kN/m3 
· 
Ify~~ use the rounded-off value of g = 10 m/s2/ the values of Ys• Ysat• and y' are, 
respectively, 27, 17.6, and 7.6 kN/m3• As mentioned, the difference is only ·about 2% and 
normally negligible. -
., - . 
' 
. ' 
- ' 
' 
.. 
28 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
b. British engineering units: 
To convert the unit weight from kN/m3 to lbf/ft3 (pcf), merely multiply the value in 
kN/m3 by 6.366. Or 
'Ys = 26.5kN/m3 = 168.7 pcf 
'Ysat = 17.2 kN/m3 = 109.5 pcf 
. 
'Y' = 7.4 kN/m3 = 47.1 pcf 
. 
. ' . 
Note that the product of 6.366 and g (9.807) equals 62.43 or 62.4lbf/ft3, the unit weight 
of water in British engineering units. (If the rounded-off value of 10 m/s2 is used, the conver-
sion factor is slightly more or 63,7.) So to convert directly from density in.Mg/m3 to unit 
.. weight in lbf/ft3, just multiply by 62.4! 
If you need some practice converting between density and unit weight and between the various 
systems of units, review the ·examples in Appendix A 
In summary, to convert density in Mg/m3 to unit weight in kN/m3, multiply by 9.8lor 10. To convert 
density in Mg/m3 to unit weight in lbf/ft3 (pcf), multiply by 62.4. To help you get a feel for the magnitude 
of unit weights in both SI and British engineering units, we have converted the typical densities in 
Table 2.1 to unit weights in Table 2.2 in terms of kN/m3 and pcf. 
You may recall from physics that the specific gravity G of a substance is the ratio of its unit 
weight 'Y to the unit weight of water, usually pure water at 4°C (symbol: 'Yo), or 
,G = _!_ 
'Yo' 
(2.24) 
Although several different specific gravities can be defined, only the bulk specific gravity Gm, the specific 
gravity of solids G., and the specific gravity of water Gw are of interest in geotechnical engineering. These 
are defined as 
' · ' 
' 
· 
' 
' 
Gm = _!_ 
'Yo 
(2.25) 
TABLE 2.2 . Some 1)rpical Values for Different Unit Weights of Common Soil Materials in Units of kN/ni3 and pcf 
Unit Weight 
'Ysat 
'Yd 
y' 
Soil'JYpe 
kN/m3 
pcf 
kN/m3 
pcf 
kN/m3 
pcf 
Sands and gravels 
19-24 
119.:_150 
15.,-23 
94-144' 
9-14 
62-:-81 
Silts and clays 
14-21 : 
87-131 
6-18 
37-112 
4-11 
25-69 
.. 
Glacial tills 
2f-24 
131-150 
17-23 
106-144 
11-14 
69-87 
Crushed rock 
19.:.22 
119-137. 
15-20 
94-125 
9-12 
56-75 
Peats 
10-11 .. 
60-69 
1.C.3 
6-19 
0-1 
0-6 
' ·Organic silts 
,13..:.18 
81:_112 
5-15 
31-94 
3-8 
19-50 
an~. clays 
Note: Values are rounded to the nearest 1 kN/m3 and 1 pcf. 
':' 
G = 'Ys 
s : 'Yo ' 
. 
')'i/; 
Gw =----:: 
'Yo 
2.3 
Solution of Phase Problems 
29 
(2.26) 
(2.27) 
Because the density and therefore the unit weight of water are a maximum at 4°C, the specific 
gravity of water is exactly 1.0000 at that temperature. Because the value of Gw ranges between 0.9999 
at ooc and 0.9922 at 40°C, it is sufficiently accurate for most geotechnical work to assume Gw = 1.00 
and 'Yw ;::j 'Yo = constant. Note that specific gravity is a dimensionless quantity and its numerical values 
are similar to what we used for d~nsities in Mg/m3• For example; the specific gravity of solid quartz 
(that is, if we could ~reate a piece that had no void space) is 2:65, and typical values for most soils range 
from 2.60 to 2.80. Organic soils will have lower specific gravities, while heavy metallic minerals may 
occasionally have,higher:values. 
, 
· 
' 
If you need to determine the specificpayity of a soil, use ASTM (2010) standard D 854. 
Example 2.9 
Given: 
A sample of soil has a bulk specific gravity of 1.91 and a specific gravity of solids of2.69, and a 
water content of29% (after Taylor, 1948). 
· 
·· 
Required: 
Determine the void ratio, porosity, degree of saturation, and the dry density of the sample in a . 
. British engineering units and b.SI units. 
, 
Solution: As before, when the size of the sample is not given, assume any convenient weight or volume. 
, For the SI case, let's assume the total volume V =. 1 ft3, and for part b, assume V = 1m3• Draw the 
phase diagram for each' case. 
, 
· 
·, : · 
a. British engineering units: 
I 
= 1 ft3 
j 
FromEqs. (2.25) and (2.21); Gm = Wrl~yw; so Wr = Gm~'Yw = (1.91)(1ft3)(62.4lbf/ft3) = 
119lbf. From the definition of water content, we know that Ws + 0.29Ws = 119lbf. There-
fore, Ws = 92 lbf and W ~ = 27 lbf. 
. .. ; , , 
FromEqs. (2.26) and (2.22), V, = WsfGs'Yw; so 92lbf/(2.69)(6Z.4lbf/ft3) = 0.55 ft3. From 
Eqs. (2.27) and (2.23), Vw = WsfGw'Yw; so 27lbf/(1.0)(62.4lbf/ft3) = 0.43 ft3• Figure Ex. 2.9a 
is the completed phase diagram for·part a of this example. 
Therefore, the answers are e =. 0.82; n = 45%; S = 96%; and I'd = 92 pcf. 
Weight (lbf) 
. 
+ 
. 
1 
. V8 =!0.02 
A 
t 
~ t27 
Vw = 0.43 
w 
'Ym = 11 
v,~ 
+ 
j 
s 
w,~o2 
9 pet 
FIGURE Ex. 2.9a 
30 
Chapter 2 · 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
b. S.l. units: 
. . 
. 
The solution for part b is basically the same as for part a, except you use Vr = 1 m
3 and 
'Yw = 10.0 kN/m3• The 'a~wers for e, n, and S are identical, and Pd = 1.48 Mg/m
3
• See 
Fig. Ex. 2.9b for the completed phase diagram. 
. 
. 
-Mass(Mg)· 
'' 
,; Volume (m3) 
r· , · 
·· 
1· ··· 
_ ., :: Va =r02 
A . 
_ . _. .. 
-: , . 
. . .... . . 
'" f 
1\Tm'v·~ 
w 
... ~f 'f 
•• 
v: 
__ ;;,o.5_5· 
s 
· M.·~1_.:4a .. ·,·,_. · 
< 
'·'' 
'· 
•' 
·," 
' 
/ ,. 
G5 ~ 2.69 
FIGURE Ex. 2.9b 
Example 2~10 
· · · ' · Given; · 
' i 
~ ' ' 
Equations (2.12), (2.15), and (2.16) . 
,;! 
·;·· 
• Required: 
Develop the corresponding relationship for these equations in terms of unit weights and specific 
gravity of solids. 
· 
·. 
· 
· 
· 
· ··:: 
Solution: Use Eq. (2.20) ( 'Y = pg) and the appropriate definitions for specific gravity of solids'and water. 
From Eq. (2.12): 
';: i 
Substituting, 
,· 
or 
From Eq. (2.15): 
Ps 
Pd = 1 ~Fe 
" 
~-
'Ys 
. 'Yd' 
g 
-=--
·:g . J+e 
' 
y; .. -
. 
. 
'Yd = l+ e = Gsywf(1 +.e) 
pwSe =.wp, 
. ;J. 
'Yw Se·= W 'Ys = W Gs'Yw 
g 
.. 'g . 
·g~· 
'{ ·,: 
' ' 
/· 
(2.28) 
2.4 Soil Texture 
31 
Therefore, 
For Eq. (2.16), 
· · Therefore, 
.,. ,,_. 'Ys ~-:u;s~ 
! = g 
. g 
g 
1 +e 
(2.29) 
(2.30) 
. " ... u~i~g J,ro.cedures simila~·t~t·li~s~ shown in :Examplez.io, you can.·~e~dily develop the corre-
sponding relationships for Eqs. (2:13), (2.14),(2.17);and (2:18) in terms of unitweights and specific 
. griwity of solids. nie corresponding equations, Eqs. (2.31) through (2.34), are giveninTable 2.3, as 
are those developed in the above example. 
.. 
. . . .. '. 
. 
: . . ' 
. . . 
' 
, 
, 
, 
' 
' 
-
'. 
. .. 
J 
,. 
' 
.I , , 
', ,_;,- ~. 
\ .. -;_: .-· ,t' 
TABLE 2.3 Corresponding Equatio!lsShowing Density and UnityWeig~~~elatio11ships 
Equation 
(2.13) 
. (2.14). 
(2.12) 
(2.17) 
(2.18) 
-I. ,• 
2.4 
SOIL TEXTURE 
Density 
· ps(1 + w) 
p= 
1 + e 
.. 
p 
Pa= 1+ w 
Ps 
Pa = 1 +e. 
p, + Pwe 
Psat = 
1 + e 
1 
·ps-Pw 
p=~ 
Equati~n 
(231) 
. Gs(1 +w) 
y= 
1 + e 
'Yw 
(2.32) 
" 'Y : .. ·- .: 
. 
'Yd = 1 + w 
,, . (2.28)' 
'Ys 
'Ya = 1 + e 
(2.33) 
G, + e 
'Ysat=~,"Yw 
.. 
~. 
(2.34) 
G :_·1 
' 
s 
'Y =~'Yw 
So far we haven't said much about what makes up the "solids" part of the soil mass~ In' Chapter 1 we 
gave the usual definition of soil from an engineering point of view: the relatively loose agglomeration of 
"mineral and organic materialii found above the bedrocK. We briefly described how weathering ·and other 
geologic processes act on the rocks at or near the earth's surface to form soil. Thus the solid part of the 
soil mass consists primarily of particles of mineral and organic matter in various sizes and amounts ... 
The texture of a soil is its appearance or "feel," and it" depends on the relative 'sizes and shapes of 
the particles as well as the range or distribution of those sizes. Thus coarse-grained soils such as sands 
. or gravels obviously appear coarse textured, while a fine-textured soil is composed mainly ofvery small 
mine.ral grains invisible to the naked eye. Silts and clay soils are good examples of fine-textured soils. 
32 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
The texture of soils, especially of coarse-grained soils, has some relation to their engineering 
behavior. In fact, soil texture has been the basis for certain soil classification schemes, although these 
are more common in agronomy than' in geotechnical engineering. Still, textural classification terms 
(gravels, sands, silts, and clays) are useful in a general sense in geotechnical practice. A convenient 
dividing line is the smallest grain that is visible to the naked eye. Soils with particles larger than this size 
(about 0.075 mm) are called coarse grained, while soils finer than the size are (obviously) called fine 
grained. Sands and gravels are coarse grained while silts and clays are fine grained. 
For fine-grained soils; the presence of water greatly affects their engineering response-much 
more so than grain size or texture alone. Water affects the interaction between the mineral grains, and this 
may affect their plasticity (roughly defined as the soil's ability to be molded) and their cohesiveness (its 
ability to stick together). While sands are tionplastic and noncohesive (cohesionless), clays are both plas-
tic and cohesive. Silts fall between clays and sands: they are fine grained yet nonplastic and cohesionless. 
These relationships as well as some ge11eral engineering characteristics are presented in Table 2.4. 
, 
Note that the term clay refers both to specific minerals called clay minerals (discussed in 
Chapter 4) and to soils which contain clay l:ninerllis. The behavior of some soils is strongly affected by 
the presence of clay minerals. In geotechnical engineering, for simplicity, such soils are usually called 
clays, but we really mean soils that contain enough clay minerals to affect their engineering behavior. 
' ' 'n is a good idea to get some pnictice'identifying soils according to tex'ture and other general 
, characteristics, such as plasticity and cohesiveness. This process is best done i~ the laboratory, and in 
fact ASTM standard D 2488 provides an excellent guide for 'describing and identifying soils visually 
and manually. Visual-manual description of soil is also mentioned ~hen we· discuss soil classification 
later in this chapter. 
TABLE2.4 
Grain size 
Characteristics 
Effect of water (m . 
· engineering behavior 
Effect of grain-size 
distribution on 
Soil Name 
Gravels, Sands 
Coarse grained 
Can see individual grains by eye, 
Cohesionless 
Nonplastic 
Granular 
Relatively unimportant (exception: 
loose, saturated granular materials 
and dynamic loadings) · 
Important 
Silts 
Fine grained 
Cannot see 
individual· 
grains 
Cohesionless 
Nonplastic 
Granular 
Impor.tant 
Relatively · 
, , unimportant . 
,,; ,, 
2.5 
' GRAIN SIZE ANb GRAINSIZE DISTRIBUJI<?N " .. 
Clays 
Fine grained 
Cannot see 
individual 
grains 
Cohesive 
Plastic 
Very important 
Relatively 
unimportant 
As suggested in the preceding section, the size of the soil particle, especially for granular soils, has some 
·.effect on engineering behavior. Thus, for classification purposes, we are often interested in the particle 
or grain sizes present i~ a particular soil as well as the distribution of those sizes: 
, , '· 2.5'·: Grain Size and Grain Size Distribution 
33 
·· The range of possible particle sizes in soils is enormous. Soils can range from boulders or cobbles 
several centimetres in diameter down to ultrafine-grained colloidal materials. (Particles in colloidal 
materials are so small that their interactions are governed by electrostatic rather than gravitational 
forces.),The maximum possible range is on the order of 108, so usually we plot grain size distributions 
· versus the logarithm of average grain diameter. We often use such scales in engineering and.other 
• :: disciplines to expand the small-scale data and compress the larger-scale data; Figure 2.4 indicates the 
divisions between the· various . textural· sizes according to· three· common engineering classification 
schemes. Traditionally in the United States the units for. the various sizes depend on the grain size. For 
materials greater than about 5 mm (about %in.) units of inches are still commonly used in the United 
States, although millimetres are becoming more common. Grain sizes between 5 mm and 0.074 mm are 
classified according to U.S. Standard sieve number, which of course can be directly related to a specific 
grain size, as shown in Fig. 2.4. Soils finer than the No. 200 sieve (openings of 0.075 mm) are usually 
dimensioned in millimeters or, for the very fine-grained colloidal particles, in micrometers~ 
., ;' 
uses 
AASHTO 
(M 146) 
~01::> 
Gravel 
Sand 
Boulders 
. ~'Q 
Coarse j Fine 
c,o~"'
0
1 Medium j 
uo,_ 
'Fine 
300 
'75 
_, 
19 
4.75 2.0 
0.425 
0.075 
~ 
·'' 
· Gravel· 
Sand 
,. 
Boulders 
~01::> 
rY'Q 
Coarsej Med.j Fine Coarse j 
c; .. 
Fine 
305 
,75. 
. 25 
9.5 
.. 2.0 
0.425 .' 0.075 ' 
' , Fines (Silt, Clay) 
.·. 
. ' 
.. ~ .. 
'. 
Silt 
>-
Colloids 
ell u 
0.002 0.001 
M.I.T., 
B 
ld 
CFEM, and · · ou ers: 
-: Silt 
Clay 
ISO/CEN 
Fine 
. 200 
60 
No.4 
10 
40 
100 200 
, U.S. Standard sieve!'-_,..ll_· --r--1'--r-.LI -r·--'-1, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
20 
60 140 270 
I"'' I 
I 
. Ill!; I 
I 
I 
I 
I"" I 
I 
Ill'' I 
I 
11!11,1 
I 
1000 
100 
10 
'_0.1 
0.01 
0.001 
.Grain size (mm) 
uses 
= Unified Soil Classification System (U.S. Bureau of 
. 
Reclamation, 1974; U.S. Army Engineer WES, 1960); ASTM D 2487 
· AASHTO = American Association for State Highway and 
Transportation Officials (1998) 
M.I.T, C.F.E.M., ISO/CEN =Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Taylor, 1948); 
Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual (2006); International 
Standardisation Organisation and Comite European de Normalisation. 
FIGURE 2.4- Grain size ranges according to several engineering soil classification systems (modified after 
AI-Hussaini, 1977). -· 
34 
Chapter 2 
.Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
How is the particle-size distribution obtained? The process is called particle-size analysis, or some-
times the mechcmical analysis'or.the gradation test. For coarse-grained soils a sieve analysis is performed, 
. in which a specimen of dry soil is shaken mechanically for several minutes through a series of woven-wire 
square-mesh sieves with successively smaller openings. Since the total mass of the specimen is known, the 
percentage retained on or passing each size sieve can be determined by weighing .the amount of soil 
retained on each sieve after shaking. Detailed procedures for this test are specified by ASTM (2010) stan-
' dard C 136 and D 422. The corresponding AASHTO (2007) test standards are T 27,and T 88. 
The U.S. Standard sieve numbers commonly employed for the particle-size analysis of soils are 
shown in Table 2.5. Since soil particles are rarely perfect spheres, when we speak of particle diameters, 
· we really mean an equivalent particle diameter as determined by the sieve analysis. 
Note that as the standard .sieve numbers increase, the openings become smaller. This is some-
times a source of confusion. Specifications should refer to the actual size of the sieve openings rather 
than the sieve numbers. For example, refer to the 425 11-m sieve instead of the U.S. No. 40 sieve. Then 
there is no ambiguity about what sizes you mean. 
It turns out that the sieve analysis is impractical for sieve openings less than about 0.05 to 0.075 
mm (No. 200 U.S. Standard sieve). Thus for the fine-grained soils (silts, and clays) the hydrometer 
analysis can be used. The basis for this test is Stokes' law for falling spheres in a viscous fluid. This law 
relates the terminal velocity of the grains in suspension, their derisity, and the density of the fluid. We 
· can thus calculate the grain diameter from the distance and time of fall. The hydrometer also deter-
mines 'the specific gravity (or density) of the suspension, and this lets us calculate the percentage of 
particles of a certain equivalent particle diameter at a given time. As with the sieve analysis, the per-
centage of the specimen still in suspension (or already 'out of suspension) can therefore readily be 
L> 
TABLE 2.5' U.S. Standard Sieve Sizes and the Corresponding Open 
Dimension (ASTM 2010) 
· 
U.S. Standard Sieve No. 
1.5~in.• 
1-in. 
0.75~in.• 
0.375-in.• 
,,' 4a 
ga 
10 
i6• 
Sieve Opening (mm) 
75mm 
50 min 
37.5mm 
25.0mm 
19.0mm 
9.5mm 
4.75mm 
2.35mm 
2.00mm 
1.18mm 
20~~---· 
~· __ 
· ____________ 850 f.LID 
30a 
600 f.Lill 
40 
425 f.LID 
:so• 
300f.Lm 
60 
250f.Lm 
1oo• 
150f.Lm 
140 
106f.Lm 
·zoo" 
75f,Lm 
•use these sieves to provide a uniform spacing on the grain-size distribution curve. 
<; "l 
· .. ·•. 2.5 Grain Size and Grain Size Distribution 
35 
determined. Detailed procedures for the hydrometer test are given by ASTM (2010) standard D 422, 
and AASHTO (2009) Standard Method T.88. The U.S. Department of the Interior (1990) and U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers (1986) also have similar standardized procedures for this test. . 
. 
The proportional distribution of different grain sizes can be shown as either a histogram or, more 
commonly, on a curriulativefiequency diagram. For each grain "diameter" (represented by a particular 
sieve size), the proportion of the sample captured on that si~ve is plotte~;~e grain diameters areplot-
ted on a logarithmic scale (x-axis), whereas the percentage by mass (or weight) of the total specimen 
passing (finer than) is shown on a regular·a·rithmetic scale (y-axis). Figure 2.5 shows some grain size 
distributions plotted both as histograms andas cumulative frequency diagrams. You will recognize that 
the histogram in Fig. 2.5(a) has a shape very similar to a normal distribution; in this case it would of 
course be a log normal distribution: The cumulative frequency diagram, commonly called a gradation 
curve, shows that this soil has a fairly good representation of particle sizes over a rather. wide range. 
Each data point on the gradation curve indicates what proportion of the total sample passes through 
that particular sieve'size; in other words, if only that sieve were used to sort the sample, it gives the 'per-
centage that would pass through it. 
· 
· · 
·.· 
· 
' 
: 
. · 
The gradation curveofFig. 2.5(a) would be considered a well-graded'soiL Figure 2.5(b) is a 
. skewed distribution, and it~ gradation curve is less well graded. A poorly graded soil is one in which 
there is' either an excess or a deficiency of certain sizes. The bimodal distribution shown in Fig. 2.5(c) 
results in a gap:g;aded or skip-graded distribution; in this particular soil, the proportion of grain sizes 
about 1-3 mm is relatively low, and the soil is also poorly graded. In general, the steeper the curve over 
a particular range of particle sizes, the more particles there are in that range. Conversely, the flatter the 
curve over a particular range, the fewer particles there are in that range. ·; 
Figure 2.6 shows grain size distributions for three typical soils. Note tha~ this figure could just as 
well be plotted with the smaller grain sizes going toward the right, and this is a very common way of 
showing gradation curves. Another small point is that we show the y-axes'of Figs. 2.5 and 2.6 as "per-
cent passing or finer than"; they could just as easily be plotted as "percent retained or coarser than," 
the difference being that 
· 
· 
%passing or finerthan = 100 - (%retained or coar~~r than) 
' 
, 
! 
~: 
Very often, practitioners will refer to the percent passing a particular sieve as the "~inus No. [sieve .· 
number]" percentage. For example, in Fig. 2.4, for the well-graded curve, the minus No.10 portion is 40%. 
We could, of course, obtain the usual statistical parameters' (mean, median, standard deviation, 
skewness, kurtosis, etc.) for the grain size distributions, but this is more commonly done in sedimentary 
petrology than in soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering. Of course the range of particle diameters 
found in the sample is of interest. Besides that, we use certain grain diametersD which correspond to an 
equivalent "percent passing'' on the grain size distribution curve. For example, D10 is the grain size that 
corresponds to 10% of the sample passing by weight; In other words, 10% of the particles are smaller 
than the diameterD10 • This parameter locates the grain size distribution curve (GSD) along the grain 
size axis, and it is sometimes called the effective size. The coefficient of uniformity Cu is· a crude shape 
parameter, defined as 
D60 
c =-
u 
DlO 
where D60:'= grain diameter (in mm) corresponding to 60% passing;a'nct 
. ''· 
:.--
D10 = grain diameter (in mm) corresponding to 10% passing, by weight (or mass). 
. (2.35) ' 
Act~ally,.tlieuniformity c~effiCientis misna~~d, si~ce the sn1aller the num'ber, tli~nioii'~niform 
the gradation-so it is ~eally a coefficient of "disuniformity." For. example, a Cu = 1 would be a soil 
36 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
. ,'f· 
cuE 
.... Cl 
.9 "03 
'03: 
co 
Q)~ 
tJ!I) 
..... "' 
QlCIS 
c.. E .. 
~ 
.s::: 
-~ 
.... .s::: 
~ .!21 
s~ 
Cl .... 
c:O 
·en~ 
:3!1) 
c,CIS 
c:E 
2l~ 
~ 
caE 
.... Cl 
0.-
.... Q) 
'03: 
......... 
~-;-
..... 
!/) 
alCIS 
o...E 
~ 
.s:::~ 
........ 
.... .s::: 
Q)C) 
·s·~ 
Cl .... 
c:s 
'Cii !I) 
:3:g 
c.E 
'E>-
Q).c 
e 
Q) 
0... 
30~ 
20 
. 
1g~ 
0.01 
0.1 
. 
1 . 
10 
Grai~ diameter (mm) 
0.1 
1 
10 
Grain diameter (mm) l 
(a) 
10 
Grain diameter (~m) . 
0 L-.-.L.--'-------:' 
0.1 
Grain diameter (mm) 
(c) . 
J 
100 
100 
caE 
.... Cl 
.S·m 
'03: 
c 0. 
Q)~ 
OC/l 
..... "' 
QlCIS 
30~ ~ 
~g 
-~~ 
I 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
o...E 
'2 
CIS 
.s:::~ 
........ 
.... .s::: 
Q)C) 
C:'(jj 
S;: 
Cl .... 
C:,8. 
'Cii"' 
:3:g 
'EE 
2l~ 
lii 
0... 
Grain diameter (mm) 
' . 
. 
Grain di11:~eter (mm) 
(b) 
~~: '40 
. :· .' :. ,
1 
: 
:. • ••• ; 
• 
.:: Q) 
30~ 
. 
- . 
ii~~·-.~~ 
Ql CIS 
0 '----~"""'"'--'---'-...J.I...~---''--
0... E 
0.1 
1 
. . 
10 
a~· 
.s:::~ 
i~ 
C:'(jj 
s 3:, 
Cl .... 
c:O 
·en~ 
!I) !I) 
·CIS CIS 
c.E 
'E>-
2l.c 
lii 
0... 
. Grain dia~eter (mm) 
j 
100 
0~~----L-----~----~ 
Grain diameter (mm) 
(d) 
FIGURE 2.5 
Histograms and cumulative grain-size distributions: (a) log normal; (b) skewed; (c) uniform; 
·.·(d) gap g'raded. 
· 
'2 
<ll =en 
'-(f) 
<Dro 
.§E 
~0 
.5:::; 
(J),e 
(/)Ol 
<ll·-
Q.Cll 
-3: 
c:>-
~.0 
(]) a. 
· ·. ·. · 2.5.; Grain Size and Grain Size Distribution 
37 
Sieve analysis 
' •. 
(U.S. Standard sieve) 
No.200100 
40 
10 
4' 3/ain.%in. 
3in. 
1oo~~---.--~--r-~.-~
1
·-~
1
---~
1
-.r--+---+~~~r--
1~~~
1
~o 
.: ·. _J. --~!-
)V 
/(": 
80 ... --·--·-· ·-·-·-·---· .......... -.......... ---·-·+·---.. -·-.. ·-·+ .. ··-" .. -+.-u 
.. _ 
.. n 
__ i+f~:~-~ =-t--~ ----- Vi~r--~~-- ----; /----1·-+- ---- 20 ! ~ 
(])(/) 
60 l---+--+--1--+--l--~--+----+•--v/'----+---+--.~'+v_-+----t--t-+--.-l 40 ~ ~ 
: 
y 
:v 
~0 
-c~ 
40 -~---- ------- ·----- ------ -,--~-[-(~~-- --·-=pf(~•--e---1·1-· g·+r·a-·d-·-e-d•---------·-+--+ ···--- 60 ·i ~ 
· 
1/i 
• l ,.. 
• 
I 
_ >-
Gap graded ~ 
: ,....'d' · 
' 
80 
~ .c 
20~~~~-+_~/.,:·~,,~.~.~~1+.~+-+--+-+~--~~ 
(]) 
~~"' 
,, 
a.. 
o ~=~:....J._.L.LJ.h-iitJ:/.Lll_.. 
LV:::,__-'--LI-LI-'-I.Ll 
ll.cu 
:: ll.......,...,.:.....tv..,...,j_ 
I.L..L.JII...ul l.u.....,. 
1,..--L--LI--L.i...lL:..Ll 
,,·J..l'''~,-l-·j_· 
1.L.LJ 
11Ui..1~ 'w'' ---' 1 oo 
0.001 
0.01 
0.1 
1 .. 
10 
100 
,. 
tines 
., .. Grain diameter (mm_ ) 
I · 
• · • 
sands ---+• +-•f--
gravels + cobbles 
FIGURE 2.6 Typical grain size distributions. 
with only one grain size. V~ry poody graded soils, such as beach sands, have. a Cu of 2 or 3, whereas very 
well graded soils may have a Cu of 15 or greater. Occasionally the Cu can range up to 1000 or so. As an 
example, the clay core material for Oroville Dam in California has a C~ of between 400 and 500; the 
sizes range from large boulders down to very fine-grained clay particles. .· 
Another shape parameter sometimes used for soil classification is the coefficient ofcurvature, 
defined as 
. · 
,· 
'.· 
Dz 
c = __ 
3_0_. 
c 
DwD60 
(2.36) 
where D30 =grain diameter (in mm) corresponding to 30% passing by weight (or mass). The other 
terms were defined previously. 
. _. 
.. 
. 
. . 
. . 
. 
A soil with a coefficlent of curvatl.m! between 1 ~nd 3 is considered to be well graded as long as 
the Cu is also greater than 4 for gravels arid6 for sands. 
,., 
· 
Example 2.11 
Given: 
The grain size distributibn~ shown in Fig. 2. 6 .. 
Required: . 
' ' 
' . \ 
' 
~ .. ' ' . 
Determine D10 , Cu, and C~ for each distribution. 
38 
Chapter 2 
• Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Solution: For Eqs. (2.35) and (2.36), we need D10 , D30 , and D60 for each gradation curve in Fig. 2.6. 
a. Well-graded soil: 
; 
Simply pick off the diameters corresponding to 10%,30%, and 60% passing. 
D10 = 0.02 mm, 
D30 = 0.6 mm, 
D60 = 9 mm 
Fro'm Eq. (2.35), 
Cu = D60-
9 
D
10 
-
0.02 = 450 
From Eq. (2.36), 
D 2 
062 
c =--30_=--·-=2 
c 
D10D60 
(0.02)9 
;,-
Since Cu > 15 and Cc is between 1 and 3, this soil is indeed well graded. 
b. Gap-graded soil: 
Use the same procedure as in part a. 
,_,, 
' 
1 
D10. = 0.022 mm, 
D30 = 0.052 mm, 
D60 = 1.2 mm 
From Eq. (2.35), 
Cu = D60 = 1.2 
, , Dto 
0.022 == 55 
From Eq. (2.36);" 
Cc = 
D~o = 
0.0522 
D1oD60 
0.22(1.2) = 0.0102 . 
Even though by the uniformity coefficient criterion this soil is well graded, it fails the 
coefficient of curvature criterion. Therefore it is indeed poorly graded. 
c. Uniform soil: 
. Use. the same procedure as in part a . 
. Dto = 0.3 mm, 
~0 = 0.43 mm, . D60 :: 0.5S rnm 
' 
• 
~ •' 
• 
• 
• ' 
I • ' 
-
' 
' 
From Eq. (2.35), 
Cu = D60 _ 0.55 
Dto- 0.3 =·1.8 
From Eq: (2.36), 
D~o 
. 0.432 
.. 
Cc = DtoD60 = (0.3)0.55 = 0·1 
This soil is still poorly graded, even though the Cc is slightly greater than unity; the Cu is 
very small. 
, ·2.7 .•. Atterberg Limits 
39 
2.6 . f r PARTICLE SHAPE 
... ;' 
2.7 
The shape' of the' individiuil particles i~ at least as 'important as the gr~in size distribution in affecting 
the engineefing response' of grinmlar s'oils: It is p~ssibl~· to quantify ~hape' ':lccordingto n1les 'developed 
' by sedirrienta:ly petrologists, but for' geotechnical engineering purposes suchrefinements are rarely 
.. warranted. Only a qualitative shape determination is usually ·made as part ofthe'visual identification of 
soilS: Co~rse:grained soils are commonly clas~ified. ~ccording to, the shapes shown in Fig: 2.7. 
·.·· 
A distinction can also be' mad~ betweenpar&les that an; bulky and those with other shapes-
for example, flat, elongated, needlelike, or flaky. ASTM (ii:no) standard D 2488, gives some .criteria for 
describing. the 'shape of rionbulkypaiticles. Mica flakes are an obvious example of flaky-shaped parti-
cl~s,while particles of oita~a sandhav~ ~.bulky shape'.'cylinders of these soils behave very differently 
wliel1 compressed by a piston. The bulky grained sand compresses hardly at all, even when in a very 
loose state, but the mica flakes will compress, even under small pressures, up to about one-half of their 
original volume. When we discuss the shear strength of sands, you will learn that grain shape is very sig-
nificant in determining the frictional characteristics of granular soils. ·: · • ·;;: 
ATTERBERG LIMITS 
(we mentioned in_ Table 2.4 that the presence of water in the voids ofa fine-grained soil can markedly 
affect its engineering behavior)Not only is it important to know how, much water is present in, for 
example, a natural soil deposit (the water content), but we need to be able to compare or scale this 
, . water content against some standard of engineering behavior. Another important distinguishing char-
:. , ~cteri~tic of fine-grained s~iis is .pl~sti~ity. In. fact, plasticity is th~ mo~t conspi~uotis physical character-
·.· .. istic of clayey s~ils (Casagrailde, 1932b ). As noted in Table 2.4, piastieity coulci'be used to distinguish 
.. ,· betweep. plastic and non plastic soiis~ that i_s,betweendaysand silts._Plasticity could also be used to 
., , ; . 
. classify days by their degre~ of plasticity. Finally, plasticity depends on the water content, of a clay soil. 
Subangular 
FIGURE 2.7 Typical shapes of coarse-grained bulky particles {photograph 
by M. Surendra) .. 
. ~ ( 
,,, 
''·l· 
40 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
And this brings us to the Atterberg limits-the threshold water contents at which certain types of 
engineering behavior can be expected. These water content boundaries are unique for each soil, but 
the referenced soil behavior is the sanie.;If we know the soils' water content at a site relative to their 
Atterberg limits, thenwe already know a great deal about their engineering behavior. Along with the 
natural water content, the A iter berg limits are the most important items in the description of fine-
grained soils. They are used in classificatimi'of such soils, and they are useful because they correlate 
with the engineering properties and engineering beh[rvior of fine-grained soils. · 
The Atterberg limits were developed in the early 1900s by a Swedish soil scientist, Albert Atterberg 
(1911; 1916). His extensive research on the consistency properties of remolded firie~grained soils is the 
·.basis of our current understanding of how water influences the plasticity of these soils. Atterberg defined 
. several limits of fine-grained soil behavior and &velope'd simple ma~~al tests to. define them~ They were: 
· 1. Uppe'r limit of viscous flow. 
2. Lower limit of viscous flow. · 
3. Liquid limit -lower limit of viscous flow. 
4. Sticky limit2-clay loses its adhesio~ to a metal blade. 
5. ·cohesion limit3-grains cea;ie to cohere to each other. 
6. · Plastic limit-lower limit of the plastic state. ·. 
7. Shrinkage limit-lower limit of volume change~ 
,;; 
,; : 
' ~ ' ' 
After much experimentation, Atterberg realized that at least two parameters .were required to 
define plasticity of clays-'the upper and lower limits of plasticity. He also defiried the plasticity index, 
which is the range of water content where the soil is plastic, and he was the first to suggest that it could 
be used for soil classification. Later on, iri the late 1920s, K. Terzaghi and A Casagrande {1932b ), work-
ing for the U.S. Bureau of Public Roads, standardized the Atterberg limits so that they could be readily 
use4 for soil classification purposes. In presen.t geotechnical engineering practice we usually use the 
liquid limit (LL or wL), the plastic limit (PL or Wp ), and sometimes the shrinkage limit (SL or Ws). The 
sticky imd the cohesion limits are more useful in ceramics and agriculture. 
Since the Atterberg limits are water contents where the soil behavior cha!lges, we can show these 
limits on~tenrconfinuum, as in Fig. 2}fA.1sosliowrfiinneTie1iaviillstate for a given range of 
water content. As the water content increases, the state of the soil changes from a brittle solid to a plas-
tic solid and then to a viscous liquid. We can also show on the same water content continuum the gen-
eralized material response (stress-strain curves) corresponding to those states. 
. 
You may recall the curves shown in Fig. 2.9 from fluid mechanics, where the shear velocity gradi~ 
ent is plotted versus the shear stre.ss. When this relationship is linear, the liquid is called Newtonian; 
and the slope of the line is, of course, the viscosity. If the viscosity is not a constant, then the material is;1 
a real or non-Newtonian liquid. Recall, too, that a liquid is defined as a material that cannot support· a·· 
static shear stress; so, as shown in Fig. 2.9, when v = 0, T = 0 for both liquids. Depending on the water 
content, it is possible for soils to have a response represented by all these curves except the ideal New- · 
tonian liquid. Note, too, how different this response is from the stress-strain behavior of other engi-
neering materials such as steel, concrete, or wood. 
Atterberg's original consistency limit tests were rather arbitrary and not easily reproducible, 
especially by inexperienced operators. As mentioned, Casagrande (1932b, 1958) worked to standardize 
the tests, and he developed the liquid limit device (Fig. 2.10) so that the test became more operator, 
2 Klebrigkeitsgrenze. 
3Zusammenhaftbarkheitsgrenze. 
,'} .' 
2.7 Atterberg Limits 
41 
Brittle 
Semi-
solid 
solid 
Plastic solid 
·Liquid 
State: 
Water content: 
0 
s~ 
PL: 
LL 
w(%) 
Liquidity 
Ll.< 0 
Ll = 0 
. O<LI<1 
Ll_=,1 
Ll > 1 
index: 
T 
X 
T 
.T 
Stress-strajn: 
w> LL 
'Y 
FIGURE 2.8 Water content continuum showing· the various states of a soil as well as their generalized 
stress-strain response. · 
(Shear 
velocity. 
gradient) 
dv 
dz 
FIGURE 2.9 , Behavior of several materials,· including soils, over a range 
of water contents. · 
,'' 
-~ 
42 
--+ 
Casagrande/ 
grooving tool 
10 mm gage for checking 
.__ height of fall of cup 
Brass cup 
. 
·. t .. ~ 
.. · 
·. 
/Remolded soil sample 
. \ . ·.+--=btl:" (1 
~~~ 
B~~ 
Heightoffall 
t ·. 
· · · 
-
_.........--of cup 
10~ 
Hard rubber base 
(a) 
jd) 
FIGURE 2.10 (a) Schematic diagram of the Casagrande liquid-limit device and grooving 
tool; dimensions in millimetres. (b) Cut groove prior to turning the crank. (c) After turning 
the crank to apply sufficient blows of the cup to close the groove 13 mm. (d) Plastic-limit 
threads. [Parts (a) through (c) after Hansbo (1975); photographs by M. Surendra.] 
2.7 · Atterberg Limits 
43 
independent. He defined the LL as that water content at which a standard groove cut in the remolded 
soil sample by a grooving tool [Figs. 2.10( a); (b)] will close over a distance of 13 mril (1/z in.) at 25 blows 
of the LL cup falling 10 mm on a hard rubber plastic base [Fig. 2.10( c)]. In practice, it is difficult to mix 
.. the soil so that the groove closure occurs at exactly 25 blows, so we generally mix and test the soil at 
· • 5 to 6 different. water contents, each resulting in the 1Jz~in. groove closing at blow counts higher and 
.lower than 25. Casagrande found that if you plot the water contents versus the logarithm of the num-
ber of blows, you get a slightly curved relationship called the flow curve. Where the flow curve crosses 
· 25 blows, that water content is defined as the liquid limit.;.; 
· • ·; . The plastic-limit test is a bit more arbitrary, and it requires some practice to get consistent and repro-
ducible results. The PL is defined as the water content at which a thread of soil just crumbles when it is carefully 
.- , . 
rolled outto a diameter of 3 mm (1/8 in.). It should break up into segments about 3 to 10 mm (1/8 to 3f8 in.) 
·, · long; If the threads can be rolled to a smaller diameter,then the soil is too wet (i.e., above the PL). If it 
: crumbles before you reach 3 mm (lfs in.) diameter, theri the soil is too dry and you are below the PL. 
Properly rolled-out PL threads should look like those shown in Fig. 2.10(d). · 
Detailed descriptions of specimen preparation, LL-deviCe calibration, grooving-tool specifica-
tions, and conducting of both the LL and PL tests are given in ASTM (2010) standard D 4318, U.S. Dept. 
of the Interior (1990), and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1986). 
. 
' -... The tests should be conducted on niat~rial passing the No. 40 425 fLu\ sieve that has not previ-
.- misly been, air or oven • dried; Altho~gh we· are technically characterizing the fine-graimid ·materials 
·passing the No. 200 (0.075 mm) sieve, the difficulty in separating ~specially highly plastic materials on 
that sieve is such that we use the No. 40 sieve, because it is the finest practical sieve size. Even though 
these tests appear simple, some practice is required to get accurate and consistent results. Inadequate 
mixing and nonuniform water content are the most common reasons for unreliable LL results. They 
cause scatter in the data points usea to plot the flow curve, and this makes the LL determination 
__ . 
ambiguous. The problems with the PL test are due mostly to operator and:weighing errors, and it is 
especially difficult for beginning students. to achieve reliable PL results. As a measure of PL' validity, 
·the following criterion is recommended: · · 
: , · -
. 
L 
_,_ PL = PLavg ± 0.05PLavg . 
(2.37) 
where PLavg is the average of all the PLtest attempts. · 
.- . 
_ 
For _example, if the average. of all your PL tests is 20,0, then all yalid attemptsrimst be between 
19 and 21. Any water content determinations outside that range much be discarded and excluded from 
the average. An even more stringent criterion is 0.02 of the PL~;g, which inearis that for this example, 
all PLs must lie with the range of 19.6 and 20.4 to be valid. Such a result can ordinarily be achieved only 
by very experienced techniCians. Note thafASTM (2010) D 4318 has a statistically based approach to 
the precision of the PLtest results that appears to give approximately the same result as Eq. (2.37) for 
soils with PL's·about20. Also included as in option in ASTM (2010) standard D 4318 is a recently 
developed mechanical PL rolling device that should make it easier to get repeatable PL results. 
-- -A word about grooving tools: the dimensions shown in Fig. 2.10 are specified so that the shape of 
the groove can be accurately_controlled.Anothertool that you sometimes see in the lab has a pyrami-
dal cross section and is curved like a short hook. This is the AASHTO grooving tool (AASHTO, 2010, 
standard T 89). The problem with it is that the height of the groove is not controlled, which can lead to 
erroneous results. We recommend that you always use the Casagrande-ASTM tool and that you occa-
sion<:~llY check its diniensions to see that it meets specifications. 
In recent years; the fall-cone test developed in Sweden to determine_ the liquid limit (Hansbo, 1957) has 
gained in popularity. It seems to give more consistent results than the Casagrande device, especially for 
44 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of .soils 
certain clays with interparticle cementations in their natural state, and it is somewhat simpler to use. 
Karlsson (1977) presents an excellent discussion of the reliability of both procedures. 
A 60-g metal cone with an apex angle of 60° is suspended in a device and positioned so that the 
cone tip just barely touches the surface of a remolded soil specimen; then the cone is released and its 
penetration into the soft soil measured. The test is repeated at different water contents, and the cone 
LL is defined as the water content atwhich the cone penetration is exactly 10 mm. The cone liquid limit 
is also the standard procedure in the United Kingdom (BS 1377: Part 2, 1990), although they use an 
80-g cone with a 30° apex. From a plot (very similar to the flow curve) of cone penetration versus water 
content, the. cone LL is defined as the water content at 20 mm penetration. According to Hansbo 
(1994), the British and Swedish procedures give very similar results. 
So, how well do the cone LL and the Casagrande (percussion) LL compare? Karlsson (1977) and 
Head (2006)report that they agree very well up toLL values of about 100; above 100, the cone LL 
. tends to give lower values than the Casagrande LL. When reporting LL results, it is a good idea to 
distinguish between the cone LL and the Casagrande LL. 
2.7.2 
One-Point Liquid Limit Test · · 
. 
. 
. 
. 
When using the Casagrande device, we can use the approximately linear flow curve to help us obtain a 
fairly good estimate of the LL from the one-point liquid limit test. All we have to do is to prepare a LL 
test specimen at a water content so that the groove closes at a blow count N between 20 and 30, obtain 
the water content wN, and use the relationship 
. 
· 
LL~wN(~Y 
' ' 
(2.38) 
The exponent a is an empirical ''constant" that ranges from 0.115 to 0.13, and ha·s an average 
value of 0.121 (Waterways ExperimentStation, 1949; Lambe, 1951; Corps of Engineers, 1986; U.S. 
Dept. of Interior, 1990; ASTM, 2010). Equation (2.38) was developed from a regression analysis of log 
w vs. log N determined on 767 different soils by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the Waterways 
Experiment Station (T. F. Wolff, Personal Communication, 1986). Note that there are similar one-point 
test procedures for the cone LL (Karlsson, 1977; Head, 2006). 
· 
Example 2.12 
: 
Given: 
Liquid-limit data in the table below (after U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990). · · 
Required: 
No. of blows 
w(%) 
1 
16 
23.3 
· Trial No. 
2 
21 
22.5 
,3 
29 
21.8 
4 
34 
21.5 
a. From the data in the table above, plot the flow curve and determine the LL of the soil. 
b. Determine the flow index (defined as the slope oftlle flow curve). 
· : '' 
c. Compute the LL using Eq. (2.38) and compare results. 
. ; ; :' 
· - 2.7 Atterberg Limits 
45 
Flow curve· 
i", 
JJ I 
111111 iJ I 
- ~!'.- 23 •• _ 
•. ___ -_-_-_--___ -_:_-_. 
__ -_--_-_~_--_._._-_~_-.--~_:_=::"_~_-
__ ·-_·_·:_-_·~--•~--~---~_:•--·~---~-·----.--~---~_-:-.~---·~ a:= : .. ~~~ 
1> . 
:::::. 
1 
~-:-+""-,·1·--1--l--H-+-•· ::~-•--- .:r:: ···--•••,1r:· 
~ 
1--r-t-+-+-+-+-+-H-+-t-H-i~·+C·f-
-~· 
Tf 
~ 22.0~~~4-~~-~~4-~~~-·~~---~,~-~~+r~+~H+~~+H,l 
c 
i 
I 
8 
I 
w 
' 
~ 21.0 ~+-++-t-+H-1--HH-+++t-t+++t-HH+~++'l'lli++H+tl 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 45 50 
Number of blows, N 
FIGURE Ex. 2.12 Water content versus log number of blows . 
Solutio~:' 
a~ Plot the water content versus the log of the number of blows, as shown in Fig. Ex. 2.12. From 
the curve, find the water content at 25 blows to be 22.2%. 
·. b. · To determine the flow index, find the slope of the flow curve. If the graph extends over one 
log cycle, the easiest approach is to take the variation in water content over one log cycle of 
blows, or from 10 to 100 blows. However, in the case of Fig. Ex. 2.12, just extend the flow 
curve to the limits of the graph (shown dashed) and obtain the following points: at 
water content.= 23.6o/~, the blow count ~ .. 13.8:At the other ~rid of the line;where the num~ 
ber of blows is 50, the water content = 20.55%. Therefore the slope is: 
· 
., 
' 
' -. • 
• :; 
• ,:. 
'. ' 
,· 
. • 
"j ' :. -' 
~' 
• 
" 
• 
.. lo 
= 
llw 
= 23.6 '_; ·20.55 ·= 3.05 = 5 45 · 
s_ fe 
(Nz). •.·_ lo .2Q_ 
0.56 -
: .. 
log (Nt) 
g 13.8 . 
So, the flow index is 5.45. Note that it is generally between 2 and 20. 
• c. Use Eq. (2.38)-to calculate the one-point LL. If we followASTM, we should use the data for 
. water contents between 20% and 30%, or only for Trials 2 and 3. For Trial2 we have: 
·-· _ · · -
(N)o.iz . · (21)0.12 · · 
_LL = Wn 2~ 
= 22.5 ~S _ 
.. -.. ~22.0% 
ForTrial3: 
,:1 
~··. • 
. • 
•. " 
1 l 
~. 
Note that the one-point LL test is not as accurate as taking the LL directly from the flow 
curve, but for most soils the diffe~ences are small. 
. . . 
' 
' 
46 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2.7.3 
Additional Comments on the Atterberg Limits 
The range of liquid limits can be from zero tolOoo; but most soils.have LL's)ess than 100~ The plastic 
limit can range from zero to 100 or more, with most being less than 40. Even though the Atterberg lim-
its are really water contents, they are also boundaries between different engineering behaviors, and 
Casagrande (1948) recommends that the values be reported without the percent sign. As we show later 
in this chapter, they are numbers to be used to classify fine-grained soils, and they provide an index of 
soil behavior. You will, however, see the limits reported both ways and using both symbols: LL and PL, 
and WL and Wp with a percent sign. (As you may have already deduced, civil engineers never have been 
models of consistency when it comes to units and symbols.) 
The other Atterberg limit sometimes used in geotechnical engineering practice, the shrinkage 
limit, is discussed in Chapter 6 and can be important for certain regions where soils experience sea-
sonal swelling-shrinkage cycles. 
We mentioned earlier that Atterberg also defined an index called the plasticity index to describe 
the range of water content over which a soil behaves plastically, or is moldable. The plasticity index, PI 
or IP, therefore is numerically equal to the difference between the LL and the PL, or 
PI= LL- PL 
(2.39) 
The PI is useful for the engineering ~lassification of fine-grained soil~, and many engineering proper-
ties have been found to empirically correlate with the Pl. 
When we first started the discussion on the Atterberg limits, we said that we wanted to be able to 
compare or scale our water cqntent with some defined limits or boundaries or engineering response. In this 
way, we would know if our sample was likely to behave as a plastic, a brittle solid, or even possibly a liquid. 
The indexfor scaling the natural watercontent of a soil is the liquidity index, LI or h, defined as 
w -PL 
LI = ._n __ 
_ 
PI 
(2.40) 
. 
. 
. 
' 
where Wn is the natural water content 'of the soil in question. If the LI is' less than zero, then, from the 
water content continuum of Fig. 2.8, you know that the soil will behave in a brittle or friable way if 
sheared. If the LI is between zero and one, then the soil will behave plastically, or in a moldable way. If 
LI is greater than one, the soil will be essentially a very viscous liquid when. sheared. Such soils can be 
extremely sensitive to breakdown of the soil structure. As long as they are not disturbed in any way, they 
can be relatively strong, but if for s~me reason they are sheared and the structure of the soil breaks 
down, then they litenilly can flow like a liquid. There are deposits of very sensitive (or "quick") clays in 
Eastern Canada and Scandinavia. Figure 2.11 shows a sample of Leda clay from Ottawa, Ontario, in 
both the undisturbed and remolded states at the same water content. The undisturbed sample can carry 
a vertical stress of more than 100 kPa; when· thoroughly remolded, it behaves like a liquid. Such clays, 
. 
. 
and even those with much less sensitivity, can cause significant design and construction problems, since 
they lose much of their shear strength when excavated or loaded beyond their yield stress. 
We emphasize at this point that the limits are conducted on thoroughly remolded soils. When we 
discuss the structure of clays in Chapter 4, we will see that the natural structure of a soil very strongly 
governs its engineering behavior. So, why do the Atterberg limits work? Like many properties in 
geotechnical engineering, they work empirically. That is, they correlate with engineering properties 
and behavior, because both the Atterberg limits and the engineering properties are affected by the same 
things. Among these "things" are the clay minerals, the ions in the pore water, and the geologic history 
of the soil deposit. These factors are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. For now, just accept that these 
very simple, arbitrary, and empirical Atterberg limits are most useful in ~lassifying soils for engineering 
purposes and that they correlate quite well with the engineering behavior of soils. 
' 
2.~, ; :. :: INTRODUCTI()N TO SOIL CLASSIFICATION 
2.8 · Introduction to Soil Classification 
47 
FIGURE 2.11 
(left} Undisturbed 
and (right} thoroughly remolded 
sample of Leda clay from Ottawa, 
Ontario (photograph courtesy of .' 
the Division of Building Research, 
National Research Council of 
: ' ' Canada;hand by . 
· 
D. C. MacMillan}. 
· · ·! · • • ' · From our previous discussion on· soil texture and grain size distribtitions,you should have a general idea 
. · · about how soils are classified. For example, in Sec. 2.4 we described sands and gravels as coarse-grained 
. · soils, whereas silts and days were fine grained. In Sec. 2.5, we showed the specific size ranges for these soils 
'• ·on a grain size scale (Fig: 2.4) according to the standards of USCS,AASHTO, etc. Usually, however, gen-
. era! terms such as sand or clay include such a wide range of engineering characteristics that additional 
· ·subdivisions or modifiers are required to make the terms more useful in engineering practice. These terms 
'.are' collected into soil classification systems, usually with some specific engineering purpose in mind. 
A soil classification 'system represents, in effect, a language of communication between engi-
! neers. it provides a systematic method of categorizing soils according to their probable engineering 
·behavior, allowing engineers access to the accumulated experience of other engineers. A classification 
system does not eliminate the need for detailed soils in~estigations or more sophisticated testing for 
· engineering properties. However, engineering properties have been found to correlate quite well with 
the index and classification properties ofa given soil deposit. Thus, by knowing the soil classification, 
· the engineer already has a fairly good general idea of the suitability of the soil for a particular applica-
. tion and its behavior during construction, under structural loads, and so on. 
Figure 2.12 illustrates the role of a soil classification system in geotechnical engineering practice. 
' During the past 75 years or so; many soil classification systems have been proposed. As 
Casagrande (1948) pointed out, most systems used in civil engineering had their roots in agricultural soil 
science. This is why the first systems used by civil engineers classified soil by grain size or soil texture . 
.. · · Atterberg (1905) apparently was the first to suggest that something other than grain size could be used 
for soil classification: To this end, in 1911 he developed his consistency limits'for the behavior of fine-
grained soils (Sec. 2.7), although at that time for agricultural purposes. In the 1920s, the U.S. Bureau of 
48 
Chapter2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2.9 
Classification and Index Properties 
(w, e, p, s, GSD, LL, PI, etc.) 
Engineering Properties . 
(permeability, compressibility, 
shrink-swell, 
shear strength, etc.) 
, Engineering Purpose 
, 
(highways, airfields, 
foundations, dams, etc.) 
FIGURE 2.12 Role of cl~s~ifi~ation 
systems in geotechnical engineering. 
,! ' 
' 
' 
' 
Public Roads started classifying fine-grained highway sub grade 
soils using the Atterberg limits and other simple tests. Casagrande 
(1948) describes several other systems that have been used in 
· highway engineering, airfield construction, agriculture, geology, 
and soil science . 
. Today in North America, only the Unified Soil Classifica-
. tion System (USCS) and the American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) system are 
commonly used in civil engineering practice. TheUSCS is by far 
the more common of the two, and it is used by engineering agen-
cies of the U.S. Government (e.g., U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Federal Aviation Administration) 
and virtually all geotechnical consulting firms and soil testing 
laboratories in the United States and Canada. The USCS is also 
the best-known and most widely used engineering soil classifica~ 
tion system in the world. 
The only other classification system used in North America 
is the AASHTO system, developed primarily for evaluating sub-
grade soils under highway pavements. It is still used for that pur-
pose by state departments of transportation. Once you become 
· familiar with the details, both the USCS and AASHTO systems 
are easy to use in engineering practice. 
UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (USCS) 
Because of difficulties experienced with other chissification systems Jo'r the design a~d construction of 
military airfields during World War II, Professor A. Casagrande developed the Airfield Classification 
(AC) System for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Casagrande, 1948). In 1952, the AC system was 
modified by the U.S. Depitrtip.ent of the Interior and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in consultation 
with. Pr:ofessor Casagrande to make it also applicable to dams, foundations, and other construction. 
This expanded system is known as the Unified Soil Classification System or the USCS (U.S. Army 
Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, 1960). The basic concept of the USCSis that coarse-grained 
..• soils can be classified according to their grain sizes and grain 'size distributions; whereas the engineer-
ing behavior of fine-grained soils is related primarily to their plasticity. In the USCS, therefore, only the 
.. results. of a sieve analy~is and the Atterberg limits are necessary to _completely classify a soil. This also 
means that a hydrometer test, which can be relatively time consuming and subject to operator error, is 
notnecessary to classify soils. 
, . 
: 
:, ; ; 
. . , ASTM (2010) standard D 2487, U.S. Department of the Interior (1990), Designation USBR 
5000, andtheU.S.Army Corps ofEngineers (1960) are the best references on the USCS. They define 
the soil terms used inthe system, tell you howto sample the soil and prepare specimens for classifica-
; tion, and then give .you a step-by-step procedure for classifying soils. The ASTM and USBR procedures 
... may be summarized as follows. . 
_ 
. . 
, 
. 
· · . 
First; the system defines the various soil components according to their grain sizes and other 
characteristics (Table2.6). These are-strict-engineering definitions .. Thefine-grained soils-silt, clay, 
. organic silt and_ organic clay, and peat7 are defined not according to grain size but according to certain 
:visual and manual characteristics. These definitions are given below when we describe the classification 
. · .. of fine-grained soils. 
· · 
*:· 
2.9 
Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) 
49 
TABLE 2.6 USCS Definitions of Particle Size, Size Ranges, and Symbols 
Soil Fraction or Component 
Symbol· 
Size Range 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Boulders 
Cobbles 
Coarse-grained soils: 
Gravel 
Coarse 
Fine 
Sand 
! 
Coarse 1:~, 1 
Medium\ 
Fine 
L' 
.. 
Fine-grained so~ls: 
Fines 
Silt 
Clay 
Organic Soils: 
Peat: 
Gradation Symbols 
Well-graded, W 
Poorly-graded, P 
None 
'' None 
G· 
s 
\,_ 
M 
c 
0 
Pt 
Greater than 300 mm 
75 mm to 3oo'min 
75 mm to No.4 sieve(4.75 mm) 
75mmto19mm 
19 mm to No.4 sieve (4.75 mm) 
No.4 (4.75 mm) to No.200 (O.D75 mm) 
. No.4 (4.75 mm) to No.lO (2.0 mm) 
No. 10 (2.0 mm) to No. 40 (0.425 mm) 
No. ~to (0.425 rpm) to No. 200 (P.Q75,mm) 
I 
Less than No. 200 sieve (0.075 mm) 
(No specific grain size-use Atterberg limits) 
(No specific grain size-use Atterberg limits) 
(No specific grain size) 
(No specific grain_ size) 
Liquid Limit Symbols 
·HighLL;H 
LowLL,L. 
' 
' 
. 
The basic features of the USCS are shown in Table 2.7. Take a few minutes to look through the 
table and its footnotes, and you will notice a number of important characteristics about this system. 
First, as shown in Column (1), there are three major soil divisions: (1) coarse~grained soils, (2) fine-
grained soils, and (3) highly organic soils. These are further subdivided into 15 basic soil groups [see 
Column (5)] and group· names [Column (6)]. Note that the classification of a particular soil depends 
only on its grain-size distribution and Atterberg limits, and for a complete and unambiguous classifica-
~ tion both the groupname and group symbol [Column (5)] should be given. 
Classification is performed on the material passing the 75 mm sieve. Larger particles are called 
cobbles (equivalent diameter 75 to 300 mm) and boulders (larger than 300 mm). 
· 
· 
If more than 50% of the soil is coarser than the No. ZOO sieve (or less than half passes the No. 200 
or is finer than 0.075 mm), the soil is coarse grained. The coarse-grained soils are subdivided [Column (2)] 
into gravels (symbol G) and sands (symbolS). This is perhaps the trickiest part of the USCS-deciding 
whether a soil is a gravel or sand. One must examine the coarse fraction. Gravels are those soils having 
more than 50% of the coarse fraction (particles larger than 4.75 mm diameter) retained on the No.4 
sieve, while sands are those having 50% or more. of the coarse fraction passing the No.4 sieve. Beyond 
this level of classification, one needs to look at the percent passing the No. 200 sieve, and this is divided 
· into three categories: 
· 
• Less than 5%: Determine the Cu [Eq. (2.35)] and Cc [Eq. (2.36)]. If the 'cc is between l.and 3, 
and the Cu is greater than 4 for gravel and 6 for sand, then the soil is well graded. The symbol 
would be either GW or SW. If the gradation requirements are not met, then the soil is poorly 
graded and the symbol would be GP or SP. 
·· 
· 
· 
so 
Chapter 2 · 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
, TABLE 2.7 
Unified Soil Classification System 
.· 
,• 
Soil Class_ification 
Criteria for Assigning Group Symbols' ~nd Group Names Ush1g Laboratory Tests• 
Group 
Symbol 
GroupNameb 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
COARSE-
GRAVELS 
CLEAN GRAVELS 
Cu ;;e: 4 and 1 > Cc < 3• 
GW 
Well-graded gravd 
GRAINED 
More than 50% 
I•.Less than 5% finesc 
Cu< 4 and/or 
GP 
Poorly graded 
SOILS 
~f coarse fraction 
1 > Cc < 3e 
gravd 
More than 50% 
retained on No.4 
GRAVELS 
Fines classify as . 
GM 
Silty gravetfg,h 
retained on · 
·sieve '' · 
,'1' '•' WITH FINES 
MLorMH· 
No. 200 sieve· 
More than 12% finesc 
. Fines classify as 
CLorCH 
GC 
Clay~y gravetfg.h 
SANDS 
CLEAN SANDS 
Cu > 6 and 1 < Cc < 3• 
sw 
Well-graded sand; 
. ' ' ~ 
'• 
"' 
·Less than 5% finesd 
Cu < 6 and/or 
SP 
Poorly graded sand; 
50% or more 
\' 
of coarse 
f> Cc > 3e 
fraction passes 
SANDS WITH 
Fines classify as 
SM 
Silty_ sandg,h.i 
: 
. No.4 sieve 
FINES 
MLorMH. 
More than 12% finesd : Fines classify as 
... sc 
Clayey sandg,h,l 
' 
CLorCH 
.. 
. 
FINE-
SILTS AND 
Inorganic 
PI > 7 and plots 
· CL 
Lean clayk•l,m 
GRAINED 
CLAYS 
.. 
. . on or above "A'' -linei .... 
----
~ 
". 
-·-
~-
" 
.. 
" 
.. ~., 
.,,. 
SOILS 
Liquid limit 
. 
1 PI < 4 and plots . 
ML 
Siltk,l,m 
50% or more 
less than 50 
below "A"-line' 
passes 
Organic 
LL 
· · ·.· 
· OL 
Organic clayk.l,m,n 
oven-dned < 0.75 
No.200 .· 
LLnatural 
' 
· Organic siltk,l,m,o 
sieve 
SILTS AND 
Inorganic 
PI plots on or above 
CH 
Fat clayk·1·m 
·CLAYS 
"A:'-lirie' 
.. ·. 
" 
Liquid limit 50 
. PI plots below "A'' -litie 
MH 
.: Elastic siltk,l,m · · 
Organic 
;)' 
LL 
. · 
.. 
OH 
Organic dayk·1·m,p . 
or more 
. 
oven-dned .<. 0.75 
, .. 
. Organic siltk,l,m,q 
LLnatural 
Highly organic soils 
'Primarily organic matter, dark iri color, having . .. 
Pt 
/ ...:Peat 
':· ·'.organic odor · · 
-· 
· 
''/' 
-
~" 
---------
•Based on the' material passing the 3 in. (75 mm) sieve. 
blf field sample contained cobbes and/or boulders, add "with cobbles 
and/or boulders'' to group name. 
caravels with 5% to 12% fines require dual symbols: . 
. 
GW:GM well-graded gravel with silt. 
. GW-GC well-graded gravel with clay. 
, · GP-GM poorly graded gravel with ·silt. .: 
GP-GC poorly graded gravel with' clay. , 
dSands with 5% to 12% fines require dual symbols: 
SW-SM well-graded sand with silt. 
· SW-SC well-graded sand with clay. · 
· SP-SM poorly graded s;md with'silt. 
. 
SP-SC poorly graded sand with clay. 
'c;, = D6r/D10 [Eq. (2.35)); , 
Cc = (D3o)2/D10 X D6o [Eq. (2.36)). 
!If soil contains 2: 15% sand, add "with sand" to group name. 
--
--
·-
-
_.:::::::_ 
-
-
---
--
Kif fines classify as CI;.ML, use dual symbol GC-GM, SC-SM . 
. ,hlf fines are organic, add ·:with organic fines" to group name. 
iif soil contains 2: 15% gravel, add "with gravel" to group name. : 
ilf the liquid limit and plasticity index plot in the hatched area on 
plasticity chart, soil is a CL-ML;silty clay.' 
' 
'• 
. kif soil contains 15% to 19% plus No. 200, add "with sand" or "with 
. gravel," whichever is predominant. 
.· 
. . 
. . 
1If soil contains 2: 30% plus No. 200, preqominantly sand,_add "sandy" 
to group name. 
· · · mlf soil'contains 2: 30% plus No. 200, predominantly gravel, add: 
'. "gravelly" to group name. 
" 
. 
.. "PI· 2: 4 and plots on or above :•p:•Jine. -• .:. 
0PI <: 4 or plots below "N; line. · 
. . PPI plots on or-above "A" line. , . 
' •PI plots below "N' ·line. ' · · 
· 
After U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1990). 
'\ 
2.9 ·. Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) 
51 
• · Between 5% and 12%: Again, Cu and Cc need to be evaluated, but now there are sufficient fines to 
also run Atterberg limits on the minus No. 40 material. The soil is classified as either W or P based 
on the Cu arid Cc, and the fines are classified using the plasticity chart (Fig. 2.13). A dual symbol is 
th~n assigned, with each part of.the sy'.llbol starting with either G or S. These dual symbols are: 
GW-GC 
GW-GM 
SW-SC 
SW-SM' 
GP-GC 
GP-GM 
SP-SC 
.SP-SM 
Notice that the L
1 and H from the plasticity chart don't make it into the classification, but they 
can be included in the verbal description of the soil; . . 
, 
• Greater than 12%: The Atterberg limits are performed on the minus No. 40 material, and the 
primary symb,ol is modifiedby C or M, as follows: 
·· · 
· · · ·· -
·· 
· · 
GC,GM,SC,~M 
! I. 
In all of the cases.cited above for coarse-grained soils; 0 can be substituted for CorM if the fines are. 
determined to be primarily organic in nature. 
· 
. 
The fine-grained soils, silts and clays, are those having 50% or more passing the No. 200 or 75 m 
sieve, and they are classified according to theirAtterberg limits and whether they containasignificant, 
amount of organic matter. Based. on Casagrande's plasticity chart (Fig. 2.13), a distinction is made. 
between soils with LL-less than or greater than 50 (symbols Land H), and between inorganic soils 
above or below the "A -line.'' The A -line generally separates clayey' from silty soils (symbols C and M). 4 
Low plasticity inorganic 
clays; sandy and , 
silty clays 
I 
. 
F 
"··-.Silty clays; I 
· 
clayey silts 
1 
and sands 
_._- _j_ -.-67~777-="'i 
CL-ML •. 
----F"- +"""'P::L.O" 
0 
I 
0 
10 16 
50 
Liquid limit 
90 
.100 
. 110 
FIGURE 2.13 
Several representative soil types shown on Casagrande's plasticity chait {developed from 
Casagrande, 1948, and Howard, 1984). 
· 
' 
4The symbol M isfrom the S~edish terms rna(= very fine sand) ~nd mjiil~ (=silt). 
52 
Chapter 2 
.Index and Classification Properties of Soil~ 
HIGHLY ORGANIC SOILS 
(Pt) 
Fibrous texture, color, odor, 
very high moisture content, 
particles of vegetable 
matter (sticks, leaves, etc.) 
Note: Sieve sizes are U.S. Standard 
COARSE GRAINED 
50% or less pass No. 200 sieve 
• If fines interfere with free-draining properties use double symbol such as GW-GM, etc. 
Make visual examination of soil to determine whether It 
Is HIGHLY ORGANIC, COARSE GRAINED, or FINE GRAINED. In 
· borderline cases determine amount passing No. 200 sieve. 
FIGURE 2.14 Auxiliary laboratory identification procedure (after USAEWES, 1960). 
The U-line is·an upper-limit line. Casagrande developed his chart by plotting Atterberg limit results 
from various soils from around the world, and he found that no ·soils plotted above this line 
(A. Casagrande, personal communication, 1966). If you plot results above this line, you've made either 
soil history or an error (you can figure the odds). Note that the U-line is 'vertical at LL =;= 16, because 
LL's below 16 are not very reliable, since the soil is sliding on the LL cup rather than flowing or shearing 
through the soil itself. Howard (1984) reports that of over 1000 LL tests performed by the USBR, only 
four had LL = 17, one had LL = 16, and none had LL below 16. 
Silts and clays that contain sufficient organic ma!ter to influence the}r properties are classified 
as organic. It has been found that the LL of organic clays and silts decreases after oven drying, so this 
is a simple indicator of the presence of significant organic matter. If the ratio of the oven~dried LL 
to the LL not dried is less than 0.75, then the soil is considered to be organic and has the symbols OL 
or~ 
. 
' 
. 
(The third major group is highly organic soils. These consist primarily of organic matter, are dark 
bro~n to black in color, imd have an organic odor. They are given the group symbol Pt and the group 
name of peat. Peats are composed of vegetable matter and plant debris in various stages of decompo-
sition, and thus they often have a fibrous to amorphous texture as well as the ·dark color and organic 
odor mentioned above. See ASTM standard D 4427 for a system for classifying peat. 
Both the ASTM D 2487 and USBR 5000 procedures give flow charts for coarse-grained, fine-
grained, and organic soils to help you conveniently assign the appropriate name and ~'group name" to 
a soil. In addition, we have always found the step-by-step procedure in Fig. 2.14 useful, because it shows 
a process of elimination of all the possibilities until only the correct classification remains. Figure 2.14 
should always be used together withTable 2.7._ 
· 
{
FIGURE 2.14 Continued. 
Example 2.13 
Given: 
' ,, 
2.9 
Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) 
53 
Umits plot in 
hatched zone on 
plasticity chart 
Run LL and PL on minus No. 40 sieve material 
Sieve analysis and plasticity data for the following three soil~ .. 
Sieve Size 
No.4 
No.lO 
NoAO 
No.lOO 
No.200 
LL 
PL 
PI 
"Non plastic. 
Required: . 
Soill, % Finer 
••• -! 
Soil 2, % Finer 
Soil 3, % Finer 
97 
100 
90 
100 
40 
100 
8 
99 
5 
97 
124 
47 
NPa 
77 
Cl!issify the three soils according to the Unified Soil Classification System and provide a group name. 
54 
Chapter2 
·Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
U.S. Standards sieve opening (in.) U.S. Standards sieve numbers 
Hydrometer 
1.1 
.:l. .1 .:l. 
100 
6 43 2 214 2 8 3 4·6 -·-···-----·---·-·····----
~ 
11'{1.11_1_11·1~1111~ 
~ 0 
90 
l:l 
80 
t1l 
~ 70 
0 
t 
60 
"(ii 
~ 
10 
f/l 
f/l 
t1l 
E 
5 
:E 
Ol 
"(ii 
~ 
>-
~ 
t----~~--------~--~~~~~~~~~~-­
~ 40 
:;::: 
..0 
tii 
~ 
t1l 
0 
(.) 
~ 30 
""-~ 
~ .. 
"'----...:.j 
"E 
~ 
QL 
Q.. 
Q) 
~ 
Q) 
Q.. 
Sample .No. Elev. or depth 
Classification 
Natw% 
LL 
PL 
PI I Project 
·Ex. 2.13 
1 
. 
20 
15 
5 
2 
"" 
., .. - ····· 
--
... NP 
3 
124 
47 
77 Area 
49 
24 
25 '-----
4 
"'. 
Boring no. -.. 
5 
NP r--
Date 
FIGURE Ex. 2.13 
Solution: Use Table 2.7 and Fig. 2:14. 
. 
.. 
1.' 'Plot the grain-size distribution curves forth~ threesoils (show~ inFig.Ex. 2.13). 
2. ' For soil1, we see from the curve that more than 50% passes the No. 200 sieve (60% ); thus 
the soilis fine grained and the Atterberg limits are required. to further classify it. With 
LL = 20 and PI = 5, the soilplots inJhehatched zone on the plasticity chart (Fig. 2.13), so 
it is a CL-ML. Continue now by using Table 2,7to obtain the group name. With> 30% pass-
·. ing the No. 200 sieve: looking at the grain size curve, the % sand _;::! % gravel, and with 
< 15% gravel, footnote l in Tably 2.7 indicates that "sandy" should be added, so that the 
soil's group name is ~'Sandy Silty Clay." .. 
. 3. . Soil2 is immediately seen to be coarse grained, since only 5% passes the No.200 sieve~ 
b 
7% passes the No.4 sieve, the soil is a sand rather than a gravel. Next, riote the amount of 
: 
eria assing lleN-o.200Sl:eve(5%);HciinF1g:'2}4;theioil is "borderline" and therefore 
. 4. 
/1 
~ni;ied Soil Classification System (USCS) 
55 
has a dual symbol su~h~;;~-:~ending on the values of Cu and Cc. From the 
grain-size 'distribution ~x:-T.lT,\Ve find that D60 · = 0. 71 mm, D30 . = 0.34 mm, and 
· D10 = 0.18 mm. The coefficient of uniformity Cu is 
Cu = D60 ="' 0.71 = 3.9 < 6 
· D10 
0.18 
· 
and the coefficient of curvature Cc is 
. . 
(D3o? 
co.34)2 
Cc' = 
= 
= 0.91 · 
. D10 X D60 
0.18 X 0.71 
. 
. , 
. 
For a 'soil to be considered ;well graded, it m~st meet the criteria shown in Column ( 4) 
of Table 2. 7; it does not, so the soil is considered poorly graded and its classification is SP-SM . 
. (The soil is SM because the fines are nonplastic and probably silty.) 
. 
. 
. . 
For the group name, from footnoted inTable 2.7, a soil with symbolSP-SM is "poorly 
graded sand with silt." [Because this soil is almost borderline with < 5% fines, one could 
also end up .with a group name of poorly graded sand (SP). Even a small percentage of fines 
ch'cu1ges the engineering properties quite a bit.] 
· · · · 
· 
' 
' 
' 
'' 
' 
.A quick glance at soil 3's characteristics indicates that it is fine grained (97% passes the 
No. 200 sieve). Since the LL is greater than 100, we cannot directly use the plasticity chart 
(Fig. 2.13): We use instead the equation for the A-line on Fig. 2.13 to determine whether the 
soil isaCH or MH. 
,... 
· 
PI = 0.73(LL - 20) = 0.73(124 ·"-- 20) = 75.9 . 
,,, ' 
' 
i 
' 
' 
.'. 
' 
-
! 
. 
' 
' 
1 
S.inct;: the Pi is 78for soil 3, itlies abov~ th~ A-line,and thus the soil is classified as a CH. 
From Table 2.7, at the CH group symbol, with 97% 'passing,' only 3%is retained on that sieve, and 
none of the footnotes k, 1, or m apply, so the group name is "Fat Clay." · 
• Commentary on this example and engineering practice: The only way-repeat, ONLY way-that 
the correct classification symbol, let alone group name, may be found is by having both the Atterberg 
limits AND the grain size analysis. Otherwise it is an educated guess-unless you have lots of experi-
ence with the visual-manual classification procedure. 
· 
2.9.1 
Visual-Manual Classification of Soils 
Although the letter symbols and group names•in the USCS are convenient, they do not completely 
describe·a soil. or soil deposit. For this reason, descriptive terms should alsobe used for a complete 
soil classification; Burmister (1948) is credited with introducing the concept of systematically describ-
·. ing soils, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1960), Howard (1977), ASTM D 2488, various gov-
ernment agencies,· and consulting firms have· developed variations of basic· descriptive categories. 
These are called visual-manual procedures because they use only observations and manual manipula-
tion to describe and identify soils. No sieves or Atterberg limits are used'-just your eyes and fingers. 
Characteristics such as color, odor, moisture con.dition, and homogeneity of the deposit should 
be observed and included in the sample description. A typical set of soil colors includes the following: 
gray, brown, mottled .yellow and brown, yellowish, reddish brown, gray brown, and other combinations 
of the basic colors. The .word "mixed" is used if the material is fill comprised of various soil components 
from different sources. Odor is important, since it can be used to assess the presence of organics and 
contaminants; in fact, caution should be used when one is· handling and ''sniffing" soil that is believed 
56 
Chapter 2 
. Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
to be severely contaminated. The moisture condition description can be as simple as dry (dusty), moist 
(damp) or wet (free water). 
·· 
· 
For cohesionless, predominantly coarse-grained soils, such items as grain shape, mineralogical 
content, degree of weathering, in situ density, and the presence or absence of fines should be noted and 
included. Adjectives such as rounded, angular, and subangular are commonly used to describe grain 
shape (see Fig. 2.7). The in situ density is normally obtained using the standard penetration test or a 
cone penetrometer, but a cruder version of this test is to use a No.4 (1/z-in. diameter) piece of rein-
forcing steel: very loose soil can be penetrated with the bar pushed by hand, while to penetrate very 
dense soil even a few millimetres may require a sledge hammer. Terms such as very loose, loose, 
medium, dense, and very dense are used to describe in situ density. 
For fine-grained soils, consistency, remolded consistency, and some measure of plasticity should 
be noted in the sample description. Consistency in the natural state corresponds in some respects to the 
in situ density in coarse-grained soils, and is usually evaluated by notingtheease with which the deposit 
can be penetrated. Such terms as very soft; soft; medium, stiff (or firm), very stiff, and hard are employed 
to describe consistency~ Table 2.8 describes four methods for field testing of soils, and their relationship 
to p'1nticularfine-gr~ined soil types and plasticity: 
~·. 
. 
. 
· 
. · . 
·· 
You can probably see thatthe visual-mariual classification of soils is much more subjective than 
uses classification, which means that descdptive classification will be more dependent on the person 
doing it.Ther6fore, getting a consistent desciiptiv~'classification for' a given soil requires considerable 
experience. However, the method mentioned above, as well as the tests described in Table 2.8, provide 
astartingpointfor this part of soil classification. · • 
· 
· · 
· 
· 
When we discussed texture of soils in Sec. 2.4 ·and at the beginiling of this section, we sug-
gested that you get some pracfice identifying soils according to texture and other characteristics. 
Excellent guides for doing this ar~;given by ASTM (2010) .standard D 2488 and U.S. Dept. of the 
Interior (1990) Procedure USBR 5005. Although they are similar to the USCS and use the same 
· group names and symbols, these proceduresrely only on vislial examination: and simple manual 
tests-and not on laboratory tests for grain size distribution and Atterberg limits,-to describe and 
·identify soils. They also have flow charts to help you get the correct group name and visual-manual 
classification. We encourage you to obtain a copy of one of these procedures and use it as a guide in 
learning to visually and manually classify different soils. ~e procedures. are very simple; and with a 
little practice on a variety of soils, especially under the guidance of an experienced soil classifier, you 
can become quite good at it. (See Chapters 3 and 4 for rock classification.) 
Table 2.9 is a checklist of the items that should be included in a visual-manual soil description. Of 
course, not all these items will be required for all soils; you just use those that are applicable for your 
particular soil sample. Also be sure to include all pertinent information' on the origin or source of the 
sample, the project or job name and number, bore hole or test pit number,' sample riumher, and'imy 
other appropriate identification marks andinformation. 
· •:: 
. Years ago, we prepare.d a 'set of ten samples of moist soils along with a small container of the 
· same soils air dried. About 25 very experienced soils engineers were invited to classify the samples 
according to the Unified Soil Classification System and provide a name 1 for each soil (without 
knowing the Atterberg limits or grain size). (This test occurred long before ASTM had group names 
in their standards.) There probably was about 400 years of total geotechnical experience inthe 
room. 
Each participant was given a clipboard and pencil and was free to poke, feel, and even taste (if 
they wante.d) the soil in order to classify it. Everyone was under the gun,' especially the more senior 
people. The result was entirely unanticipated. The·average grade, as compared with thelaboratory-
determined USCS classification of these ten soils, was only3 out of 10! Most of the engineers were 
· consistently off (horizontal translation) regarding the "fineness" of a soil sample. They were calling 
silts, clays and sands, silts. In other words, they perceived the soils to be finer than they actually were. 
Conclusion: It takes practice and continual self-calibration.to become.an effective and accurate 
.a 
TABLE 2.8 
Property Tested 
Dilatancy 
(reaction to shaking) 
Dry Strength 
(crushing properties) · 
Toughness 
(consistency near 
the plastic limit) 
Plasticity 
(estimate of natural 
plasticity) 
2.9. ·. Unified Soil Classification System {USCS) 
57 
Test Procedures and Results Interpretation 
• Prepare a pat of moist soil with a volume of about 5 cm3• • · 
• Add enough water to make the soil soft but not sticky. 
• Place the pat in the open palm of one hand and shake vigorously against the other hand 
several times. 
• A positive reaction consists of water appearing on the surface of the pat, which becomes filmy 
and glossy. Then, when the sample is squeezed between the fingers, the water and gloss 
disappear, the pat stiffens, and it finally cracks or crumbles. 
. 
. 
Results Interpretatio~: Very fine, clean sands give the quickest and most dramatic reaction, while 
a plastic clay gives no reaction. Inorganic .silts show a moderately quick reaction. 
• Mold a pat of soil to the consistency of putty, adding water if necessary. 
• Allow the pat to dry completely by oven, sun, or air, then test its 'strength by breaking and 
crumbling between the fingers. · 
· · · 
' 
• Th~ dry strength increases with increasing plasticity. · 
,. 
: 
Results Interpretation: High dry strength is characteristic of a CH clay. A typical inorganic silt 
has only very slight dry strength~ Silty fine sands and silts have about' the same dry strength, but 
. the fine sand feels gritty after breaking, while a typical silt feels sm'oother and more like flour. 
'' 
'' . 
' 
' 
. '.' 
. 
• Mold a specimen ofsoil about the size of a 12mm cube (like a sugar cube) to the consistency 
- of putty, adding water or slightly drying if necessary.' . 
. 
. 
• Roll out the specimen by hand on a smooth surface or between the palms into a thread about 
3 mm in diameter. Fold and refold the thread repeatedly:.:.moisture is lost; the specimen 
stiffens, finally loses it plasticity, and cnimbles when the plastic limit is reached. 
• After the thread crumbles, the pieces should be lumped together and a slight kneading action 
·continued until the lump crumbles . 
• The tougher the thread near the plastic limit and the stiffer the lump when it finally crumbles, 
the moreyotent the clay fraction in the soil. 
Results Interpretatio~: Weakness of the thre~d at th~ pl~stic limit and quick loss of coherence 
of the lump below the plastic limit indicate either inorganic clay of low plasticity or materials 
such as kaolin-type clays and organic clays that occur below theA-line. High-organi~ clays have 
. a very weak and spongy feel at the plastic limit. 
• M~?ld a specimen of soil at its natural water content into a lump. 
;, Roll out the specimen by hand on a smooth surface or between the palms into the smallest 
thread possible without causing excessive cracking or crumbling. 
• The smaller the, thread that can be rolled out, the more plastic the soil. 
Results Interpret~tion: · 
Degree of plasticity 
Nonplastic· 
Slight 
Low'· 
. Medium· 
High· 
· .VeryHigh 
· .. 
Soil type 
SILT 
Clayey SILT 
SILT and CLAY 
· CLAY and SILT 
·· Silty CLAY 
CLAY 
Note: Soil iype in caps is the predominant soil type.'· 
.3mm· 
1.6mm 
,0.8mm 
a All tests are for soil or soil fractions minus No. 40 sieve size. 
After U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (1960), Howard (1977), and von Rosenvinge (2006). 
58 · Chapter 2 · 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
TABLE 2.9 Checklist for Description of Soils (U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990) 
1. Group name 
2. _ Group symboL 
3. Percent of cobbles and/or boulders (by volume) 
4. Percent of gravel, sand and/or fines (by dry mass) 
5. Particle-size range: Gravel-:fine, coarse; Sand-fine, medium, coarse • 
6. Particle angularity: angular, subangular, subi:ounded, rounded .. 
7 .. Particle shape (if appropriate): flat, elongated, flat and elongated , 
s: Maximum particle siie or dimension. 
9. Hardness of coarse sand and larger particles . 
10. Plasticity of fines: nonplastic, low, medium, high 
1L Dry strength: none, low, medium, high; vei:y high' 
12 .. Dilatancy: none, slow, rapid 
· 13. Tmighness: low, medium, high 
14. Color (in moist condition) 
. 
15. Odor (mention only if organic or unusual) 
16. Moisture: dry, moist, wet 
. 
' 
· · 
17. Reactio~ with HCI: nom!, weak, strong 
For int~ct sa~ples: · 
. 
. . . . . 
. 
.. 
18. COnsistency (fine-grained soils only): very soft, soft, firm, hard, very hard 
19. Structure: stratifi~d, laminated, fissured, slickensided, le~sed, homogeneous 
20. Cementation: weak, moderate, strong 
. 
. 
21. Local name 
. 
· 22. Geologic interpretation 
. 
:• · 
'-; 
Additional comments: 
Presence. of roots or root holes 
Presence of mica, gypsum, etc.· 
Surface coatings on coarse-grained particles 
Caving or sloughing of auger hole or tren~h sides·<· 
Difficulty if! auguring or excavation 
. · • 
"•; ·' 
~ : ' 
1 
• 
classifier. Follow ASTM D 2488 and USBR 5005 and get some experience! And calibrate yourself 
frequently with a variety of soils with knownAtterberg limits and grain size curves. · 
' 
, 
, r~, ' 
:' 
~; : 
2.9.2 
What Else Can We Get from the LL-PI Chart? 
Besides being useful for the classification of fine-grained soils (e.g.~ Fig. 2.13), we can get several other 
things from Casagrande's LL-PI chart. For example, representative fine-grained soil types are shown in 
Fig. 2.15. These. namesalsoshouldcorrelate With the group names in Column ( 6) of Table 2. 7. Figure 2.16 
from Casagrande (1948) shows the Atterberg limits for a number of typical soils from around the world, 
while the inset at the upper left of the figure shows data primarily from the United States. 
You can see from these figures that several different soil types tend to plot in approximately the 
same area on the LL-PI chart, which means that they tend to have about the same engineering behav-
ior. This is basically whytheCasagrande chards so useful in the engineering classification of soils. For 
example, Casagrande (1948) observed the behavior of soils at the same liquid limit with plasticity index 
·increasing, as compared with their behavior at the same plasticity index but with increasing liquid limit. 
The results are shown in Table 2.10. 
'; 
,> 
·.'•J. 
. 2.9, Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) 
59 
' ... 
G) SANDY CLAY, NORTHEASTERN NEW MEXICO 
180 
@SILTY LOESS, KANSAS-NEBRASKA' 
. ®CLAYEY UJESS, KANSAS. 
. 
f+-. ·-+-+--+-+--+--f---1 
@ KAOLIN CLAY, DECOMPOSED GRANITE, SINGAP-ORE I . 
160 
@KAOLIN CLAY; RESIDUAL SOIL, CALIFORNIA 
rt,--+--:-+-+--+-t-:--t----1 
_ @SILTY CLAY, SALT LAKE BASIN SEDIMENTS, UTAH -
_ 
I ' 
-
CZ)PORTERVILLE CLAY "EXPANSIVE" (CALCIUM 
i 
-- · 
, . , 
140 -
BEIDELLITE), CALIFORNIA 
• 
: 
, -· t-. ---:- ___ c ~-
, 
. · 
@HALLOYSITE CLAY, SANDY, TRACE OF 
. 
. . 
I •. 
.• ~ 
• 
. 
· 
MONTMORILLONITE GUAM. MARIANAS_ISLANDS t---- ----- -- . ---- ----- ----- ----
120 . @~~EM~~ ~:i::.EE"i~ _\~t,ig~~~EOUS AND . . . r~~ _ __.._ ~-j-~--
x 
_ @MONTMORILLONITE CLAY, SLIGH. TLY ORGANIC, 
. -~-:S -------7----~7--- --
{g 
· 
.· 
GUAM, MARIANAS ISLANDS 
· 
--
~ 
. 
~ 100 
@CLAY, GLACIAL LAKE DEPOSIT, NORTH DAKOTA B 
~<:,/ / 
. 
:~ 
@CLAY, "EXPANSIVE"(SODIUM MONTMORILLONITE}$"_ 
''~+. ..... '-_/"--f---+--f---+--f---1 
ro 
· 
GILARIVERVALLEY,ARIZONA 
• 
. 
~12! ·_A: 
' 
· · c::: '_ 80 
@_ BENTONITE, WYOMING AND souTH._ 
~v / '/ 
1
/ 
I ·' 
' ·· DAKOTA-
..LI=7'. 
_)-
. 
600 ,-------,---,---.,----., 
. j- ·I 
~~ ~/ 
~--
I 
/ 
l I 
'A'dfmJH~f® I 
~ 
(13) I // . 
I 
~400t-:--+--~~~/-+-?'~ 
40 
· 
• 
I~ :e:~~~r® I.: ~ 
60 
o 
~~~·.- T~ 
-
I 
··0 
20 
' 40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
200 
. Liquid limit 
FIGURE 2.15 
Relation between the liquid limit (LL) and the plasticity index (PI) for various soils 
(U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990).. 
·. · 
• TABLE 2.10- Relation Between Position on the i.L-PI Chart and Physical Properties 
· .. 
-
' 
ll 
.. 
' 
'-· 
. 
,.. . 
' 
\ 
. Characteristic. 
Soils at Equal PI with Increasing LL 
Soil~ at Eq~al LL with Increasing PI' 
. -.. , ' 
,-
' . 
. 
' 
Dry strength 
Toughness near PL 
· Permeability 
· 
: Compressibility 
R~te of volume charige 
• ·After Casagrande (1948). 
Increases 
'Increases 
Decreases 
-About the same 
· · ' Decreases 
Decreases 
Decreases 
Increases 
· Increases 
', .,, 
60 
Chapter 2 
.Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
>< 
Q) 
"'C 
. !: 
~ 
·-m 
co 
a:: 
400 r--,----,------;------,----, 
70r--~--~--~-r-T---r--~ 
100 
30 
00 
Various 
/~Types 
of 
Diatomaceous Earth Peat 
§...<- (Calif. and Mass.) 
1 00 
200 
300 
400 ' 
Liquid Limit 
-------l· __ __;____ 
. 
.. , 
. 
I 
. 
· 
. 
· . ,.. 
Natural State 
-
t=¢F~"~~~~~~. ~~:h~~x~---
south Carolina) 
.-.: . • @ ·Mica Powd
1
er 
' Organic Silt and Cl 
' ·-·-------
(Fl
. 
.· 
. 
ay. 
~~ 
, ,.~· 
• ~ 
ush!~g Meadows, Ll.) 
··-·~· 
. 
.... 
..;,..~;'-~...:.. -. · :(' 1- Or~am~ ~l~y (N.~w London 
.• , Conn.) 
Dned 
qrgamc S1\t and Clay (Panama) __ _ 
I 
: 
K~olin (Mica, Wash.) 
I 
Micaceous Sandy Silt (Cartersville, Ga.) 
10 
20 
30 
40 
110 
Liquid limit 
FIGURE 2.16 
Relationship betw'een liquid limit and plasticity index .for typical soils (Casagrande, 1948). 
-
"~ ,~ ' 
'. 
·~ 
' 
Toughness near the. PL and dry strength are v~ry useful visual classification properties, as shown 
in the preceding section (see Table 2.8). The other three characteristics are engineering properties, and 
they are discussed in great detail later in this book. For now, just ·rely on yoilr general knowledge and 
ingenuity to figure out what those three words mean .. ': 
. 
· 
. . 
. · 
. We shall see in Chapter 4 that Casagrande's plasticity chart can be used to identify qualitatively 
the predominant clay minerals in a soil (Fig. 4.14), along with correlation with the activity. 
2.9.3 
Limitations of the uses 
!" 
.... 
,; 'i; 
·,:; 
. As noted by Galster (1999), the USCS does have some limitations. For one thing, it does not consider the 
geologic origin or source of the materials being classified. As will be noted in Chapter 3, the nature of the 
· soils and their engineering properties are often strongly influenced by· their geologic origin. Thus, when 
you are classifying a soil deposit, it would be prudent to mention the geologic' origin of the materials you 
are working with, in addition to the USCS group name and symbol. (This is item 22in Table 2.9.) 
Another difficulty with theUSCS is that it says veiy little about materials laq~er than gravels, 
. suchas cobbles ·and boulders .. Furthermore; the angularity of cobbles and boulder~ is not mentioned, 
although, as we will later see, particle shape strongly influences the strength of granular materials. 
Although the uses is meant for classifying naturally occurring mineral and organa-mineral 
, soils, Howard (1984) mentions that it is often used to-classify materials such as shale, siltstone, clay-
. stone, sandstone, crushed rock, slag, cinders, and shells, which do not occur naturally as soils. If these 
. materials are crushed or otherwise broken down by construction activity, it is still OK to classify them 
as soils according to the USCS (see ASTM D 2488 and USBR 5005). However, be sure to indicate that 
the materials did not naturally occur in this state. 
2.10 
Problems 
61 
AASHTO SOIL CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM 
• J,' 
In the late 1920~ the U.S. Bureau of Public Roads (now the Federal Highway Administration, FHWA) 
co~ducted ex'tensive research on the use. of soils in local or secondary road construction, the so~called 
"farm-to:market" roads: That research led to the development of the Public Roads Classification System 
(Hogentogler and Terzaghi, 1929), based on.the stability characteristics of soils used as a road surface or 
. with only a thin tar or asphalt pavement. The PR system was modified several times for sub grades under 
thicker pavements. The latest revision was in 1942, and this is essentially the present AASHTO (2004) 
_system. Its details are given in AASHTO.Designation M 145 .and ASTM (2010)standard D 3282. 
·Although AASHTO states that the system "should be useful in determining the relative quality of the 
soil material for use in embankments, subgrades, subbases, and bases," you should keep in mind its 
original purpose. (See Casagrande, 1948, for some comments on this point.) · 
The AASHTO system classifies soils into seven groups,A-1 throughA-7, and it includes several 
subgroups. Soils within each group are evaluated according to the group index, which is calculated by 
an empirical fonnula; The only tests required are the sieve analysis and the Atterberg limits. 
There are several significant differences between the' USCS and AASHTO soil classification 
··systems, which is· riot surprising, considering the differences in their history and purpose. AI-Hussaini 
(1977) arid Liu (1970) compare the two systems in terms of the p~obable corr~sponding soil groups. 
PROBLEMS 
Phase relationships 
2.1 From memory, draw a phase diagram (like Fig. 2.2, but don't look first!). The "phases" have a Volume side 
and Mass side. Label all the parts. 
· 
· 
2.2 ·From memory, write out the definitions for water c~ntent, void ratio, dry density, wet or moist density, and 
saturated density. If you just look them up and copy the~, you will satisfy the moral obligation to do the 
homework but you will not learn them. · 
. 
. 
2.3 Assuming a valtu:' of Ps = 2.7Mg/m3,'take tl~e range of saturated density iii T~ble il for the six soil types 
and calculate/estimate the 'range in void ratios that one might expect for these soils. Doing so will give you an 
idea of what to expect in the future. Remember this range. Matlab-or a spreadsheet would be nice! 
2.4 Prepare a spreadsheet plot of dry de~sity in Mg/m3 as the ordi~ate versus water content in percent as the 
abscissa. Assume Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3 and vary the degree· of saturation, S, from 100% to 40% in 10% incre-
ments. A maximum of 50% water content should be. adequate (except for very soft clays, to be defined 
shortly). [Note: Such a graph is very useful to check problems that you do in this chapter, as there is a unique 
relationship between dry density, water content, and the degree of saturation for any given density of solids. 
Void ratio, wet density, and so on are then readily computed. Similar graphs for density of other solids may 
be easily computed and plotted.] Show all your equations as corrmi.ents on your sheet for future reference. 
2.5 Prepare a graph like that in Pr~blem 2.4, only use dry 'density unlts of kN/m3 and pounds per cubic feet. 
-
,,;, 
•. 
,! 
'-. 
2.6 Prepare a graph like that in Problem 2.4, only for S = 100%, and varythe density of solids from 2.60 to 
2.80 Mg/m3• You decide the size of the increments you need to "satisfactorily" evaluate the relationship asPs 
varies. Prepare a concluding statement .of your observations. 
. 
2.7 The dry density of a compacted sand is 1.87 Mg/m3 and the density of the' solids is 2.67 Mg/m3• What is the 
water content of the material when saturated? Phase diagram! 
2.8 A soil that is completely saturated has a total density of 2045 kgim3 and a water content of 24%. What is the 
density of the solids? What is the dry density of the soil? Phase diagram! :. 
:2.9 What is the water content of a fully saturated soil with a dry density of 1.72 Mg/m3? Assume Ps = 2.72 Mg/m3• 
2.10 A dry quartz sand has a density of 1.68 Mg/m3• Detennine its density when the degre~ of ~aturation is 75%. 
The density of solids for quartz is 2.65 Mg/m3.': 
. . 
' 
. 
,. • . . 
· 
. ·. 
• 
; 
.. : 
, 2.11, Th.e d~ densityor'a soil is i.60 Mg/m3 and the solids have a density of2.65 M~m3
• Find the(a) water content, 
' ..•. (b) void ratio, and (c) totaldensity when th'e 'soil is saturated. 
. ;, 
.. · . . 
. . . 
. .. 
' 
~ 
. ~ 
'' 
' 
. 
' ' : ' . 
' 
' ' 
' 
62 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2.12 A natural deposit of soil is found to have a water content of 20% and to be 90% saturated. What is the void 
ratio of this soil? 
2.13 A chunk of soil has a wet weight of 62 lb and a ~olume of o:s6 ft3: When dried iri ~n· ov~n, the ~oil weighs 
50 lb. If the specific gravity of solids G5 = 2.64,determine the water content, wet unit weight, dry unit weight, 
andvoid ratio of the soil.' 
' 
·· 
· 
2.14 In the lab,' a container of saturated soilh~d a mass of113.27 g bef~re it was placed in theoven and 100.06 g after 
the soil had dried. The container alone had a mass of 49.31 g. The specific gravity of solids is 2.80. Determine the 
void ratio and water content of the original soil sample. · 
' · 
· · 
2.15 The natural water content of a sample taken froin a soil deposit was found to be 12.0%. It has been calculated 
that the maximum density for the soil will be obtained when the water content reaches 22.0%. Compute how 
many grams of water must be added to each 1000 g of soil (in its natural state) in order to increase the water 
content to 22.0%. 
· 
2.16 A cubic meter of dry quartz sand (Gs = 2.65) with a porosity. of 60% is immersed in an oil bath having a 
density of 0.92 g/cm3.If the sand contains 0.27, m3 of entrapped air, how much force is required to prevent it 
from sinking? Assume that a weightless membrane surrounds the spechn<!n·. (Prof. C. C,.Ladd.) 
2.17 ·A soil sample taken from a borrow pit has a natural void ratio of 1.15. The_soil will be used for a highway 
project where a total of 100,000 m3 of soil is needed in its compacted state; its compacted void ratio is 0. 73. 
, . How much volume has to be exc~v~ted from the bo~row pit to _meet the job requirements? 
2.18 A sample of moist soil was found to have the following characteristics: 
Total volume: 0.01456 m3 
Total mass: 25.74 kg 
Mass after oven drying: 22.10 kg 
Specific gravity of solids: 2.69 
Find the density, unit weight, v~id rati~; por~sity, and degr<!e of saturation for the moist soh .. 
2.19 A gray silty clay (CL) is sampled from a depth of 12.5 feet. The "moist" soil was extruded from a 6-inch-high 
brass liner with an inside diameter of 2.83 inches and weighed 777 gniiris. 
· · · . · • 
'(a) Calculate the wet unit weight in po~nds per cubi~ feet. 
, 
· · 
·' ' · . 
(b) A small chunk of the original sample had a wet weight of l 40.9 grams and weighed 85.2 grams after drying . 
. Compute the water content, using the correct' number of significant figures. . 
. . (c) Compute the dry density in Mg/m3 and the 'dry unit weight in kN/m3 •. 
2.20 A cylindrical soil specimen is tested in the laboratory. The. followlng properties were obtained:. 
; I ( 'J_ 
, f ~ I 
Sample_diameter 
Sample length 
·• Wt. before drying in oven· 
Wt. after drying in oven 
· Oven temperature ' 
Drying time· . . . . 
Specific gravity 'of solids 
' ..• ': Wh~t is the degre~ of saturationof this specimen? 
3 inches 
. 6 inches 
2.95lb 
2.54lb 
uooc 
···.:) 
24ho~rs 
2.65 
2.21 A sample of saturated silt is 10 em in diameter and 2.5 em thick. Its void ratio in this state is 1.35, and the spe-
cific gravity of solids is 2.70. The sample is compressed to a 2-cm thickness without a change in diameter. 
(a) Find the density of the silt sample, in glcffi.3, p~ior to being compressed. 
. . 
. .· 
(b) Find the void ratio afte~ compression and the chal!-ge in _water content that occurred from initial to final state. 
2.22 A sample of sand has the following properties: total mass M1 = 160 g; total volume v; = 80 cm3; water con-
tentw = 20%; specific gravity of solids G5 = 2.70. How much would the sample volume have to change to 
get 100% saturation, assuming the sample mass M 1 stayed the same? 
2.23 D~aw a phasediagr~m' and begin to fill in the bl~nk~: A soil speci~~n h~s totalvolum~ of SO,OoO mm3 and 
weighs 145 g. The dry weight of the specimen is 128 g, and the density of the soil solids is 2.68 Mg/m3• Find the 
(a) water content, (b) void ratio, (c) porosity,' (d) degree of saturation, (e) wet density, and (f) dry density. 
Give the answers to parts (e) and (f) iri both SI and British engineering units. 
· 
.2.24 
Problems 
63 
A sample of soil plus container weighs 397.6 g when the initial water. content is 6.3%. The container weighs 
258.7 g. Howmuch water needs to be added to the original specimen if the water content is to_ be increased 
by 3.4%? (After U.S. Dept. oflnterior, 1990.) 
-
. 
. 
' 
' 
. ' 
' 
' 
~ 
' 
. 
' 
. 2.25 A water-content test was made on a sample of clayey silt. The weight of the wet soil plus container was 18.46 g, 
and the weight of the dry soil plus container;was 15.03 g. Weight <,>f the ·e!llpty contaii!er.was 7.63 g. Calculate 
. the_watercontent of the ~ample. · 
2.26 A soil sample is dried in a microwave-i.wen to determine its water content. From the data below, evaluate 
the water content and draw conclusions. The oven-dried water content is 23.7%. The mass of the dish is 
146.30 grams: (After U.S. Dept.. of l!lterior, 1990.) · 
· 
· 
· 
Time in Oven, min 
. Total Oven Time, min 
0. 
3 
4" 
5 
.. 6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Mass of Soil + Dish, grams 
231.62 
217.75 
216.22 
215.72 
215.48 
215.32 
215.22 
215.19 
215.19 
"This total time of 4 minutes is from 3 minutes before and one more minute, giving a mass of 
soil + dish = 216.22 grams, and so on. 
· 
2.27 The ma~s of~ sample of silty' clay soil plus corit~inerls 18.43g and the ~eight of the dry soil plus container is 
13.67 g. The container weighs 8.84 g: Compute the water content of the sample. 
. 
. 
2.28 A specimen of fully saturated day soil that weigh~ l3S9 gin its natural state weighs 982 g after drying. What 
is the natural water content of the soil? 
. . 
. 
2.29 -The volume of water in a sample of saturated soilis 0.24 m3: The' vol~me. of solids Y, is 0.25 m3• Given that 
. 
. the density of soil solids Psis 2600 kg/m3, find the water content. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
2.30 For the soil sample of Problem 2.29, compute (a) the void ratio and (b) the porosity. ; 
2.31 For the soil sample of Problem 2.29, compute (a) the total or wet density and (b) the dry density. Give your 
answers in Mg/m3, kg!m3, and lbf/ft3. 
2.32 A 592-cm3volume of moist sand weighs 1090 g. Its dry weight is 920 g and the density of solids is 2680 kg!m3• 
Compute the void ratio, porosity, water content, degree of saturation, and total density in kg/m3• 
2.33 The saturated density 'Ysat of a soil is 137 lbf!ft3• Find the buoyant density of this soil in both lbf!ft3 and kg/m3• 
2.34 A s~nd is composed of solid constituents having a density of 2.68 Mg/m3• The void. ratio is 0.58. Compute the 
density of the sand when dry and when saturated and compare it with the density when submerged. 
2.35 A sample of natural glacial till was taken from below the groundwater table. The water content was found to 
be 52%. Estimate the wet density, dry density, buoyant density, porosity, and void ratio.' Clearly state any nec-
essary assumptions. 
· · 
2.36 A 1~ll13 sample of moist soil ~eighs 2000 kg: The water ~ontent is 10%: Assume Psis 2.70 Mg/m3• With this 
information, fill in all ?lanks in the phase diagram of Fig. ~2.36: . 
· 
FIGURE P2.-36 
64 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2.37 For the information given in Problem 2.36, calculate (a) the void ratio, (b) the porosity, and (c) the dry density. 
2.38 The void ratio of clay soil is 0.6and the degree of saturation is 75%. Assuming the density of the solids is 
2710 kg/m3, compute (a) the water content and (b) dry and wet densities in both SI and British thermal units. 
2.39 A specimen of saturated glacial clay has a water content of 38%. On the assumption that Ps = 2.70 Mg/m
3
, 
compute the void ratio, porosity, and saturated density. 
! 
. 
2.40 The values of minimum e and maximum e for a pure silica sand were found to be 0.50 and 0.70, respectively. 
What is the corresponding range in the saturated density in kg/m3? 
. 
2.41 Calculate the maxi~um possible porosity and void ratio fora collection of (a) tennis balls (assume they are 
64.14 mm in diameter) and (b) tiny ball bearings 0.3 mm in diameter. · · 
· 
2.42 A plastic-limit test has the following results: 
Wet weight + container 
= 23.12g 
Dry weight + container 
~ 20.84 g 
Container weight 
= 1.46 g 
Compute the PL of the soil. Can the plastic limit be evaluated by a one-point method? 
2.43 During a plastic-limit test, the following data was obtained for one of the samples: 
Wet weight + container 
Dry weight + container 
Weight of container 
What is the PL of the soil? 
= 23.13 g 
= 19.12 g 
= 1.50 g 
2.44 The degree of saturation of a cohesive soil is 100%~ The clay when wet weighs 1489 g and after drying weighs 
only 876 g. Find the water content of the soil. Draw a phase diagram and properly label it. 
2.45 For the soil in the previous problem, compute the void ratio and the porosity. Does your answer compare 
. with what you would expect for a satu~at~dcohesive soil? 
2.46 For the soil in the previous two problems, compute (a) the total or wet density and (b) the dry density. Pro-
vide your answers in units of Mg/m3, kN/m3,and lbf/ft3• 
• . 
· 
' 
. , 
2.47 A soil specimen had a buoyant density ~f'73 pounds per cubic foot. C~lcul~te its wet density in kg/m
3
• 
2.48 Verify from first principles that: 
_ (1 + w) _· Ps + PwSe 
(a) p -
Ps · 1 + e 
-
1 + e 
·(b) p = Pd(1 + w) 
· 
· Ps 
" 
'(c) w- = Se 
' 
Pw 
., 
n 
(d) e = 1- n 
, 
e . 
(e)n=--
. 1 + e 
2.49 Derive an expression for p, in terms of the porosity n and the water content w' for (a) a fully saturated soil 
and (b) a partially saturated soil. 
· 
2.50 Derive an expression for (a) dry density,(b) void ratio, and (c) degree of saturation in terms of p, p,, Pw• and w. 
2.51 Develop a formula for (a) the wet density and (b) the buoyant density in terms of the water content, the den-
sity of the soil solids, and the density of ~ater. 
· 
' 
2.52 From Archimedes' principle show that Eq. (2.11), p'.= Psat...:. Pw; is the same as (p,- Pw)/(1 + e). 
2.53 The "chunk density" method is often used to deter~i~e the unit weight (and other necessary information) of 
a specimen of irregular shape, especially of friable samples. The specimen at its natural water content is 
(1) weighed, (2) painted with a thin coat of wax or paraffin (to prevent water from entefing the pores), 
(3) weighed again (W, + Wwax), arid (4) weighed in water (to get the volume of the sample +wax coating-
remember Archimedes?). Finally, the natural water content of the specimen is determined. A specimen of 
cemented silty sand is treated in this way to obtain the ~'chunk density." From the information given below, 
determine the (a) wet density, (b) dry density, (c) void ratio, imd (d) degree of saturation of the sample. 
··J 
2.54 
2.55 
. Given:. 
Weight of specimen at natural water content ia air 
Weight of specimen + wax ~oatirig iri air 
, 
Weight of specimen + :-vax in water 
Natural water content· 
Soil solid density, Ps 
Wax solid densitY, Pwax 
Phase. diagram!! ' '· 
i' 
Problems 
65 
.. ,; 181.8 g . 
'= 215.9 
' ' '~ 
= 58.9 . 
'=2.5% 
~ 2650 kg/ri13 
= 940kg/m3 
A sensitive volcanic clay soil was tested in the laboratory and found to have the following properties: 
(a) p = 1.28 Mg/m3 
(b) e = 9.0 
(c) S =95% 
(d) Ps = 2.75 Mg/m~ 
(e) w = 311% 
In rechecking the abov~~~lues, one was found ta' be inconsistent with the rest. Find the inconsistent value 
and report it correctiy. Show all your computations and phase diagrams. 
. 
A cylinder contains 510 cm3 of loose dry sand which w~ighs 740 g. Under a static load of200 kPa the volume 
is reduced 1%, and then by vibration it is reduced 10% of the original .volume. Assume the solid density of 
the sand grains is 2.65 Mg/m3• Compute the void ratio; porosity, dry density, and total density corresponding 
to each of the following cases: 
(a) Loose sand. 
(b) Sand under static load.- -
(c) Vibrated and loaded sand. 
Soil Classification 
2.56 On five-cycle semilogarithmic paper; plot the grain-size distribution curves from the following mechanical 
analysis data on six soils; A through F. For each soil determine theeffective size as well as the uniformity 
coefficient and the' coeffiCient of curvature. Determine also the percentages of gravel, sand silt, and clay 
according to (a) ASTM, (b) AASHTO, (c) USCS, and (d) the British Standard. 
or Particle Size 
SoilE 
SoilF 
75 mm (3 in.) 
38 (P/z) 
19 (%) 
.91 
9.5 (3fs).'. 
87 
No.4 
,88 ,, 
81 
'! 
100 
No.10 
•' 
82 
70 .. 
100 
89 
.No.20 \:; 
,,.-,·:: 
80 
., .. ·,'"-
99 
-
"' 
No.40 
8 
., 
:.78 
'•·; 49 .. 
91 
63 
No.60:.· 
., -~, 
... .74 
,,·_' •' 
:37 
No.100 
!'. 
. ,..5 
.9 
No.140,. 
:65 
35 
'!, 4 
60 
No.200 
'. 4 
55 
·:32. 
57 
100 
40~J.m 
3 
31 
27 
41. 
99 
•' 
20f.Lm 
2 
19 
22 
35 
92 
. ' 
10 ~A-in 
1 
h· 
18 
20 
82 
5~J.m 
<: 1 j 
10 
14 
8 
71 
2~J.m 
. ' 
-
'· 
11 
52 
1~J.m 
2; 
10 
39 
Note: Missing data is indicated by a dash in the column. 
66 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
2.57 (a) Explain briefly why it is preferable, in plotting GSD curves, to plot the grain diameter on a logarithmic 
rather than an arithmetic scale.. 
· 
(b) Are the shapes of GSD curves comparable (for example, do they have the same Cu and Cc) when plotted 
arithmetically? Explain; 
· 
· 
2.58 The soils in Problem 2.56 have the following Atterberg limits and natural water contents. Determine the PI 
and LI for each soil and comment on their general activity. 
Property 
Soil A 
SoilB 
SoilC• 
Soil D•. 
Wn, o/oo' 
27 
14 
14 
11 
LL 
13 
35 
35 
-
PL 
8 
29 
18 
NP 
2.59 Comment on the validity of the results of Atterberg limits on soils G and H. 
LL 
PL 
SL 
SoilG 
55 
20 
25 
SoilH 
. 38 
42 
2.60 The following data were obtained from a liquid-limit test on a silty clay. 
No. of Blows 
35. 
29 
21 
15 
Water Conterit, %: 
41.1 
41.8--
43.5. 
44.9 
.-. 
Soi!E 
Soil F 
8 
72 
'28 
60 
NP· 
28 
Two plastic-limit determinations had water contents of 23.1% and 23.6%. Determine the LL, PI, the flow 
· index, and the toughness index. The flow index is the slope of the water content versus log of number of 
blows in the liquid-limit test, and the toughness index is the PI divided by the flow index. 
2.61" . Classify the following soils according to the USCS: -. 
. 
. 
·.. , 
. ' '(a) A sample of well-graded gravel with·s~nd has 73% fine to coarse sub-angular gravel, 25% fine to coarse 
subangular sand, and 2% fines. The maximum size of the particles is 75 mm. The coefficient of curvature 
is 2.7, while the uniformity coefficient is 12.4. 
(b) A dark brown, wet, organic-odor soil has 100% passing the No. 200 sieve. The liquid limit is 32% (not 
dried, and is 21% when oven dried!) and the plastic index is 21% (not dried). 
• (c) This sand has 61% predominately fine sand, 23% silty fines, and 16% fine subrounded gravel size. The 
maximumsize is 20 mm. The liquid limit is 33% and the plastic limit is 27% .. : · 
(d) This matei'ial has 74% fine to coarse subangular reddish sand and 26% organic and silty dark brown fines. 
The liquid limit (not dried) is 37% while it is 26% when oven dried. The plastic index (not dried) is 6. 
(e) Although this soil has only 6% nonplastic silty fines, it has everything else! It has gravel content of78% 
fine to coarse subrounded to subangular gravel,- and 16% fine to coarse subrounded to subangular 
sand. The maximum size of the subrounded boulders is 500 mm. The uniformity coefficient is 40, while 
the coefficient of curvature is only 0.8. (After U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990.) 
2.62 · Yo~ know what is coming. Classify the five soils in the preceding question according 'to the AASHTO method of 
soil classification. You can find procedures for doing this in the references given in Section-2.10 or on the Web. 
2.63. The results of a sieve test below give the percentage passing through the sieve. 
· 
' 
. 
. ' ' ' 
(a) Using a spreadsheet, plot the particle-size distribution. 
(b) Calculate the uniformity coefficient. 
(c) Calculate the coefficient of curvature. 
. ' 
,;,, 
)'>. 
Problems 
. 67 
71 
37 
32 
No.20 
23 
No.40 
,, 
11 
No.60 
7 
No.100 
4 
2.64 For the data given below, classify the soils according to the USCS. For each soil; give both the letter symbol 
and the narrative description . 
.. Ja) 65%material retained on No.4 sieve,32%retained on No. 200 sieve. Cu =3, Cc .= 1. 
. . (b) .100% material passed No.4 sieve, 90% passed No. 200 sieve. LL .=. 23, PL.= 17-
. ' (c) 70% material retained on No.4 sieve, 27% retained on No.' 200 sieve. Cu ~ S, Cc = 1.5. 
2.65 A sample, of soil was tested in the laboratory and the following grain-size analysis results ~ere obtained. 
Sieve No. 
4 
10 
20 
40 
60 
100 
200 
Pan 
Sieve Opening (mm) 
Percent Coarser by Weight 
36' 
52 
'64 ' ... ·:~' 
. 69 
71 
LL = 26, PL.= 23,30% is coarserthanthe 1/z-inch'sieve: Classify this soil according to the USCS, providing 
the group symbol for it. · · 
· · 
· 
· 
' 
2.66 A minus No. 40 m~terial had a liquidity index of 0.73, a ~ai~ral watercontent of 44.5%; and a pl~sticity index 
of 24.7. Classify this soil according to the USCS, providing the group symbol for it. You do not need to graph 
this data; use linear interpolation if you need specific values no( given. ' ' 
,, ' . 
2.67 A sample of soil was tested in the laboratorya~d the following grain-size analysis results were obtained: 
' 
. 
-
<.'' 
. 
. 
' 
' 
···, 
. 
• 
Sieve No. 
Sieve Opening (mm) 
Perc~nt Coarser by Weight 
.4 
4.75 
37 
10 
2.00·· 
52 
20 
0.85 
64 
40 
',,_ 0.425 
69 
60 
0.25 ·' 
71 
100 
0.15 
77 
200'' 
O.D75 
90 
• r , 
'100 ' 
LL ~ 60,· PL ·~·26:'ciassify this soil ~cc~rdlng to the USCS,p~oViding 'theg~o;p:~ymbol for it . 
. ·. 
. 
. 
. . 
' 
•,,.·, 
. 
. 
. 
' 
. 
. 
. 
2.68 A sample of soil ,wastes ted in the laboratory and the following grain~size an'alysis results were obtained: · 
Sieve No. 
4 
10 
Sieve Opening(mm) 
4.75 
2.00 
Percent Finer by Weight 
'100 
100 
(Continued) 
68 
Chapter 2 
Index and Classification Properties of Soils 
Sieve No. 
Sieve Opening (mm) ' 
Percent Finer by Weight 
20 
40 
60 
100 
200 
Pan 
0.85 
0.425 
0.25 
0.15 
O.Q75 
Atterberg limits on minus No. 40 material were: LL = 36, PL = 14. 
Determine the USCS classification symbol for this soil.· 
100 
94 
82 
66 
45 
0 
2.69 Laboratory testing was performed on two soil samples (A and B) and the data is summarized in the table. 
Sieve No. and/or Opening Size 
3 in. (76.2 mm) 
1.5 in. (38.1 mm) 
0.75 in. (19.1 mm) 
4 (4.75 mm) 
10(2.00mm) 
20 (0.85 mm) 
40 (0.425 mm) 
100 (0.150 mm) 
200 (0.075 mm) 
Liquid limit 
Plastic limit 
Sample A Percent Passing 
100 
98 
96 
77 
Not used· 
55 
Not used 
30 
18 
32 
25 
. Determine the USCS classification for samples A and B. 
Use log interpolation as necessary. 
Sample B Percent Passing 
100 
96 
94 
73 
Not used 
55 
52 
32 
2.70 A sample of soil was tested in the laboratory and the following grain~size analysis results were obtained: 
Sieve No. 
Sieve Openirig (mm) 
4 
4.75 
0 ' 
10 
2.00 
,, .. , 
' 5.1. 
20 
0.85 
10.0 
40 
0.425 
40.7 
60 
0.25 
70.2 
100 
0.15 
84.8 
200 
O.Q75 
90.5 
Pan 
-
100 
Atterberg limits on minus No. 40 material: LL = 62, PL = 20. Determine the USCS letter symbol (e.g., GP) 
for this soil. 
· · 
. 
2.71 A sample of a brown sandy clay was obtained to determine its Atterberglimits and then classify its soil type 
· according to the Unified Soil Classification System. For one of the PL determinations, the wet weight+ 
dish = 11.53 g and the dry weight +.dish = 10.49 g. The dish only weighed 4.15 g. Compute the plastic limit. 
Another plastic limit was 16.9%. Three deterniinations of the liquid limit were niade. For 17 blows, the water 
content was 49.8%; for 26 blows, tlie water' content' was 47.5%; arid for 36 blows, the water content was 46.3%. 
Evaluate the soil type, indicate the information on a plastiCity chart, and give the Unified Soil Classification 
symboL_. 
· 
' ~ I 
Geology,' La~dforms, · 
and the Origin otGeomaterials 
.. 
' 
·, 
3.1 
IMPORTANCE OF GEOLOGY TO GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING· 
Geotechnical engineering is the branch of civil engineering that applies civil engineering technology 
to some ·aspect of the earth; Knowledge of geology is very important to the successful practice of 
geotechnical engineering, and is helpful in several other areas of civil engineering as well. So in this 
chapter we introduce you to relevant and important aspects of geology: We believe that students 
should know something about the origin and nature of geologic materials before beginning to study 
·geotechnical engineering. As pointed out by Heim (1990), geotechnical engineers and geologists are 
"truly handicapped" in their professional activities if they do not know the origin ofthe deposits 
theyareworkingwith. 
··. '· · 
· ' 1 ···' 
· 
: ··''''' • 
• •• 
··.: • .: 
•• 
• 
: • . 
·. Although this chapter provides some ofthe basics; it is not a substitute for formal courses in 
· physical geology, geomorphology, arid engineering 'geology, and you are encouraged io take as many of 
these courses as your schedule permits. If you have already had 'one ormore courses in geology, this 
chapter will be usefulas a review.: Finally, at the end of the chapter we describe some books, articles, 
and websites that you can go to for additional information, 
. 
, 
, 
3.1.1 • ·Geology 
: , :Basically, geolog~ is the science ofthe earth~ It is primarily; d~scriptive science that isconcerned with 
the history, form, composition, structure, and natural processes acting on or, in. our planet. It is an 
extremely broad field that includes the study of rocks (petrology) and minerals (mineralogy), struc-
: · tural geology arid geophysics, geochemistry and enviromriental geology, historical geology and paleon-
tology (study of fossils), economic geology, geomorphology and hydrogeology. Geologic processes 
: 
, such as volcanism, glaciation, sedimentation, as well as the material deposits associated with these 
processes, also are a part of geology. The branches of geology most relevant to civil engineering are 
physical geology, geomorphology, and hydrogeology. Petrology is important in construction materials 
engineering, and some aspects of structural geology apply to rock mechanics, rock, engineering, and 
earthquake· engineering. In addition to hydrogeology, geochemistry and environmental geology are 
69 
70 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
important aspects of geoenvironmental engineering. Although engineering geology is sometimes 
considered another branch of geology, we consider it to be an interdisciplinary field between geology 
and civil engineering that is very closely related to geotechnical engineering practice. 
3.1.2 
Geomorphology 
Geomorphology is that .branch of geology concerned with the form or shape of the earth's solid surface. 
Geomorphology involves the study of specific landforms: their origin; the geologic processes involved in 
their formation, and their composition. 
· 
. 
Why. study landforms? Well, if we can identify the particular landform(s) at our site, then we know 
how it was formed and the geologic processes involved, what soils and rocks probably exist at the site, and 
something about their likely engineering properties. This information helps us anticipate engineering 
problems that may occur at that site. This is essentially how geomorphology is applied in geotechnical 
practice. The basic equation for geotechnical engineers then is: 
· 
geology~ specific landform~ soils/rocks ~engineering information and 
potential problems at a site 
In general, any landform is a function of: 
1. the original rocks or soils (composition and structural relationship), 
2. the processes a'cting on those rocks and soils (for example water transport), and 
3. the timeframe over which these processes ac{ 
. 
. 
·, 
(3.1) 
In this chapter we discuss these factors, the landforms produced, andtypical rocks and soils commonly 
found in these landforms. We also mention important engineering characteristics and problems often 
associated with the landforms. 
3.1.3 • . Engineering Geology 
<'} 
Engineering geology is an interdisciplinary field between engineering and geology, closely related in 
professional practice to geotechnical engineering. Engineering geologists obtain the geologic informa-
tion and data necessary to' describe the pertinent geologic features and processes, the structure and 
characteristics of rocks and other deposits at a· site or project, and they interpret this information for 
use by civil (geotechnical, materials, or construction) engineers. Engineering geologistshave a major 
role in the planning, design, and construction of)arge civil engin.eering projects. As Galster (1992) 
noted, engineering geology provides: 
· 
. · · · 
· 
" 
. . 
· 
a complete and accurate geologic description of a site and relevant areas, determining of the . 
adequacy of geologic conditions for the intended project, and making available appropriate 
· ·advice to the engineer/designer throughout the design, construction, and operational period of 
· the project. ' 
· 
In recent years engineering geologists have become increasingly active in the environmental aspects 
of geotechnical engineering (also known as geoenvironmental engineering). A good example is the 
· important role that geologic conditions play in determining groundwater movement and the design of 
facilities such as landfills.· 
As a civil engineer, you should recognize the limitations of your own education and experience, 
. · especiallywith regard to geology, and when appropriate, be prepared. to call upon the services of a 
. , professional engineering geologist. 
·• 3.2 The Earth; Minerals, Rocks, and Rock. Structure 
71 
3.2 
THE EARTH, MINERALS, ROCKS, AND ROCK STRUCTURE · 
3.2.1 
The' Earth 
. 
. 
' 
. . 
. 
l 
··: 
.: 
; 
' 
• 
'' 
.:•;/ 
·![ 
' 
·; 
'• 
; ; 
\,':,' 
• 
.. 
. 
·. 
. 
·The' plc:net Earth con~ists of a den~e mo~ten core, surrol}nded by a less dense, quasi-solid to ductile 
•' mantle,and arela~ivelyihin (25~75km thick)least:dens'epust. The earth's lithosphere, a composite 
' ')ayer 'ofthe crust' and ouiennost part ofthe mantle; consists, of seventl)~rge, solid, r~latively brittle 
'. rocky plates that slowly move arcmi1d on the nuintle, propelled by convection cells that circulate the 
·. earth's internal heat. These plates contain the relatively lightcoi1tinentallithosphen!, heavier oceanic 
' .lithosphere, or acmnbination ~fboth: Most. of the volcani~ andpimintain-buildingactivity on the 
'earth's surface occurs where these 'large lith~spheriC plates. meet, collide, or move alongside or under 
om: another. Ph1te intersections also seem to he. the primary loci of recorded. seismic (earthquake) 
activity; The study of the plate's and their movements, an important aspect of modern g'eology and geo-
physics, is called plate tecto,;ics. 
' 
' . . 
. 
' ' . ' . ' 
:. : . ' '' '.' ' ; : 
... ··. ' ' . . 
. 
' 
, 
, In civil engineering practice we are concerned mostly .with the rocks, soils, and human-made 
materials found on or near the surfaceofthe Earth's crust. Only in the 'case of earthquake engineering 
is the deeper realm of plate tectonics and geophysics of interest. (Earthquake engineering is concerned 
with the design, performance, and operation of civil engineering structures and other facilities that may 
be subjected to earthquakes during their service lives.)· 
· 
3.2.2 
Minerals 
(.>-.::: 
': .. : 
A mineral is a naturally occurring inorganic solid with a.specific chemiCal composition and having its 
'- atoms arranged in a systematic internal structure. Mineralogists have identified more than 3,000 different 
types of minerals found in soils and rocks, but probably fewer than 20 are important for civil engineering 
purposes. The four major rock-forming mineral groups are silicates, carbonates; oxides and "other," 
mostly salt minerals(sulfates andchlorides). The most important m_inerals und~r each group are: 
l; Silicates: Quartz (and chert), feldspar (orthoclase and plagioclase); mica (biotite and muscovite), 
chlorite, amphibole (hornblende), pyroxene, olivine, serpentine, talc, and the clay minerals. 
2 •. Carbonates: Calcite, dolomite . 
. 3. Oxides: Limonite, hematite. 
.'· · · · · 
. 
. 
4. Others: Gyp~um, anhydrite, halite (NaCI), pyrite (fool's gold), and graphite(carbon):. 
Identification of these and other less collinion miner~ls is b'~sed on their vis~~l appearance, ha;dness, and 
certain characteristics of the cry~tal~ in the mineral. Tables and 'charts in Goodman (1989), FHWA (1991), 
Goodman (1993), imd West (1995) as well as in basic geology texts provide a simple but systematic 
.. approach to mineral identification. According toT. Taylor (personal communication, 1999); a list of miner-
:· als you· definitely. should not· know would include the following: amblygonite, atacamite, boulangerite, 
. brochanthite; cerargyrite; chloanthite, corbomite, crocoite, dumortierite, erythrite, ferberite, hausmannite,. 
jarosite, phnarghite, pyrargyite, pyrochloremicrolite, smaltite, smithosonite, tennantite, torbernite, tyuya-
munite, vivianite, witherite, xenotime, and zincite. 
. . , .. 
:.,,Only a small number of minerals are. responsible for most engineering problems. For. example, 
. some minerals are soluble (e.g., calcite, dolomite, gypsum, anhydrite, and halite), while others release 
• sulfuric acid when they weather (e.g.; pyrite): Some minerals have low friction coefficients (e.g., clay 
• minerals, talc, chlorite, serpentine, micas, and graphite). Potentially swelling minerals include anhydrite 
and the clay minerals montmorillonite and vermiculite (described in Chapter4).You probably know 
, from your study of concrete that several minerals that may be part of the aggregate composition (e.g., 
chert, gypsum, mica, and some volcanic rocks) react adversely with Portland cement in concrete. 
72 
Chapter 3 · 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
3.2.3 
Rocks 
Rock is any naturally occurring aggregation or mass of one or more minerals found in the earth's 
crust. Petrologists (geologists who specialize in rocks) usually classify rocks, according to their gene-
sis or origin, into. three main groups: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic.' Igneous rocks are 
formed from molten mineral material that' has cooled and solidified either deep. in the earth 
(plutonic) or in volcanic eruptions at ~r near the earth's surface. Sedimentary 'rocks are formed 
from the accumulation and aggregation of particles derived from preexisting rocks and ranging in 
size from the coarsest rubble down to the finest coiloidal sized particles. They may also come from 
crystalline precipitates and biologic deposits in oceans and lakes, and from buried piarit and animal 
. remains. Metamorphic rocks result from thealtenition of the structure and/or chemical composi-
. tion of rocks of any type by heat, pressure, or chemicai reactions. Goodman (1989), FHWA (1991), 
Goodman (1993), and West (1995), among others, provide tables and charts to help you with rock 
identification and classification. 
· 
· 
• ' 
· 
The following rock classification scheme (Galster, 1992) appears to be a practical one for civil 
engineers.A few examples are given after each rock type. 
. 
·· . 
. . . 
. 
. 
. . 
. . 
. 
. 
' 
' 
. 
' . 
I. Igneous rocks 
A. Volcanic rocks 
1. Volcanoclasitics:volcanic ejecta, tuff, breccia, pumice 
2. Lavas: basalt, andesite, rhyolite, feldsite, and trachite 
3. ·. Volcanic intrusives: diabase, pahoehoe, aa 
B. Plutonic and other coarselycrystalline rocks: granite, granodiorite, diorite, quartz diorite, 
syenite; gabbro · 
II. Sedimentary rocks 
A. Precipitates: chert, limestone, dolomite, rock salt, gypsum, anhydrite 
B.· Clastics: sandstone, shale, siltstone,· claystone, conglomerate, sedimentary breccia,. argillite 
C. • Biological sediments: coal, coral reef limestone, chalk, diatomite 
III. Metamorphic rocks 
· 
1 · 
A. Nonfoliated: 
1. Quartzite, hornfels, amphibolite, marble 
2. · Numerous volcanic and sedimentary rockswith meta as a prefix 
B. Foliated: 
· 
. · 
· 
' 
· 
· 
· 
· 
1. Schist, phyllite, slate, amphibolite, serpentinite.· 
2. Bedded metaniorphics (argillite, gneiss, metasandstone, quartzite) 
,_. 
' 
' 
' 
, 
' 
: 
; 
'.r 
' 
·,· i 
·A few more definitions are in order. Clastic texture refers to rocks made up of broken fragments of 
preexisting rocks and assorted minerals bound or cemented together by another mineral or chemical. 
Thus vo!Canoclastics are clastic rocks of volcanic origin, while sedimentary clastic rocks are trans-
ported, sedimented, and then transformed into clastic sedimentary rocks by chemical cementation, 
pressure, and/or temperature. Lava is a general name for molten rock from volcanoes deposited on the 
, ·' · 
surface, while plutonic rock refers to those volcanic rocks that are intruded into pre-existing materials 
below the surface of the earth. 
Crystalline. texture means . that the rocks are mostly composed of mineral crystals that have 
developed in the rock itself. Because of rapid cooling at the surface, lava rocks generally contain min-
• eials with very small crystals, too small to be seen without· a microscope. On the other himd; plutonic 
rocks have cooled very slowly at depth and thus are coarsely crystalline, because their mineral crystals 
are relatively large. 
.. :-:· '3.2 '.The Earth, Minerals; Rocks, and Rock Structure 
73 
Precipitates are those sedimentary rocks that resulted from chemical precipitation in either a 
marine or fresh water environment. Clastics have'. already been defined. Biological sediments and 
rocks obviously have an organic origin. Foliated metamorphic rocks are banded or laminated (in 
contrast with the stratification and bedding planes of sedimentary rocks); they result from the flat-
tening of the constituent mineral grains due to the ex.tieme temperatures and pressures that cause 
metamorphism. Nonfoliated metamorphic rocks are 'those that did not develop foliation as a result 
of their metamorphism. 
· 
. 
' · 
· 
There are many examples of engineering problems associated with specific rock types. For 
example, dams have failed and re~ervoirs have leaked when they .were constructed on soluble rocks 
such as carbonates and gypsum, and such deposits can also result in sinkholes, particularly when 
chemically aggressive.groundwateris present (e.g., from mining wastes or tailings); Shales can swell 
or soften when exposed to water or even air and become weak anct' compressible. Swelling rocks 
cause serious problems in tunnel construction when the materials are de-stressed during excavation. 
Foliated and bedded rocks often have planes of weakness. that can cause landslides and stability 
problems in excavations. Kiersch and James (1.991) describe a number of spectacular failures of civil 
engineering structures directly related to these and other geologic conditions, as well as human 
activity. These failures, many of them deadly, illustrate how important it is for civil engineers to rec-
ognize potentially dangerous geologic conditions as "early as possible in the design and construction 
process.· 
·.. 
· 
· 
. . 
· 
3.2~4 
Rock Structure 
When rock masses are subjected to different stress conditions such as compression, tension, and shear, 
they can." fold, shift,' and rupture, even imder conditions''of high confining pressure and temperature. 
These processes result in features such as joints, folds, and faults, all of which strongly influence the 
engineering behavior of the rock mass. 
Joints are regularly occurring and relatively planar fracture surfaces in the.rock mass, with 
spacings ranging from a few millimetres to several metres, along which little or no movement has 
occurred. Joints occur because of tensile or shear strains in the rock mass, and they. are extremely 
important in rock mechanics and rock engineering. Even if the intaCt rock between the joints is 
.. very strong and impermeabie; the joints usually make a rock mass weaker and more permeable. See . 
. Goodman (1989) and .West (i995) for.details as to how rock joints are observed, measured, and 
·tested for strength and frictional characteristics. Wyllie. (l996 and 1999) describes how rock joints 
are treated and strengthened ii_l thefietd. When beds and strata, especially of sedimentary rocks, are 
subjected to bending without ruptUf!?, the deformation of the beds creates a number of structures, 
such as different kinds of folds, domes, basins, and arches. Some of these structures are very large 
and may cover hundreds of square kilometres of the earth's surface. Fold structures are shown in 
Fig. 3.1. 
A fault occurs when the rock mass ruptures and movement or shearing displacement takes place 
along the rupture surface. Several types of faults have been identified, depending on how movement 
takes place, and these are shown in Fig. 3.2. A series of closely spaced, approximately parallel faults is 
called a shear or fault zone. 
' . . .. . 
:: - . . . .· 
· 
.. 
· 
The spatial orientation . of. geologic features such·· as. rock layers, joints, folds, and faults is 
described by the terms dip and strike, as illustrated in Fig. 3.3 for a tilted stratum. The dip or dip angle 
of a geologic feature is the acute angle between the feature and some reference plane, usually the hori-
zontal. The strike is the azimuth or direction of the feature in the horizontal plane. Note that the dip 
and strike are at right angles to each other.. . . 
. 
· 
· · 
·. 
· · · Rock structures produce a number of interesting l<indforirls. Some of the m'ore signifidi~t ones 
will be discussed in Sec. 3·.3.9. 
" 
· · • · · 
· 
· . 
. 
· 
74 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Oldest rock 
' Axial plane 
Symmetrical 
(open) 
(b) 
-(d). 
'l) 
Youngest 
rock' 
(c) 
(e) 
FIGURE 3.1 -. Fold structures: (a) anticline and syncline; (b) symmetric~ I anticlif1e; (c) a~ym~etrical anticline; 
(d) overturned anticline; (e) recumbent anticline; (f) monocline (after Chernicoff and Venkatakrishnan, 1995, 
and Emmons et al., 1955). 
- · 
· 
'··.• 
;· 
. ·! 
'j j( 
;-·· 
:/; 
·FIGURE 3.2 Faults: (a) normal; 
. (b) reverse or thrust; (c) strike-slip 
(after Z.Z. Zipczeck, 1956) .. 
FIGURE 3.3 
St,rike and slip ' 
defined (after Emmons 
· · 
et al., 1955). 
75 
76 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
3.3 
GEOLOGIC PROCESSES AND LANDFORMS 
Earlier we mentioned that geomorphology deals with landforms: their origin, the geologic processes 
involved in their formation, and their composition; Because specific landforms indicate the geologic 
processes that produced them, it is important to be able to recognize the different landforms and their 
commonly associated earthen materials and potential design and construction problems. 
The three factors controlling the formation of a particular landform are the (1) earth materials' 
(their composition and structural relationship), (2) geologic processes acting on the earth materials, 
and (3) time over which these processes act. 
Geologic time, to most humans, is almost incomprehensibly long. Still, it has aspects we need to 
understand. Some geologic processes are very long acting while others can take place in a relative'Iy 
short period-for example, during a construction project. Both contemporary and ancient processes 
and their resulting landforms can significantly influence engineering projects. To civil engineers, the 
relative age of a deposit or landform is ordinarily more important than absolute age, although absolute 
age may be important in understanding contemporary processes. Table 3.1will help you appreciate the 
geologic time scale. 
. 
. . 
. 
In this section we describe a particular geologic process, the landforms produced, typical soils 
and rocks involved, and some of the engineering concerns associated with each landform. 
3.3.1 
Geologic Processes and the Origin of Earthen Materials 
Geologic processes can be described according to the origin of their activity, that is, (1) on the earth's 
surface, (2) below the earth's surface, and (3) in rare cases, extra terrestrially.· 
Geologic processes originating on the earth's surface include weathering, gravity, surface water, ice 
(glaciers), wind, volcanic activity, the action of organisms (plants and animals, including human beings), 
and combinations of these processes. Surficial geologic processes can also be classified according to the 
results of the process, whether aggregational (depositional or building. up) or degradational ( erosionai or 
tearing down). Most processes are both degradational and aggregational at the same time, if not at the 
same geographic location. Rivers and glaciers, for example, can be eroding at one place and depositing at 
another, all within the same river or glacier system. Volcanoes can be both degradational and aggrega-
tional in the same event. In the Mount St. Helen's (Washington) eruption of May 1980, about 400 m of 
the top of the volcano was blown away (definitely degradational!) while large volumes of volcanic ash 
varying in thickness from a few metres down to a inild dusting were deposited. 
Subsurface geologic processes of interest to geotechnical engineers include groundwater, tec-
tonic, and plutonic processes. These are described toward the end of the chapter. · 
Extraterrestrial objects (meteors) striking the earth's surface can leave craters that are locally 
important but not ordinarily of engineering concern. 
.. 
<.. 
Table 3.2, adapted from Galster (1992), lists the origin of different surficial sediments and mate-
rials together with the particular geologic process that produced them. · 
Identification of the origin is important, because knowing the origin of a particular soil deposit 
helps you estimate its distribution, variation, and even some of its potential uses and limitations as a foun-
dation or construction material. One special example is aeolian or wind-deposited materials. Because the 
particles had to be small enough and sufficiently lacking in cohesion to be windborne, these are generally 
silty materials that are loosely deposited.:...not very good to put foundation on, and prone to erosion. 
3.3.2 
Weathering 
. Weathering is the alteration of the composition or structure of rocks at or near the earth's surface by 
physical, chemical, or biological processes. Physical weathering causes mechanical disintegration of 
rocks by changes in temperature (freezing and thawing), the action of agents such as glaciers, wave 
3.3 .Geologic Processes ·and Landforms 
77 
TABLE 3.1 
Geologic Time for Civil Engineers (after Chernicoff andVenkatakrishnan, 1995;T. Taylor, personal 
communication, 1995) 
Eon 
p 
h 
a 
n 
e 
Era 
Period 
c 
Quaternary 
e 
n 
0 
z 
0 
i 
c 
M 
e 
Tertiary 
Epoch 
Holocene 
Pleistocene 
· Pliocene 
Miocene 
Oligocene 
Eocene 
Paleocene 
Age of Boundary 
· (yr before 
Translation· 
present X 106) 
for Engineers 
3.7 
18.4 
12.9 
Not so young 
21.2 
8.6 
66.4 
78 
r 
o 
64 
Old 
0 
z 
z 
0 
i 
c 
.r 
e c· :·,, 
a 
m 
. b 
r 
i 
a 
n 
0 
. 
i' 
c 
e 
0 
z 
0 
i 
c 
Triassic 
·Permian 
Pennsylvanian 
Mississippian· 
Devonian. , 
Situ'rian ' ' 
Ordovician 
Cambrian·;;.· 
37 
41 
34 
.. 
40 
48 
Older 
,• 30 ... 
67 
65 ,; 
570 
1930 
-... 
1300 
Very old 
800 
~4600 
action, and wind. Biological activity includes the actions of plants and animals, and it can be physical 
and/or chemical. 
· 
· 
. 
, Chemical weathering causes decompositionofrocks by chemical action-oxidation, reduction, 
hydrolysis, carbonization, and the action of organic acids. In general, chemical weathering dominates 
. in temperate and tropical climates, whereas physical weathering tends to be more important in arctic 
climates and at higher elevations intemperate zones. 
· · 
The products of weathering are all typ~s of soils, sometimes called residuum. Physical weather-
ing tends to produce coarser-grained soils, ranging from boulders and cobbles to gravel, sands, and 
silts (these grain sizes are defined exactly in Chapter2): Chemical weathering produces various types 
78 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
TABLE 3.2 Surficial Geologic Processes and Materials Produced 
Surface Process 
Description 
Material Produced [soil name, if any] 
Weathering 
Gravity 
Material weathered in place 
Gravity deposition; slope wash 
Fluvial (stream) deposition 
Marine and .coastal deposition 
Deposition in lakes 
Residual [residuum] 
Colluvial [colluvium] 
Alluvial [alluvium] 
Marine and coastal 
Lacustrine 
Surface water 
Marine and coastal 
Lacustrine 
Ice 
Wind 
Volcanic 
Deposition associated with glacial ice and frozen ground 
Deposition by wind 
Deposition by volcanism 
Human activities 
Glacial 
Eolian 
Volcanic 
Artificial fill 
After Galster (1992). 
of clay minerals. For example, the hydrolysis of feldspar and mica (biotite) minerals in granitic rocks 
produces the clay mineral kaolinite, an important constituent of fine-grained soils. Other types of clay 
minerals are produced from different rock minerals under different chemical; climatic, and drainage 
conditions. Clay minerals and other products of weathering are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. 
Karst and Karstic Features-Sometimes specific landforms result from weathering. The best-
known and most important example is the development of karst topography and karstic features on 
soluble bedrock, as shown in Fig. 3.4. 
' 
The name "karst" comes from a particular limestone plateau located on the Dalmatian coast of 
Croatia and extending into Slovenia and Italy along the Adriatic Sea. Because limestone and other 
carbonate rocks are so common throughout the world, karstic features and topography are very 
important geotechnically where such rocks occur. 
Rainwater is slightly acidic because it dissolves carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, yielding 
carbonic acid, and it may become even more acidic from air pollution and organic-enriched soils on 
the ground. Extreme levels of groundwater acidity can result from mining operations and the wastes 
(or tailings) produced. Carbonate rocks are attacked by this acidic groundwater and slowly dissolve, 
Deeply intrenched 
permanent stream 
Karst valley 
· FIGURE 3.4 Typical karstic landscape features (Thornbury, 1954). · 
( 
I
~_l
. · 3.3 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
79 
(a) 
. ' (b) 
(e).·· 
FIGURE 3.5 · Development of solution cavities and karstic features, starting with 
(a) solution cracks, leading to(b) slots and blocks, and eventually (c) pinnacles and 
residuum. Formation of a collapse sinkh'ole in a shallow cavern; (d) initial collapse with 
rock overhang, and subsequent (e) rim collapse and debris mound (Sowers, .1996). 
' 
' 
. 
', 
.-,.' 
' 
' 
leaving solution cavities, subterranean caves:and.caverns, enlarged vertical joints (often filled with 
silty clay soil), and a highly irregular bedrock surface (Fig. 3.5) resulting from ground collapse. Some-
times large blocks of more resistant limestone are completely isolated from adjacent bedrock and 
may even be underlain.by clay occither weaker materials. Shallow. caves and domes often collapse, 
leaving surface depressions called sinkholes (Figs: 3.4 and.3.5) that may be filled with clay or even 
80 
Chapter.3 • ·.:Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
water. Large collapsing sinkholes in built-up areas can be very destructive to surface structures and 
facilities. The design and construction of foundations on karstic bedrock present serious challenges to 
geotechnical engineers(Sowers, 1996). Reservoirs in karstic country often experience severe leakage. 
The most important karstic regions ill North America are in central Florida and in the large area of 
southern Indiana, west-ceritnil Kentucky, and north-central Tennessee. A number of other areas in the 
United States and Canada have deposits of soluble rocks with solution features such as ca~es and caverns. 
Residual and Tropical Soils-Soils that result from the in-place weathering ofrock or other 
earthen materials, and are not subseque11tly transported, are known as residual soils. They can develop 
from just about any bedrock type. A progressive and gradual. weakening and decomposition takes 
place from the ground surface down to the unweathered material (Fig. 3.6). There is often no definite 
boundary between rock and soil, either vertically or horizontally, because weathering generally follows 
the joints and bedding planes in the rock. The degree of disintegration and the thickness of the zone of 
residual soil depends on the type of bedrock (local "parent" material), climate, drainage conditions, 
and topography. Goodman (1993) and Wesley and Irfan (1997) discuss the difficult problem of classi-
fying weathered rock and residual soils profiles for engineering purposes. · 
As noted by LyonsAssociates (1971) and Mitchell and Soga (2005), because of high tempera-
tures and high rainfall in tropical regions, intense chemical weathering and decomposition of the 
parent bedrock occurs along with rather complex chemical alterati~n of the minerals in the bedrock. 
Chemicalprocesses of hydration, hydrolysis, solution, and carbonation result inthe alteration of 
minerals in the rock, and new minerals, mostly clay minerals (Chapter4) are formed due to water, 
oxygen, carbon dioxide, lmd organic acids derived from decaying vegetation. The process is known as 
"laterization." The resulting soils,'calledlaterites (Latin: later = brick), are red, because of a high 
concentrationof aluminum and iron oxides (because the silicates have been weathered away). 
Weathering profiles [Fig. 3.6(a)] can be very deep in the tropics, often tens of metres deep. The 
upper clayey zone can be a metre or two thick, then underlain by a silty or sandy zone, which in tum 
transitions into a highly irregular weathered zone and finally into sound rock. The thickness of these 
zones varies greatly, even at a specific site, and this variability in thickness and soil properties creates 
difficult problems for foundation design and construction. 
· 
· · 
. 
Saprolites are also weathered residual soils, usually rich in clays, that result from the chemical 
decomposition of bedrock, forming primarily in humid temperate or subtropical climates. Sometimes 
saprolites retain the original (relict) texture and structure of the parent rock, especially when they 
form on gneiss and schist bedrock [Fig. 3.6(c)]. . 
. ·•·.· ·• -
. 
... 
· 
Another residual soil, which is locally important in the desert southwest as well as in higher ele-
vations of the Sierra N evadas and other western mountain ranges, is decomposed granite (also known 
' as DG). It forms largely due to chemical weatheri~g ~f graniticbedrock in situ, and it leads to highly 
variable and irregular soil and bedrock profiies. Most DG is primarily granular (sands and fine gravel) 
in size, but it may contain relict boulders. 
· . 
· 
Possible engineering problems in areas of deeply weathered rock and residual soils are sum-
marized by Jennings and Brink (1978) and by Blight (1997). These problems often lead to unstable 
slopes, including landslides and debris flows (described in the next section), reservoirs that leak, 
especially on DG; and difficulties with foundation exploration, constniction, and performance. For 
example, in niakirig excavations at sites in deeply weathered rock, what is rock and whafis soil for 
quantity payment purposes may result in costly disagreements between 'the owner and contractor. 
Deep foundations for heavy structures such as bridges can be very problematic due to variable 
.. lengths, end bearing conditions, and installation; Residual soils also· are often difficult to compact 
when used for road bases. They may appear to be sandy and free draining when excavated, but when 
compaction energy is applied, the' granules break down, and the result is a fine~ grained, almost clayey 
· .. material that is difficult to. cmripad and is not free draining. Furthermore,:the presence of mica in 
both saprolite and DG may result in lower compacted densities (Chapter 5) and more compressibility 
than desirable. 
, · '· 
3.3 
Geologic Proces'ses and Landforms 
81 
. · HUMUS & TOPSOIL 
/ 
..£ 
•• 
. SOIL 
• .·. -[~,'~£~~~~ · · • 
COMPLETELY 0 ° '
0 
0
: 
'::: i: W.: :-
0 
o 
0
.:.. ~~ 
WEATHERED 
0i
0i: 
0~ 0 °) .0 /;./:_/-: ~:-.r:-
HIGHLY 
WEATHERED 
SLIGHTLY 
WEATHERED 
·; FRESH ROCK · 
;· 7 • 
·. 
-----
-
. 
{a) 
.. LEACHING -SOILdltJ~a .. £ 
SAPROLITE 
';->>:~~---. : 
PARTIALLY J·· :-'/\· .... .-.. .-.... :.-. ·Q··". 
WEATHERED ··· ··: .. ·-:·:v:: ::-h::o·' .··.:·-,., 
ROCK 
.· 
·:Lj~(?b\~;/:~>:b'.t:j: . 
. RELATiVELY--
---
----- -.-.-
,-,---.-.:-
SOUND 
ROCK 
ZONES 
' GRANITE TO GABBRO 
(c) 
GNEISS TO SCHIST 
(b) .· 
FIGURE 3.6. :rypical residual soil profiles: (a) tropical residu~l soils (Blight, 1997, after Little, 1969); 
(b) humid temperate regions .on igneous bedrock (Sowers and Richardson, 1983); (c) humid temperate 
regions' em metamorphic bedrock (Sowers and Richardson, 1983); and (d) decomposed granite. 
. . 
(Mitchell and Soga, 2005). 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
· 
· 
· 
. 
. . . 
82 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Because of extensive erosion by glaciation (Sec. 3.3.7) in Canada and the northern United States, 
residual soils in North America are mainly -found south of the continental ice limit: in the central and 
southern Great Plains states, the southeastern states in the Appalachian Mountains, Hawaii, the Colorado 
Plateau in the "four-corners" area of the southwest United States, and the coastal areas of California, 
Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Additional information on_ the engineering problems of 
residual soils can be found in the proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference on Engineering and 
Construction in Tropical and Residual Soils held in Honolulu in 1982, Blight (1997), and Edelen (1999). 
3.3.3 
Gravity Processes 
Mass movement (or mass wasting) is a geologic term for a variety of processes that .result in the move-
ment of rock and soil masses down a slope under the influence of gravity. The generic teim for this is 
landslide. Downslope movements include falls, flows, spreads, soil creep, solifluction, and talus. Ground 
collapse is also briefly discussed in this section, because the geological process is gravitational. Although 
there are a number of possible ways to identify and classify downslope movements, we follow Cruden 
and Varnes (1996), who classify landslides according to (1) type of movement and (2) type of material. 
Possible landslide movements are fall, topple, slide, spread, and flow (shown in Fig. 3.7), or possibly 
combinations of these. 
, 
Slide materials can be rock, debris, or earth (soil). Rock refers to a rock mass that was_ intact and 
in its natural place before sliding; earth consists of predominately sands, silts, and clays; and debris con-
tains a significant amount of coarse materials (gravel and larger). So, for example, a landslide might be 
a rock fall, a debris flow or an earth slide. Additional terms may be added to these names to further 
describe landslides. 
' 
, 
Table 3.3 is a glossary for forming landslide names. It gives adjectives to describe.the state, dis-
tribution, and style of the landslide, followed by descriptions of the rate of movement, water content, 
material type, and slide type. The table also gives some indication of the damage the landslide can 
cause. Cruden and Varnes (1996) provide detailed definitions and illustrations of the terms in Table 3.3, 
so we will give just a few examples of some of the more common landslide types. 
Because the term "mud" does not have a precise engineering definition (itis a mixture of earth 
and water) and should be avoided in technical discussions, mudslide or mudflow is often used by 
nonengineers 'to describe severill different types of landslides. These slides can involve rock, earth, or 
debris, be moist or wet, and be complex or composite in style. Some mudslides are simply earth slides, 
while others may be retrogressive, composite rock slides or advancing slow, moist earth slides. Mudflows 
are, for example, often active, advancing, complex, rapid to moderate, very wet debiis flows or earth 
slides. Thus, to avoid confusion, it is important to be able to describe a landslide precisely. 
Spreads can occur on rather gentle slopes, and after movement starts, they may progress or 
retrogress very rapidly. Spreads are common on water-bearing thin seams of sands and silts overlain 
by relatively 'competent rock, homogeneous clays, or constructed earth fills. Spreads may result 
from licp.iefaction (Chapters 7 and 13) of the sand and silt seams, triggered by earthquakes, blasting, 
or pile driving in the vicinity. 
. 
___ 
.. 
. . 
-.A number of important flows have also been identified. These include debris flows: lehars [debris 
flows from volcanoes (Indonesian, from laharisa, meaning hot mud)] and debris avalanches (extremely 
. rapid; active, advancing debris flows) . . Rock glaciers-accumulations of broken rock, some finer~ 
grained materials, and ice that slowly creep-downslope in mountainou~ areas-are "very slow, wet 
debris flows." Solifluction is the slow downslope flowage or "creep" of saturated surficial soil layers. In 
the new terminology, solifluction is ''very slow, wet earth flow." Because die term creep is ambiguous, it 
'should be n:!placed by theappropriate rate modifiers (very slow or extremely slow) in Table 3.3.' 
-
. Since the 'earthen materials have been disturbed, landslide landforms h~tve an irregular surface, 
usually with one or more ridges where slide material has bunched together. Because· of the sudden 
0 
(a) 
~ 
... 
0··· 
20] 
(b) 
500m 
(d) 
(e) 
3.3 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
83 
.sm 
FIGURE 3.7 
Types of landslides: (a) fall; (b) topple; (c) slide; (d) spread; 
· and (e) flow (after Cruden and Varnes, 1996). 
;; 
'i !' 
material movement, there' is often an abnorm~l surface drainage patt~rn. Usually ~here is a scarp [the 
· steep slope at the top of the slide--:-see Fig. 3. 7 (c) and (e)] that indicates the uppermost and widest 
· ·lateral extent ofthe slide area. The size oflandslides varies fro~ a few square metres to square kilo-
' metr~s. Engineering probh:ms associat~d ~~th landslides inaude variable groundwater conditions 
and highlyvariable and often poor foundation conditions. Probably the mostdifficult problem is 
determining the potential for additi~nal movem.'ent and sliding, either of the ia~dslide material itself 
or of intact. materials in the vicinity. Slop_es. experiencing solifluction may contain trees with bent 
84 
Chapter 3: : 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
TABLE 3.3 
Glossary for Forming Names of Landslides and Rates ~f Landslide Movements·.·. 
State of 
Activity 
Distribution 
of Activity 
Style of · 
Activity 
Rate of 
Movement 
· Velocity 
Water 
Content 
Material 
Type 
Example 
Active 
Advancing 
Complex 
Extremely 
·; >5 inls 
Dry 
Rock 
Fall 
Major catastrophe 
rapid 
Reactivated 
Suspended 
Retrogressive 
Widening 
Composite 
.Multiple 
Very rapid 
>3m/min 
Rapid 
>1.8 rnlhr 
Moist 
Earth 
Topple 
Some lives lost 
Wet 
Debris 
Slide 
Evacuation possible; 
structures destroyed 
Spread 
Maintenance possible 
Flow 
Remedial construction 
possible 
Some permanent 
structures undamaged 
Imperceptible without 
instruments 
Modified after Cruden and Varnes (1996). 
FIGURE 3.8 Schematic illustrating a slope experiencing solifluction (after 
Lambert,.1988).. 
· 
trunks or leaning power poles, a sure indication that downslope movement is slow and continuous 
and that the slope is not very stable (Fig. 3.8). 
. , , : 
· 
Another gravity-induced landform, quite common on mountain slopes, is a talus slope. Talus is the 
accumulation of rock fragments (ranging in size from boulders through gravel) derived from and lying 
at the base of a cliff or a very steep rock slope. Talus results from the physical weathering (alternate 
·freezing and thawing) of ari exposed rock face. Talus slopes form at 30-50 degrees and they may extend 
. · upslope tens to hundreds of metres.Tahis slopes are called active if they continuously creep and inactive 
if they have become stabilized,. generally by vegetati.on. In.constructing facilities near or through talus 
.. . slopes, it is important to know whether the slope is still active or not, and whether an' excavation into or 
construction on the slope will cause instability and ·undesirable movementS. Engineering information 
required for talus stabilization includes the sizes of therock particles in the slope, whether there are 
finer materials in the rock voids, and the groundwater conditions inthe slope; 
· 
· 
3.3 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
85 
The loose and 
ten incoherent soil and rock materials deposited down slope due to the action of 
• gravity are calle colluvium. olluvium includes all landslide debris, no matter the type of slope move-
ment, including creep. o e that the materials in talus are an example of colluvium. 
Ground collapse, another gravitational process, depends on loss of underground support due to, 
either mining operations or dissolution of carbonate and other soluble rocks . .Landforms produced 
include surface depressions or sinkholes that may fill with ground or surface water. Sinkholes often 
form suddenly, without warning, and damage property and infrastructure. They are' quite common in 
karstic regions, as discussed in Sec. 3.3.2 above. The major engineering problem in these regions is the 
potential for the formation of additional· sinkholes or enlargement: of an existing· sinkhole. Holzer 
(1991) gives a detailed description of non tectonic subsidence and its effect on engineering works. 
Mass wasting, landslides, and other gravity landforms and features occur in most regions of North 
'America. Large landslides and mass movements are, of course, more common in mountainous areas, but 
sliding canoccur even on relatively flat topography-for example, because of erosion of river banks or 
construction excavations. Fleming and Varnes (1991) discuss how slope hazards can be evaluated and 
describe· their relevance to engineering works. Sowers (1992) provides an excellent description of the 
, causes, impact, prediction, and control of natural landslides. The Transportation Research Board Special 
, Report 247 (Thrner and Schuster, 1996) also contains a wealth of information about landslides and their 
impact on transportation facilities. Analysis for the stability of both natural and excavated slopes is an 
.. important part of geotechnical engineering practice. However, only rather simple geometric shapes, in rela~ 
tively homogeneous earth that is moving either on a curved failure surface [rotational slides, Fig. 3.7( c)] or 
on a more. or less planar surface [translational slide, Fig. 3.7(d)] can ordinarily be analyzed, even with 
modern analytical techniques and computer programs. If you ever have to investigate a landslide, Cruden 
and Varnes (1996) provide a checklist that may help you determine the cause of the movement. 
If a slope is unstable or unsafe, it must be either flattened· or otherwise stabilized. Holtz and 
Schuster (1996) and Wyllie (1996) discuss the stabilization and remediation of soil and rock slopes, 
respectively. 
· 
3.3.4 
Surface-Water Processes 
Surface water is a ubiquitous and important geologic agent. The erosion; transportation, and deposition 
of sediments by streams, rive'rs, lakes, and oceans have influenced and continue to cause the formation 
of many of the earth's surficial geologic features. Water is responsible for many landforms and soil 
deposits of interest to civil engineers. 
In this section, after a brief discussion of infiltration, runoff, and drainage patterns, we describe 
fluvial ( strea~ns and rivers), marine. and coastal, arid lacustrine (lakes) landforms and processes. Also 
mentioned are the special landforms and soil deposits found in desert areas. 
Infiltration, Runoff, Drainage Patterns, and Gully Shapes-When precipitation falls on. the 
earth's surface, the water can either infiltrate into the surface materials or become surface runoff. 
Although both infiltration and runoff can cause erosion arid deposition; runoff is by far the most 
important of the two as a geologic agent. The relative amount of runoff v~rsus infiltration depends on 
1. the predominant grain size of the soils at the site, 
2. vegetation and ground cov~r, . , 
3. water content, 
4. density and degree of compaction of the surface soil~, 
5. whether the surface is frozen or not, and 
6. the slope of the surface. 
' 
' 
Of these six factors, grain size is the most important. In general, finer~grained soils such as silts and 
clays have relatively low resistance to erosion and relatively low infiltration. Therefore they tend to 
86 
Chapter 3: .. :Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
' : ·• develop a rather intensive pattern of rills, drainage channels, and gullies. The opposite is generally true 
of coarser-grained soils. They are much• more. erosion resistant, have much greater infiltration, and 
therefore tend to develop relatively few drainage channels: One exception to this 'general rule is the 
:fine-grained soil called loess (German: lOss), a silt carried and deposited by the wind (Sec. 3.3.6). Loess 
deposits have high vertical infiltration rates and thus develop relatively few drainage channels. 
As the water flows down a' slope or stream channel, its potential energy (from being at some 
higherelevation) is convertedirito kinetic energy as its velocity.increases. Some losses of energy, how-
ever, occur.through internal turbulence and boundary-layerfriction; additional energy is also consumed 
by erosion or scour of the channel and by sediment transport. Factors that influence stream erosion are 
, the water velocity, the type and amount of sediment, and the riature of the streambed (whether rock or 
· ' soil). In a bedrock channel, the nature and spacing of rock structures, such as joints and bedding planes, 
also influence. erosion (West, 1995). Energy loss and erosion are approximately proportional to the 
square ofthe stream velocity, and this explains why intense .rainfall, high runoff, and flooding often 
. cause so much soil erosion. 
·•.:·· .... 
· . The sediment carried by the stream includes the suspended load and bedload. Suspended load is 
. the sediment carried in suspension above the streambed, while bed load is the sediment transported 
. •,, mainly by rolling or saltation (short hops or jumps)· along the streambed. As you might imagine, there 
is a big difference' in the erodability of a strearri channel· in soil versus one.primarily on bedrock. For 
· . soil channels, Fig. 3.9 shows whether erosion, transportation, ·or deposition· is likely to take place, 
>: 
. depending on the stream velocity·and the 'size of thesoilparticles in the streambed. Fine sands are 
" obviously the most erodible. Coarser~grained soils require more·velocity (energy) to cause them to 
. . ~ . , ' 
:,, 
50 
~ 
E 
~ 
-~ 
10 
() 
0 
Qi > 
·.,, 
0.1r-----L-~~--~~----L-~~~~~~~--~L-~~ 
l() 
T""" 
C\1 
~,.... 
C\1 
,.... 
C\J 
c.o ' 0 
T""" 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
~'-o 
'l" 
I'-
.-
oi 
0 
0 
~ . o o 
. ~~-
o 
.,; . 
... 
... . . ·. I 
1---- Fines.. 
• •. 
Sand· 
, ·I·~ • , , . Gravel~ 
· Size of particles (mm) 
FIGURE 3.9 
Flow velocity and particle sizes required for erosion, transportation, 
and deposition (after Hjulstrom,J 935). . . 
. 
. 
-: ~ .. ' 
/ 
3.3 Geologic Processes and Landforms 
87 
erode, because the particles are larger and heavier. On the other hand, finer-grained soils (silts and 
clays) often have a significant amount of internal cohesion that results in greater resistance to erosion. 
Streams erode channels in bedrock mostly by abrasion due to the suspended and bed load sediment 
and by the "plucking" of loose rock blocks py hydraulic action. Erosion caused by cavitation may even 
occur in 'rapids and waterfalls. 
· · ·· · 
· 
Drainage patter~s as determined from maps and aerial photographs can provide much useful 
information about soil and rock types, bedrock structure, etc., in an area. On-line resources such as 
Google Earth and USA National Atlas Online now provide aerial photographicviewsof most areas 
around the world. Eight typical but very characteristic drainage patterns are sk~tched il1 Fig. 3.10. 
Dendritic drainage patterns [part (a) of Fig. 3.10] are very common; they develop on nearly hori-
zontal sedimentary rocks or massive igneous rocks where there is no significant structural control. On the 
other hand, a trellis pattern (b) develops where there is significant bedrock or str~ctural control, such as 
folded or dipping rocks with parallel faults. Rectangular drainage ·patterns (c) follow joint or fault sys-
tems in jointed rocks. Radial patterns (d) develop on domes, cones,· and so on. Complex or deranged 
drainage (e) develops on very recent deposits, for example on a recently glaciated region (Sec. 3.3.5). 
Parallel drainage is found in areas where slope or structure controls the developed drainage (f). Pinnate 
drainage patterns (g), a variation of the dendritic pattern, develop on steep slopes and are particularly 
common in areas of thick loess deposits (Sec. 3.3.6). Finally, Fig; 3.10(h) shows no drainage pattern, which 
means that the material is very free draining and that all precipitation infiltrates dir.ectly downward into 
the soil. Such a condition can develop, for example, on a clean gravel river terrace. Other patterns for dif-
ferent soil and bedrock conditions are given by American Society of Photogrammetry (1960). 
Gully shape, both in cross-section and in profile, also gives an indication of the possible types of 
soils to be found in an area: Three characteristic patterns are shown in Fig. 3.11. 
Fluvial Landforms-As runoff channels coalesce and flows increase, basins enlarge and streams 
... and rivers develop into systems that are in dynamic equilibrium between erosion and deposition. Because 
so much civil infrastructure development and construction takes place on the flood plains of fivers, the 
characteristics and soil deposits of fluvial landforms have important implications for civil engineers. 
Figure 3.12 shows some of the main .features found on the flood plain~ of br~l\d alluvial valleys. 
A flood plain is the relatively flat area bo~dering a stream or fiver that .contain water-deposited sedi-
ments or alluvium. lluvium rders-to-all-materials deposited by streams and rivers, and it can consist 
of just about all soi sizes ranging_lr:Q!!} gravels t~ilts~ys.Alluvium may be dep~ m the 
- stream channel Itself, on the river banks (called overbank deposits), and on the valley floor. Flood-plain 
deposits are frequently reworked as the stream meanders, both during normal flow and during floods. 
Meanders are an interesting-characteristic ofa well-developed river system, and their development is 
. shown in Fig 3.13. Any deflection of the flow will tend to cause the channel to either erode on the out-
side or deposit on the inside of the meander: Erosion occurs at the outside of the meander due to 
expenditure of energy in deflectingthe flow back into the ch'annel; undercutting of the bank adds to 
the development of the meander [Fig.3.13(b )]. On the inside of the meander, deposition of sands takes 
plac~, because the vdocityofthe stream is lower there; these deposits'are called point bars (or pubs). 
Meanders indicate' that rivers and streams have reached energy and flow equilibrium; areas along 
·waterways that are heavily developed may be more prone to flooding and channel erosion/deposition, 
since this natural equilibrium mechanism has been restricted by the development. h. 
: 
· · . Other flood-plain features include channel bars, deltas, natural·levees, and backswanip deposits 
(Figs. 3.12~ 3.13, and 3.14). Channel bars contain sand and gravel deposited within the stream channel 
itself. Deltas form when sands and gravels are deposited at the mouths of tributary streams entering the 
•: .main river channel. The.low ridges lying parallel to and along the banks of the main river channel are 
called natura/levees (Figs. 3.12 and 3.14). They form especially on older, well-developed flood plains 
during floods when the • stream first begins to .leave the main channel. Because the velocity decreases, 
coarser materials (sands and ~oarse silts) are deposited first, adjacent to the main channel. Then, further 
88 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
•;; 
~··. 
~ 
.. 
(a) 
~(/l/Jh 
~
0 
oo 
0' 
. 
.·. 
0 
0 
0 
.: (b) 
~ 
,, 
' 
' 
' 
' 
(c) 
,. . ' ~ 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
~~ 
~~~; 
" ' . ' . 
. 
. 
·~· 
' • 
~ 
' 
• 
I 
(d) 
(f). 
. (no pattern) 
(g) 
0 (h) 
FIGURE 3.10 Drainage patterns: (a) dendritic; (b) trellis; (c) rectangular; (d) radiali 
(e) complex or deranged; (f) parallel; (g) pinnate; and (h) no drainage pattern 
° 
(after Krynine and Judd, 1957, and Thornbury, 1969). 
SOIL 
(a) NON-PLASTIC . 
:SEMI-GRANULAR 
: NON-COHESIVE 
SANDS 
, GRAVEL.• 
· 
COMBINATIONS 
o• 
(c) NON-GRANULAR 
COHESIVE· ·
00 
PLASTIC:' .. 
------
PLAN 
·~0·0·"0 
' .. ) 
·' 
,., 
0 
'' '<-1...... 
··1 <o'"dm;o 
; ·' 
~ 
-
,.., 
CLAY 
~
,,.·,·~~ 
:u.: I' 
:· 
.. 
; 
SILTY CLAY 
~ \. 
· 
• · ' · 
Pinnate 
FIGURE 3.11 · Characteristic guily shapes for various soil types (after American Society of 
Photogrammetry, 1960).' 
· · ' 
.:;');. 
• • 3:3 :. Geologic Processes and landforms 
89 
Natural levees 
Natural levees 
Valley wall 
·Oxbow lake 
Backswamp 
Yazoo stream 
Valley wall 
Point bar 
Meander scars 
, FIGURE 3.12 
Landforms and fe~tures found on flood plains of broad all~vial valleys (from West, 1995). 
• 
' 
' 
' 
' 
1 lj 
' 
' 
' 
'!'" 
~· ,: ' ' ! ; • ' 
;; 
FIGURE 3.13 . Development 
of a meander due to erosion 
and deposition: (a) plan view;, 
(b) cross section. ' . 
. . 
·,·, 
A 
·Deposition 
(point bars) · . , 
·.~. '! ;.. . . B 
(b) 
90 
Chapter 3: • .. -Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
,\:' 
FIGURE 3.14 
Natu'raF---
levees and backswamp . 
deposits. -
, . Natural levees 
' 
' 
i 
' l 
' 
l ' 
,. "'"'"',,>I' 
-~'<:==-!:l;;_::~ __ 
. i 
~ --"- ·. , -
I, ~~~ 
···,·<,· 
.·------
''"f>Yt 
··..• 
,' 
' 
•'·· -t 
t 
Backswamp deposits · 
from the main ch~nnel, fine'r sediments (fine silts and clays) an! depo~ited in the backswamp of the flood 
plain, as shown in Fig. 3.12 and in the cross-section' in Fig. 3.14. Backswamp deposits typically ar~ very soft 
and often contain organic materials. Although these deposits are good for agricultural purposes, they 
make very poof foundations and are not good sources of construction materials: On the other hand, flood 
plains may be good sources of groundwater, depending on the. thiCkness and character of the alluvium. 
Meanders continually move back and forth across the· flood plain; and in' very old and wide 
river valleys, even the so-called ineimder belt'caii meander. Eventually, a meander may become so 
large and sinuous that the river channel cuts through its "neck" and leaves it stranded in the form of a 
crescent-shaped, water-filled channeL call~d an, px.bow l(lke (boolabong )f1 Aboriginal Australian) 
(Figs. 3.12 and 3.15). Materials deposited behind the natural levee darn at the cutoff points effectively 
seal the lake. Oxbow lakes may eventually fill with very soft and compressible organic silts and clays. 
Like backswamp deposits, filled oxbow lakes make poor construction sites, and where identified are 
best avoided. Another feature shown in Fig. 3.15 is the scroll-like pattern of the old point-bar deposits. 
Because these are coarser grained than the backswamp or oxbow deposits, they appear to be lighter 
colored when viewed from the air or .On aerial photographs. 
' 
The lower Mississippi River valley (Fig. 3.15) is a classic example of a well~developed old river 
system with a very broad (> 130 km) flood plain and a_wide meandering meander belt, many oxbow 
lakes, scroll-like point-bar deposits, natural levees, and backswamp deposits. The extensive protective 
levee system along the Mississippi River was 'constructed to help protect adjacent land f~om flooding; 
however, such systems also prevent further natural channel development, and tend to ultimately 
increase flow.velocities, especially during floods. 
· 
·· 
Braided streams are an interesting fluvial phenomenon that occurs when the stream bedload is 
very large relative to its discharge and the mainstream channel becomes choked with sands and gravels. 
Many channels and islands form, with lots of branching and.rejoining of channels, until the stream 
appears to be braided . .Braided streams are quite· common in yalleys downstream from glaciers that 
carry lots of coarse sediment, arid in deserts where occasional flooding and high erosion provide large 
· amounts of granular mate~ials to be carried by a channel: 
· · 
Fluvial terraces are relatively flat, benchlike ~emnants of older flood plains found on the valley 
walls above the'jJiesent flood plain. Fluvial teir~~es'can be cut either into rock or into soil [Fig. 3.16(a) 
and (b)]. They usually consist of predominately· coarser granular materials but niay also contain 
pockets of silts and clays wherever the flood velocity decreases. Terrace deposits often tend to become 
siltier away from the main channel next to the valley walls, where the flow velocities are less. Alluvial 
terraces are commonly paired [Fig. 3.16(c)]; that is, there are corresponding terrace at the same eleva-
tion on opposite sides ofthe valley. Sometimes, however, terraces are unpaired or cyclical [Fig. 3.16( d)]; 
that is, they are not at the same elevation due to' tilting of the flood plain or differential lateral 'erosion. 
Fill terraces and terraces cut in fill are often g'ood sources-of aggregates for construction arid frequently 
provide excellent groundwater resources. ' ' 
' 
' · .. ' ' '' 
":.' ' ' ' ' 
Deltas are formed when alluvium is deposited at the mouths of rivers a~d streams as, they enter 
into a larger valley or body of water,·such as another river, a lake, or the ocean. In plan view deltas often 
; ; 3.3: Geologic Processes and Landforms 
91 
FIGURE 3.1S . The Mississippi Ri~er ~b~ve Natchez, Miss:, sh~wing me~nders • 
and meander cutoffs, former channels, 'oxbow lakes, and point bar deposits 
·{modified after Lob~ck, 1939). 
· 
· 
•1 ·· 
• 
• 
· 
· 
:>''; 
;', 
·have a shape similar to the Greek letter L\. As the river enters the larger body of water, its velocity 
·. · decreases markedly because of a change in gradient; and the sediments in suspension' drop out. Coarser 
' materials are deposited first; then finer materials are deposited further from the mouth of the river. The 
delta gradually builds up in thickness as deposition continues with time [Fig. 3.17(a)], and eventually a 
: .. 
deltaic plain [Fig. 3.17(b )] forms. The main and secondary river channels cut through the deltaic plain, 
· and materialis deposited on the plain itself only during flooding. ; ·' · 
·, 
· 
· 
92 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
h 
Present __j 
flood plain~ 
I 
I 
I 
.IIJ~~~i~iit~~~i~!~t 
(b) 
• < / 
:....--
-----.--~ 
-cs=~ 
----y 
) 
Alluvium_)____;/"-"'\: 
& 
. 
-lAIIuvium 
\ 
Present · 
_____'-__! 
• 
flood plain~ 
FIGURE 3.16 Fluvial terraces cut in (a) rock and (b)soil; (c) paired and 
(d) unpaired terraces. . 
· . 
What will we find if we take a vertical secticin through a typical large river delta? At the bottom 
of the section are nearly horizontal beds, called bottomset beds, consisting mostly of silts and clays. 
Foreset beds are found in the middle of the section; they are mostly sands and gravels and thus are able 
to stand on a somewhat steeper slope than the finer-grainedmaterials near the bottom. At the top of 
the section are strata lying nearly horizontally, the topset beds; these are a continuation of the alluvial 
or flood plain of the main river system. These beds are illustnited in Fig. 3.17 .. ·. 
. .. . 
· 
A feature related to a delta is an 'alluvial fan. Alluvial fans are formed when streams carrying 
sediment down from a mountain or highland area flow onto a valley floor or a plain; The sudden 
decrease in slope of the stream channel results in a decrease in water velocity and therefore in the 
. , . , , sediment-carrying ability of the stream. Coarser materials, primarily gravel and sand, drop out first; 
· finer and finer mateiialsare. carried further. out on the plain (Fig. 3.18). Often the stream on the flat-
., ter portion of the alluvial fan becomes braided with a poorly defined main channel. Alluvial fans are 
often good sources of groundwater. as well as construction aggregates. 
,One important characteristic of all coarse-grained fluvial deposits is that they have a rounded 
shape. During the tninsportation ofthese particles. as part. of the.bed load of the stream, their rough 
j 
'. 3.3 
Geologic Processes and La,ndforms 
93 
Note: A - topset beds 
B- to reset beds 
C - bottomset beds 
0- bunk beds 
Sea level 
.· ': 
. FIGURE 3. ,{ Cross section of a delta: (a) early in its depositional history; 
and (b) much later after the deltaic plain is formed. . . 
' 
i :.; 
i >, 
.. and broken edges are smoothed by the abrasive action of the turbulent water and contact with other 
· particles in the stream; Particle shape is discussed in Sec. 2.6. 
' Marine and Coastal Landforms-Shorelines along large bodies of water such as oceans are sub-
ject to wave action from tides, wind (especially during storms), and. the rare tsunami (Japanese: "tidal 
wave"); Waves are the major cause of erosion of ~oastlines, and so you might think they would produce 
~··' .; 
FIGURE 3.18 Cross section of an alluvial fan. 
94 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
only erosional landforms. However, several important coastal features are the result of deposition of 
sediments caused. by wave action. :. · 
·· 
.. .. . . · 
In deep water, the wave velocity and wave length remain essentially constant.Asthe wave enters 
shallow waters, increased bottom friction slows it down to the point that the wave becomes unstable and 
breaks at the shore. When the wave breaks, its energy is dissipated by turbuh!nce, and work (erosion and 
sediment transportation) is done on the shor~ bottom. Finally, after the wave breakS, water continues to 
run up the beach, expending the last bit of wave energy. Runup length depends on the wave height and 
the roughness and slope of the beach. Figure 3.19 shows an idealized profile of a beach along with some 
coastal, beach, and nearshore (littoral) features and terminology (Henry et al., 1987). In assessing the 
condition of a specific coastal area, we need to know whether the coastline is emergent, submergent, or 
stable, and the reasons for this assessment. These conditions lead to coastlines that are destructional 
(eroding), constructional( accreting), or.....:: as is common in many coastlines..::. a composite stable com-
bination of both eroding and accreting{m)ces~es. 
·. 
· · 
· · · ; : ; 
Reflection and refraction of waves impinging on the sh<ore, as well as longshore currents, probably 
contribute the most to coastal erosion and transportation of sediment (Henry eta!.', 1987):Some of the 
more important erosional shoreline landforms are shown in Fig. 3.20. Most of these features depend on 
the lithology of the headlands; massive hard rock is, of course, much more resistant to erosion than soft 
rock and soil. Changes in sea level, whether caused by climatic changes or tectonic activity, also strongly 
influence the formation of coastal landforms. A difficult problem associated with erosional coastlines is 
predicting their rate of retreat, which is obviously important in protecting infrastructure from coastal 
landslides and other damage. 
· · · ' · · 
· 
In constructionalshoreline~, the bea~h is co.ntinually re~eiving materials erodedfrom some 
other area of the coast, or even offshore, arid transported by wave' aCtion and alongshore currents. This 
process results from peculiarities in predmninani wind mid wave direction, loc~l topography, and the 
availability-of materials to be eroded·elsewhere:and then transported: Common landforms in con-
structional shorelines are shown in Fig. 3.2L If the lana is rising relative to the sea or lake level, or if an 
excess of littoral or.beach material is present, then a succession of beach ridges or. beach terraces may 
be formed; these landforms also typically develop sand dunes and other Eolian features (Sec. 3.3.6). 
Barrier islands are very .long offshore bars; they. are important landforms along the southern Atlantic 
and Gulf Coasts of the United States. 
Pub 
High water level 
Low water level 
Beach 
Backshore 
·Nearshore (littoral) zone 
(extends through breaker zone) 
Fore 
Offshore 
Shore 
FIGURE 3.19 
Idealized beach profile illustrating coastal, beach, and nearshore (littoral) terminology 
(Henry et al., 1987). 
j· 
·· 3.3 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
95 
( 
. FIGURE 3.20 .icommon landforms of an erosionalc~astline in resistant rock: {a) ~arlier stage showing 
headland a, bay b; sea Caves C, and cliff-top blowhole d; {b) at a later stage; cave erosion causes sea arches e 
and stacks f (after Lambert, .1988). · · 
· 
FIGURE 3.21: Common landforms in constructional shoreliries.T, toinbolo; s,:spit; RS, re'cunied spit or 
. 'hook; CS,' complex spit or compound hook; CT, complex tom bolo; LB, looped bar; DT, double tom bolo; HB, 
headland beach;. 8MB, baymouth bar; MBB, midbay bar; CB, cuspate bar;BHB, bayhead beach; BSB, bay-
side beach; BHD, bayhead delta; CF, cuspate foreland {moaified after Thornbury, 1954); 
96 
.:· 
Chapter 3' · ·Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Beach lagoons and tidal marshes are commonly found behind barrier islands, beach ridges, bay 
mouth bars, and so on, as shown in Fig. 3.21. These features are important geotechnically because they 
often become filled with soft organic silts and clays that are very poor foundation materials. 
Materials found on shorelines and beaches range from boulders and cobbles to very fine sands; of 
course, finer particles produced by erosion have already been carried away by wave action. In boulder, 
cobble, and pebble beaches, the wave action is so strong that even most of the sand particles have been 
carried away. Just as with coarse-grained fluvial deposits, these coarse-grained particles usually have 
rounded and smooth shapes due to the abrading action of the waves and tides. 
The predominant material found on beach ridges and terraces is sand, because the finer particles 
have been carried away by the wave action. Coarser sands tend to be found nearer the tops of the 
ridges, while nearer the water the materials tend to be finer in texture. Inorganic coastal deposits are 
suitable for use in embankment fills. However, as coastal areas are also environmentally sensitive, they 
may not be logical sources of construction materials. Low-lying coastal areas, especially near the 
oceans and inland seas, are often poor sources of groundwater because of saltwater intrusion into adja-
cent aquifers. 
. 
· 
Lacustrine Landforms-Similar to ocean coastlines, the shorelines of lakes are al.so subject to wave 
action caused by wind or the rarf! seiche. Although the wave energy is less, the same types of en?sional 
and depositional landforms can develop on lakeshores. The term acust~ine efers to both the processes 
associated with and the materials deposited in lakes. The natural deve opment pattern for small shallow 
lakes, especially in glaciated regions (Sec.3.3.5), is that they gradually fill with sediments and organic 
· materials and turn into swamps and marshes, even with no exposed water surface. This process is termed 
eutrophication (from Old Slavonic, eutropikosz: "stinky bog"). 
Lacustrine deposits are geotechnically very important, because they usually are fine-grained silts 
and clays, often are quite soft and compressible, and may also contain significant amounts of organic 
matter. If this is the case, lacustrine deposits are poor foundation materials, although in some cases, due 
to desiccation and subsequent glaciation (Sec. 3.3.5), they may be strong enough to support structural 
foundations. In soft materials, there may be problems with the stability of slopes and excavations. Fluc-
tuating water levels in lakes and reservoirs also can cause shore slope instability in these deposits. 
Important lacustrine deposits associated with the last Ice Age or Pleistocene epoch (Table 3.1) 
are found around.the Great Lakes and in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and the Dakotas. The Ottawa'and 
St. Lawrence River valleys contain thick deposits of soft, sensitive. clays, l~rgelyJacustrine in origin, 
although the clays in the lower St. Lawrence Valley were deposited in brackish to salt water. Varved 
clays are found in the Connecticut River valley (much of which was formerly covered by glacial Lake 
Hitchcock), the Puget Sound basin, and in many other formerly glaciated areas. Varved clays contain 
alternating thin layers of silty and clayey soils; the coarser, silty layers were deposited when.the lakes 
were ice free, while the finer" sediments settled out much more slowly (following Stokes' law) when the 
lakes were frozen over and the water very quiescent. Finally, important lacustrine deposits are found in 
the basins of western Nevada and Utah, in southeastern Oregon, and in southeastern California in a 
remnant of the Colorado River delta. During the Pleistocene, large lakes formed and remained for a 
• ·long time because of the particular topogniphic and climatic conditions in these areas. 
Also associated with the Pleistocene lakes are beach ridges and beach terraces that were formed 
during different stages or levels. of the li1kes. These landforms are common around the Great Lakes , 
and the western basins, particularly the Great Salt Lake basin, They are often good sources of sands 
and gravels and, depending on local conditions, may also provide limited groundwater supplies. 
Sp.ecial Conditions in Desert Areas-Because conditions in desert·areas are different than in 
. ::temperate and wetter,climates,speciallandforms·and soil deposits develop. The reasons for this devel-
opment are fourfold. First, contrary to popular opinion, it does rain in deserts, although. obviously 
infrequently. When rainfall does occur, often it is very intense and leads to significant runoff and ero-
sion. Also contributing to erosion is the lack of vegetative cover. Second; drainage in deserts is often 
• 
J' 
:·.J 
3.3. Geologic Processes and Landforms · 97 
' 
. 
' 
· :: largely.internal through the coarser materials found on the desert floor and in desert mountains. This 
leadsto well-developed drainage patterns (discussed earlier in this section). Third; evaporation rates 
....• are much greater than rainfall rates, so if there is some standing water after a rain, it rapidly evaporates. 
, Fourth, mechanical weathering, especially.because of wind action (Sec. 3.3.6), is more significant than 
·in wetter climates (where chemical weathering predominates). All these conditions lead to the devel-
. opment of special desert landforms and soil deposits. Figure 3.22 illustrates a number of the landforms 
commonly found in desert regions. 
' 
1,: 
- \; .... (a} 
. 
~ ) . ; . . 
Fines~ 
• Piedmont ·plain . 
.. 
r 
c. : ·.FIGURE 3.22 Common landforms in.deserfregions: (a} bajadas; (b) pediment and .. : · 
, ; piedmont plain; and (c) fans and playas (after West, 1995). 
.. ,' 
:·· 
98 
Chapter 3' 
1 Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
· Alluvial fans, discussed previously, are. very common in desert areas. When several alluvial fans 
coalesce on the valley floor or the piedmont plain below, they form what is called a bajada ("bottom" or 
"lower" in Spanish). Because of the coarser materials found in the upper portions of alluvial fans, they 
are often good sources of groundwater in desert areas. The broad, gently sloping erosional surface at the 
-base of a mountain front is called a pediment. Pediments may contain Eolian landforms (described in 
Sec. 3.3.6) and inselbergs.An inselberg ("island mountain" in German) is an isolated bedrock hill rising 
abruptly above the eroded bedrock surface. 
Dry, almost dry, or sometimes seasonal lakes on the piedmont plain in deserts are called playas 
("beach" in Spanish). In the desert southwest United States, playas often have no outlet, and because 
of the high evaporation rate, the water, if any, in a playa tends to be very salty. The dry lake-bed or 
playa soils are also often salt encrusted.due to precipitation of salts from the ephemeral lake water; 
such areas are commonly called alkali flats. 
. 
A type of soil commonly found in desert regions is caliche (origin: Spanish for "flake of lime") 
which is a hard, highly variable layer cemented mainly with calcium carbonate ( CaC03) found within the 
soil profile. Caliche is generally found at or just below the ground surface, and it is extremely variable in 
thickness, ranging from a few centimetres to a few metres, even at the same site. Its hardness also varies 
·greatly, which can make excavation difficult at times. Where it exists,itis an excellent foundation-support 
material for highways and buildings, although dissotution is a problem with increased groundwater 
presence. West (1995) gives two hypotheses for the origin of caliche. One is that water percolating 
downward from the ground surface deposits calcium carbonate near the bottom of the soil profile. The 
other is that capillary action (Sec. 6.2) draws mineral-rich water up near the surface, where the high 
evaporation rate causes the salts to precipitate out and cement the soil particles together. 
The potential for flooding and encroachment of infrastructure presents difficult problems for 
civil engineers in desert regions. Stream channels can change rapidly, and due to the high~intensity 
rainfall, erosion, and rapid runoff, flood waters often carry large amounts of debris and sediments. 
Because these events may be rather rare; it is often difficult to obtain high~quality engineering data 
necessary for design of culverts, bddges, levees,' and so on. 
· 
-
3.3.5 
Ice Processes and Glaciation 
The formation, movement and subsequent ~elting of large ice masses are important. geologic 
processes that result in a number of major landforms, and important soil deposits. A~is 
a large 
body of ice that is formed on land by the compaction and recrystallization of snow an'd-that gives evi-
dence of past or present movement. Glaciers are important erosional and depositional agents, and 
their effects extend well beyond the limits ·of glaciation. Although ·major continental glaciation 
occurred during the Pleistocene epoch [2 X 106 yr B.P. (before present) to 15,000 yr B.P.; Table 3.1], 
some glaciation is still occurring today. Also important geologically, and. geotechnically are 
permafrost-permanently frozen ground-and seasonally frozen ground. About one-quarter of the 
North American continent currently· contains penriafrost, while about two-thirds· of it is seasonally 
subject to frost action. Frost action in soils· is discussed in Sec. 6.8. 
. 
. · , , , , 
_ . In this section, wedescribe the origin and' characteristics of glaciers; the landforms and soil 
deposits they produce, and the geotechnical characteristics of these landforms and soil deposits. 
Origin and Characteristics of Glaciers-Glaciers begin with an acciuriulation of snow that on an 
annual basis is greater than the loss taking place during the summer due to melting and evaporation 
(called wastage). As snow accumulates, it co~presses and recrystallizes under its own weight and 
gradually turns into ice that starts to flow plastically downslope (Fig. 3.23) or outward due to its own 
weight. In some ways, glacial ice behaves as a very viscous liquid. 
Glacial systems are essentially self-perpetuating, as long as no drastic climatic changes occur over 
the long term. The surface elevation of the glacier rises as sriow accumulates, and this tends to cause 
3.3 .. Geologic Processes and Landforms 
99 
FIGURE 3.23 Cross se~tion through a valley glacier showing the area relationship.betwee~ accumulation 
and wastage; downslope flow lines are also shown schematically (~fterSharp,1960); 
· 
more snowfall; snow also increases the reflectivity of the area, and this means l((ss solar heat and lower 
temperatures. In any event, for glaciers to continue to exist, there must be a state of equilibrium between 
precipitation and accumulation of snow in the winter, and wastage (Fig.3.23) during the summer months. 
When this equilibrium is altered by long-term climatiC changes, a glacier either (1) advances by accretion 
of new snow deposition, more ice formation and less melting (colder climate trend); or (2) retreats when 
melting outpaces accretion (warmer climate trerid). For example; there is evidence that during the 
period 1300-1850, global temperatures were generally cooler, and glaciers advanced into areas where 
. · · 
· ,:,,they hadn't been present·for hundreds of years (Fagan, 2000). The opposite has been true since 1850, 
•. : although there is debate 'aboutwhether this reflects a natural temperature cycle or human activity. 
Glaciers can originate either on mountains or on continents. Mountain glaciers are active in many 
areas of North and South America, Europe, and Asia in the Himalayas.' Continental glaciers were very 
c·omnion· during the.Pleistcicene on all continents; today, large continental~type' glaCiers or continental 
ice sheets exist only on Greerilarid and Antarctica (with remnants in Alaska imd Siberia). Observations 
: made on those glaCiers' togethef\vith studies of Pleistocene glacial deposits tell us much about the 
· .. · .: behavior arid effects'of continental glaciers during the Pleistocene. 
: 
· · 
· · · Figure 3.24 illustrates both mountain and continental glaciers. As most mountain glaciers occur in 
valleys, the term valley glaCier may be more appropriate. Where two or more valley glaciers coalesce at 
, the mountain front; they form a piedmont glacier. Also shown in Fig:3.24 are ice caps, cirque glaciers, 
· and tidewater glaciers. 
· 
· 
· . 
· ·. Continental ice sheets can be very thick, even thicker tlian 4 km, and their weight depresses the 
·. ·:: earth's crust underneath them; As the Pleistocene ice sheets melted (at the erid of the last Pleistocene), 
·:<the earth's crus( rebounded elastically-in some cases, many metres-in Canada, the northern United 
··:.States; and the Finrio-Scandinavian peninsula; For example, in the Puget Sound basin, the inferred net 
; rebound ranges from· 40 to~l30 in.·crustal rebound has also cimsed many interesting local effects. In 
·•: 
Sweden, harbors became shallow and islimds began appearing in lakes and offshon! in the Baltic Sea. 
· , 'Some of these'chariges are so rapid thafthey.have occurred even during the lifespans of people living 
there. Residual stresses from ice loading are encountered .in the bedrock, and faults, minor earth-
. quakes, and the rupture of rcick slabs· during e'xcavations :have been attributed to these stresses 
'·' (Nicho san 
1991).. . 
·'' 
.,. 
lacial Landforms Glaciers and 'glaeial aCtion p·roduce both erosional and depositional land-
': forms'. As the Ice a vances in both valley and continental glaciers, it erodes adjacent soils and rocks by 
; abrasion and gouging, and b)" the plucking cif blocks of jointed bedrock;•The eroded materials are 
incorporated in the ice, with the greatest concentration near the bottom of the glacier. All of the debris 
100 
Chapter 3· 
Tidewater. 
glacier 
···.::··:·: 
.... 
; .. : 
~ ·~··:: . 
' . ' . 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Valley 
glacier 
Ice cap 
Cirque 
glaciers 
-.-.. 
-.-.· .. 
Piedmont 
glacier 
... ... .. :: ... : ....... · .. .. 
·· .. 
·· ..... · .... · 
.. FIGURE 3.24 . Types of glaciers (after Chernicoff .and Venkatakrishnan, .1995) .. 
Continental 
ice sheet 
.• \' ~: t.• ',") i1: . 
"<):·.: ::.·.:::·: ·. 
transported and later deposited by glacial action is called glacial drift, a general term that includes both 
: materials directly deposited by the:ice and those deposited by meltwaters that carry soils and ro·cks 
. away from the ice.. 
· 
• · . 
The unstratified drift deposited directly by the glacier itself is called till (from the Scottish: "coarse 
·obdurate land"). Basal or lodgement till [Fig. 3.25(a)] is deposited directly under the glacier, while mater-
. ial deposited as the glacier melts is called ablation till [Fig. 3.25(b) ]. Basal tills are characteristically dense 
deposits, while ablation tills are often less dense. On the other hand, drift deposited by meltwaters from 
glaciers is typically stratified or sorted and forms glacio-fluvial deposits [Fig. 3.25(a)]. Glacio:lacustrine 
deposits are common where small ephemeral lakes or large and longer-lasting ones have developed. 
: Figure 3.26 illustrates some of the landforms and erosional features associated with mountain 
. ,. 
and valley.glaciation. In contrast to ordinary river and stream valleys in mountainous areas that are 
V-shaped in cross-section, glaciated valleys are U-shaped due to the erosional processes described 
above. Even after the ice has disappeared, it is easy to tell just how far down the valley the glacier pro-
gressed during its lifetime. Yosemite Valley, California, is a classic example of a glaciated valley that 
.. starts out as a U and becomes V-shaped about halfway down. Sometimes, high up on the valley walls, 
· hanging valleys are formed where. smaller tributary glaciers intersected the main glacial valley. Often 
·streams flowing in hanging valleys form spectacular waterfalls as they plunge into the main valley. Such 
waterfalls are common in Yosemite Valley, California, as well as in Alaska, the Canadian and northern· 
· .. ' · . · ··.U.S. Rockies, and the northern .Cascade Range in Washington and British Columbia. Other mountain 
· , ·glaciation erosional features are illustrated in fig. 3.26. 
· 
: In coastal areas, fjords (and chevys) formed when deeply eroded g~acial valleys were drowned as 
the sea level rose dramatically after the last glacial period. Classic examples.are, of course, in Norway, 
: : 1 :but New Zealand, Alaska, and British.Columbia also have many;-for example, the.harbour of Van-
.: · couver, British Columbia. Puget Sound in Washington State is also a complex fjord. Other similar ero-
sional features include the Great Lakes, the Finger Lakes in NewYork; and the thousands of smaller.-
, .. i lakes on the Canadian Shield in Ontario and Quebec. 
· 
· 
-
3.3 . ·Geologic Processes and Landforms 
101 
""'" 
. 
Lodgement till 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 3.25 Glacial drift, till, and glacio-fluvial deposits: (a) lodgement till and glacio>· 
fluvial depositsi (b) ablation till (including an end moraine). 
· 
· 
• Moraines (French Provenc;al: mourreno) are till~dominated landforms that were deposited directly 
by the glacier itself. Examples inclu~e ground moraines, deposited on the ground under the glacier, and 
marginal or lateral moraines formed at the edges of glaciers. As glaciers recede;recessional moraines are 
deposited. When a glacier stagnates for a while'-that is, when the rates of melting and accumulation are 
about equal-an end moraine is formed by glacial drift deposited at the end or leading edge of the ice. 
Sometimes glaciers advance and recede several times, forming several end moraines; but the maximum 
advance of the ice is marked by a terminal moraine. Recessional or terminal moraines at the ends of val-
leys often act as dams and allow glacial lakes to form at various locations and elevations in the valley. ' 
In continental glaciation; a common landform is a ground mor-aine, sometimes called a till plain 
· or till sheet; composed of lodgement tili iliai was deposited directly under the glacier. Good examples 
-of till plains are fc{und in centrafillinois, Indiana, Ohio, and southern Ontario. Marginal or lateral 
moraines,-formed at the edges of continental glaciers; are also found, as are recessional and terminal 
··moraines; these are illustrated in Fig. 3.27. Important e~aniples of recessional and terminal moraines 
·are in New England, starting at Staten Island and continuing across Long Island in New York, Block 
Island, Martha's Vineyard, and Nantucket Island. A major recessional moraine extends from Long 
Island, southern Connecticut, Rhode Island, and ~n io Cape Cod in Massachusetts .. · .·· 
_ . 
· 
. 
Another landform common in continental glaciated areas is the drumlin (Gaelic: druim = 
"ridge of a hill"), which is a streamlined rounded hillS to 50 mhigh composedof mostly glacial till. The 
direction of ice movement is indicated by the flatter slope and elongated shape of the drumlin (Figs. 3.27 
and 3.28). ril-umlins often occur in fields of hundreds or even thousands; good examples are found in west-
ern Nova Scotia, west-central New York,northern Michigan, eastern Wisconsin, central Minnesota, south-
ern Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Also occasionally found on ground and end moraines are kettles, which 
are pits or depressions where ice blocks separated from the main glacier, subsequently melted, and left a 
collapse depression. Kettles often fill with water and become small lakes, and, as described in'Sec. 3.3.4, 
102 
! ~ t 
Chapter 3: · Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Anflte 
FIGURE 3.26 
··'" 
Tarns 
Horn 
U~shaped. 
vall~y 
Valley glacial landforms (after Chernicoff and Venkatakrishnan, 1995). 
'· 
,., 
'FIGURE 3.27 · Continental glaciation landforms (afterWest, 1995)., 
; ·' 3.3 . Geologic Processes and Landforms 
103 
Direction of ice advance ------+-
FIGURE 3.28 
Drumlins (''a hill of till"). 
they may later accumulate fines aiid organic materials. An are~ in southern Wisconsin is called the kettle 
moraine, because the ground moraine is filled with literally hundreds of kettles. 
Eskers and kames are also • important landforms associa!ed with continental glaciation 
(Fig.3.27). These features are sometimes called gla'c:io~fluviallandforms, because they were deposited 
. by the meltwaters duririgtiriieswhen the glacier was fairlystagnant or receding. They can also be called 
· ice~contact l!indfornis, because ·they were depo~it~d in ci::mtactwfth the glacial ice. Eskers (Old Irish 
escir: "ridge or elevation separating two plains")' are 'sinuou~ ridges of stratified sands and gravels and 
even larger partiCles that .were deposited in streamsflmvirig in ice tunnels under the glacier or on the 
top of the glacier: In either case, when the ice melts, it leaves the esker deposited on the ground surface 
(Figs. 3.27 and 3.29). Eskers may be up to 30m high and kilometers long, although usually they are not 
continuous for such a distance. Eskers are common. in southern Canada, Maine, Michigan, Wisconsin, 
Minnesota, and the Dakotas. Some eskers in Mairie are, 150 km or more in li:'ngti1; many older roads 
were built on then because they provided an excellent road base .. 
Kames (Old Norse kjamn¢j: "from the' ice mound") (Fig. 3.27) are mounds or small hills of 
poorly sorted coarse materials rather commonly found on moraines and outwash plains. They probably 
originated frorri crevasses on top of the ice that became filled with debris, or from alluvial fans formed 
off the front or sides of the glacier, as shown in Fig. 3.30(3) and (b). Also shown is a kame terrace 
formed by outwash deposited by nieltwaters flowing alongside a glacier between the ice and the valley 
wall. Kame terraces are commonly found above the valley floor. 
. . . 
· . Sands 'and gravels deposited by meltwater streams in fro~tof an end moraine or at the margin of 
an.' active glaciei are called outwash. (Figs. 3.27 and 3.30). In mountains, where the outwash materials are 
confined by the valley walls; the streams carrying the outwash are relatively heavily loaded with sedi- . 
merit. Braided streams (Sec. 3.3.4) ~re common. Materials deposited adjacent to the ice front tend to be 
quite coarse, while the finer gravels arid sands are carried further down the valley. These deposits form 
what is kriown as a valley train (Figs. 3.27 and3.30). In continental 'glaciers where there are no confining 
valley, walls, the outwash materials- ar-e usually deposited on a landform called an outwash plain 
(Fig. 3.27). Outwash pJains..mayalsQ..~ontain othe!:_glici~fluvial-lan 
s such as eskers and kames. 
eo technical Significance of Glacial Landforms and Soil Deposits In glaciated country, geotech-
nical engineers m 
· · 
· 
par 1cu ar c arac enstics of glacial landforms and soil 
deposits. Probably the most important sing.le characteristic is that most glacial deposits are highly varia-
ble with respect to their material properties, ev~n within very short dist<,1nces both horizontally and 
104 
Chapter 3. 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
Meltwater 
begins to deposit 
sand and gravel 
Glacial ice 
,-~~,~~S_: 
-
~ "~~ . 
·-. ~. --
. 
. .~_,,_ r ·:.-
-- '. --.._ 
__ _,_ .... 
~~~%~~\~t~ 
-
... __ -::._ 
Bedrock channel 
:;r;.;.~.,:.:;;.z...._ Bedrock 
'f' 
I < ~ 
l • 
Deposits 
accumulate 
. ! r'';" 
.r,\ >· 
___ .,;; .• 
'-s-.r::--·-..:.~-· .. 
..•.. ...: ..... 
-~.-,..=-. 
~~~~"S~0~-
-<::~r-
. 
','1' 
\)I 
·• FIGURE 3.29 
Formation of eskers (Chernicoff and Venkatakrishnim1 1995) .. 
Glacier 
·retreating 
FIGURE 3.30 A stagnant glacier, showing (a) initial phase of deglaciirtidri;'a~d (bfsome 
ice-contact and outwash deposits and landforms (after Coats, 1991). 
105 
106 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
vertically. "Of all geologic materials, glacial deposits are the most complex and are likely to be the most 
humbling to work with" (R. Galster, 1995, personal communication). For virtually all civil engineering 
construction sites in glaciated regions, you need to know at a minimum the distribution, thickness, and 
complexity of the 'glacial drift, the complexity of the groundwater system, and seasonal frost depths. Of 
course, this information will need to be supplemented by project-specific information on soil properties. 
You should be dear that the terms glacial till and drift are the generic names of glacial materials, 
not glacial landforms. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
Recall that the unstratified drift deposited directly by the glacier iscalled till. Glacial tills typi-
cally are characterized by a lack of sorting by sizes and the absence of any significant stratification in 
the deposit, although stratified deposits may be found within a till owing to meltwater streams and 
ephemeral lakes. Virtually all grain sizes are possible, ranging from boulders and even larger blocks, 
called glacial erratics, through rock fragments (cobbles, gravels), sands, as well as silts a'nd clays-typ-
ically all randomly mixed together. The mineralogy and lithology of glacial tills st~6ngly reflect their 
source and.to some extent the distance from their source. Forexample, because tills in the north-cen-
tral United States and· adjacent Canadian provinces are derived'largely from sedimentary rocks 
(shale, limestone arid/or dolomite), they are predominately clayey. They ~re also moderately stiff and 
fissured due to unloading, desiccation, and. the direction of ice movement. Tills tend to. be progres-
sively siltier-for example, as one moves ea-st of Ohio and nmth of northern Alberta~ because of the 
coarser source rocks. Tills in New England and'the Maritime Provinces, derived fro~ granites and 
othyr igneous rocks; are quite gravelly and bouldery (as in Scotland and England with their "boulder 
clays" or "boulder tills"), and they are also stiff and fissured because of ice loads and desiccation. Tills 
in the PaCific Northwest (Washington, British Columbia) 'are often granular and very silty (because 
they were predominately derived from igneous and metamorphic rocks and debris); they also are very 
dense because of very high ice loads. Another characteristic. of the coarser particles found in glacial 
till is that they are generally subangular to angular in shape (Fig. 2.7) and have rough surfaces and 
broken edges. 
Ground moraines· and till plains are generally acceptable for foundations, especially of smaller 
and lighter structures. Excavations may be a problem because of the fissures in some tills; fissures are 
planes of weakness and, if unfavorably inclined, can cause slope instability. As sources for construction 
materials,ground moraines are of only average to poor quality. End and lateral moraines in mountain-
ous areas generally make good foundations and may. be good sources of materials for highway fills and 
earth dams, depending on their specific engineering properties: \ 
' · 
Glacial lakes formed behind recessionalor.terminalmoraines in mountains and at the ends of 
glacial valleys often contain soft lacustrine clays, silts, and organic materials. Similar deposits, including 
peat, are commonly found in kettles. Glacio-lacustrine, deposits are often varved, as described in 
Sec. 3.3.4.' If they are soft and compressible or organic, glacio-lacustrine deposits are poor foundation 
materials: However, in some locations, due to desiccation or subsequent glacial loading, glacio-lacustrine 
deposits may be very quite stiff and therefore good foundatio~-support materials, especially for lighter 
structures and roads. Although the reasons are different, just as with soft deposits, there may be slope 
and excavation stability problems in these materials .. 
:Because the 'transportation medium is water, drift .deposited by meltwaters f~om' glaciers in 
glacio~ fluvial or'outwash landforms tends to be stratified and well sorted by grain size. These materials 
tend to be' coa~ser grained and can rangefrom boulders down to fine sands, but sands 1md g~avels pre-
dominate. The finer silt arid clay particles have, of course, been carried away by the meltwaters. Just as 
with ordinary fluvial' deposits, coarse-grained glacio-fluvial materials· terid to have· rounded particle 
shapes. Eskers 'are hnp~:>rtantto engineers because. they ~re: excellent sources' of clean, well sorted and 
stratified sand and gravel. They also can provide excellent foundation materials, although excavations 
along their flanks can pose problems because of boulders and cobbles. Eskers can be good groundwater 
sources in glaciated regions. 
' 
'l'' 
' 
-· 
• 
),:, 
, :3.3: Geologic Processes and L3ndforms 
107 
Both kames and kame terraces are good sources of sands and gravels, although they tend to be 
sandier and usuaily not as .cle~n (fre~ of silt ;md Clay) as eskers ~r valley tniin deposits. Because kames 
and kame terraces tend to be more variable than eskers arid may contain kettles, they are l~ss desirable 
as foundations than eskers. Kames and ka~e terraces are often good sources of groundwater. 
· , Outwash plains a~ci valiey trains tend to be quite sandy in character, although they may also 
contain som:e gravels and· finer particles. They generally are good for~ foundations except where 
organic materials exist---' for example, in kettles and stream channels: They are also reasonable sources 
of groundwater. Fill terraces (Sec. 3.3.4) in glacial valleys are composed mostly of coarse· sands and 
gravels; they also are gciod groundwater sources.. 
. . . 
. . .. · .. 
. 
. · 
For additional geologic and geotechnical information about glacial deposits, see Coates (1991). 
· Permafrost and Periglaciai Landforms-' Permafrost is. perennially frozen ground. Because of long, 
cold winters and short; cool summers, the ground does not complet~ly thaw during the year. Nearly 25% 
of the earth's surfac~ is per~afrost, primarily in the polar regions and at high altitudes (Fig. 3.31 ): In these 
regions, permafrost is either continuous or discontinuous. In continuous permafrost ~ones, permafrost 
exists everywhere . except: under lakes . and. rivers . that. do. not freeze completely to. the bottom; in 
discontinuous permafrost zones, there are numerous permafrost-free areas that progressively increase in 
size arid number as you go from noith to south. The presence or. absence of permafrost in the discontinu-
ous zone is influenced by the vegetation and the depth of snow cover present in winter .. Maximum 
permafrost d~pths range from ~bout 1600 min Siberia and 1000 min the Canadian arcticto about 740 m 
in northern Alaska. In summer, even in the far. north, the upper 1-6m of the permafrost thaws, and 
because of its high water content froin melted ice is very unstable. This active layer contributes to the 
development of many of the characteristic features and landforms found in permafrost" and periglacial 
(i.e., near glacial) regions. As noted previously, because the average global temperature is rising relatively 
dramatically-compared to historical trends,many permafrost regions are experiencing significant active-
layer events (e.g., http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=mg18725124.500). 
. 
. 
The high water content of the active zone, repeated freezing and thawing, differential frost heaving, 
solifluction, and local vegetation all contribute to patterned ground, frost or ice-wedge polygons, and stone 
stripes and sorted circles found in periglacial and permafrost regions. Icewedges, sometimes as much as 3 
m in diameter and 10 m deep, are relatively CC?nimon;· when they thaw, th~ ~ayities can fill with gravel and 
sand that later densify to form ice-wedge casts. Among the stranger permafrost features are pingos (Inuit 
pinguq or pingu: "small hill"), which are cones or domes of ice and sediments that range in size from less 
than a metre in height and diameter to more than 50 m high ·and 400 min diameter. They are very common 
in northern Alaska north of the Brooks Range and in northern Canada, especially on the Mackenzie River 
delta. The largest known pingo is 70 m high and 600 min diameter, located near Thktoyaktuk, NWT . 
. ' In the Ice Age, periglacial environments existed all along the frorit of the North American conti-
nental glacie~s, so today periglacial features are sometimes found from New Jersey across the continent 
to the Dakotas. In addition, the cooler," wetter climate undoubtedly contributed to the development of 
the large pleistocene lakes in what is now the desert southwest United States described in Sec. 3.3.4. 
Acco~ding to Pewe (1991), the four mairi problems associated with infrastructure on permafrost 
are: (1) thawing of ice-rich permafrost with subsequent" surface subsidence under unheated structures 
such as road !lnd airfields; (2) ground subsidence under heated structures; (3) frost action, generally inten-
sified by poor drainage caused by"perrr1afrosi; and'( 4) freezing of buried sewer, water, and oil pipelines. 
Probably the most important and most destructive is the first one, the thawing of ice-rich permafrost and 
ice wedges. When.soil is frozen it has' exc~llent bearing capaCity and very low compressibility. When it 
thaws, however, the result is a high-water-content soil~ which causes a concurrent decrease in soil strength 
' ~iid increase in c~~pr~ssibility. The softening' of the foundation sciils leads to differential settlement, 
; ·~ubsidence; mid e~en bea~in"gcapacity.failu~e of foundations of buildi~gs, roads; railroads, and airfields. 
Weakening of near-surface thawing soils' al~o leads to slope instability. of b~tli natural slopes and 
excav"aii~ris iri froieri ground: 
. : 
. . . ··. . 
. 
. ' . ; . 
.. ' . . • . 
·. r . 
. . . . . . 
. 
. l . 
: ' ,. . 
. 
' 
' 
. 
' 
. 
" .. . • 
... ~ 
. > 
• : '. 
; 
•• ' 
• 
• 
• 
• 
, 
• 
~-· 
, 
' 
·~ 
' 
108 
Chapter 3 
. Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
\; 
,;:· 
30° 
100° 
30° 
Zone of· 
continuous 
permafrost 
Zone of 
discontinuous 
·permafrost 
FIGURE 3.31 
Distribution of Permafrost in the Northern Hemisphere (Pewe, 1991). · 
\'l 
Because th~ surface of thawed p~rmafrost is v~ry irregular and ~ontalns features such as small 
lctkes, bogs, pits, and caverns, it resembles karstic limestone topography (Sef. 3.3.2) and.is referred to as 
thermo karst topography. Sometimes local subsidence features are called thermokarsts. 
· 
' . . . For engineering iri tlie arctic and subarctic, it is important to know the'distribution of seasonally 
and/or permanently frozen ground, whether the frozen ground is satunited or dry frozen ground, and 
: 
·;-
··: 3:3 Geologic Processes and Limdforms. 109 
whether ice wedges and lenses exist at the site. See Pewe (1991) and Andersland and Ladanyi (2004) 
for information on the impact of permafrost on civil infrastructure construction and performance. 
3.3.6 
Wind Processes 
Wind is ~very ~ffecti~e geol~gic age~t that. produce~ 
from the Greek g:od of the winds, Aeolus) 
landforms by erosion, transportation, and deposition of finer-grained materials. Eolian landforms are 
found especially in areas of sparse vegetation such as deserts, beaches, and recent fluvial deposits. 
· It is interesting that the mechanisms of transportation and deposition by the wind are quite sim-
ilar to those in water~ Soil particles can roll and bounce along the ground surface (saltation, from Latin: 
sa/tare: "to jump"), or they can be lifted and carried in suspension by the wind. Also, the wind is a very 
effective sorting agent; that is, it readily separates the different particle sizes. For suspension to occur 
with common soil and rock minerals, the grain diameter must be less than about 0.01 mm, which is a 
silt-size particle (Chapter 2). Investigations of sand dunes, for example, have shown that the minimum 
grain size found in them is about 0.08 mm, which indicates that the smaller sizes have been carried 
away in suspension. Because the upper end of the size range that can be moved by wind forces is not 
much larger than the lower end, the sands.that are left behindan;;'often quite uniform; i.e.; they have 
about the same diameter (Sec. 2.5). 
Eolian Landforms-Erosional eolian landforms include shallow caves eroded from cliffs and 
bluffs; and blowouts where the wind has removed the topsoil and caused a small depression devoid of 
any vegetation [Fig. 3.32(a)]. Desert pavement is a term applied to a surface of small stones and gravel 
left behind when very strong winds have removed sands and <;!11 finer particles from the ground surface. 
The most prominent depositional eolian landforms are dunes, 'most commonly composed of 
sand but occasionally ofsilts.Across section of atypical sand dune is shown in Fig.3.32(b). The.wind-
ward side is relatively flat and somewhat denser, while the'l~ew~ud sid-e· is much steeper ;looser, and 
inclined at the angle of repose (Sec.12.2) or rest Figure 3.32( c )shows how both astation~ry dune and 
a migrating dune are formed. On the leeward side of each type, the d~ne will have a slope angle of 
repose of about 30° to 356• The slope is iHistable at steeper angles, and sand grains will roll down the 
slope until an angle of repose is reached that is just stable. 
Dunes ·are usually described according to their shape. The· common shapes are· (a). transverse, 
(b) longitudinal, (c) barchan, and (d) parabolic, and each is primarilY determined by the type of sand 
present, climate, local wind conditions (direction and strength), and vegetation, if any. Transverse 
dunes, showri in Fig. 3:33(a), are a seriesofparallel ridges that form perpendicular to the prevailing 
.. · :.vind direction. Transverse dunes form where the winds are relatively weak and blow from the same 
direction, vegetation· is: scarce,. and. the. sand source is nearby. and: plentiful.. In the Sahara desert, 
transverse dunes _can be huge.( -;::-100 to.200 m high, 1 to 3:krri wide, and more. thanlOO km long) . 
. . Transverse dunes aiso are common along the southern arid easter!?- shores of Lake Michigan. 
. .. 
Longitudinal dunes (also called seifs, from Arabic: ''sword"), Fig. 3.33(b), form parallel rather 
·. •. . : than transverse. to. the prevailing .wind direction arid when .the. sand supply is moderate. Typically 
they are only a few metres high, but some in the. Sahara and Arabian deserts can be 100 m high and 
••· as long as 100 km. A barchan (from an East Turkic dialect:,"moving forward, progressing") is the 
• classic crescent-shaped sand dune, as shownin fig. 3.33(c):Barchansform perpendicular to the pre-
vailing,windswhen the wind direction is coi1starit and the supply_of sand is limited. Vegetation also 
,tends to anchor,barchans at their :apexes, Parabolic .dunes [Fig. 3.33(d)] have: a shape similar to 
.:barchans, except that they form with their ·apexes in the opposite direction. They probably develop 
.from transversedunesa'fter some vegetation removal, and they are common along sandy ocean and 
:-:! 
.lakeshores~ 
.. ,::'::~. 
· ::., 
:• 
,., . 
. The major engineering problems in areas with extensive sand dunes are associated with protec-
tion of infrastructure (roads; canals, pipelines) from moving simd dunes that can at.times present seri-
ous maintenance problems. Stabilization by fences and vegetation is probably most effective. 
110 
Chapter.3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
.. 
-: 
Wind 
~ 
Vegetation 
(1.\ 
· '1 1\u, 
(.:fi,J/ 
~ 
'V 
,_., 
No 
vegetation 
'VYVV 
(a) 
Wind------+ 
(b) 
Stationary dune , 
~ ·~I;' ......... 
;....- ....... 
.... -...... ""'..... 
' 
' 
',, 
:---, .. 
' 
(c) 
· Vegetation 
.JJJ~h.JJJiJ·'iJfJJ 
;s?" 
.. 
...<:XX 'X 
', ;<' 
c 
. Migrating dune 
.~ 
~IGURE 3.32 
Eolian landforms: (a) blowout; (b) cross-section of a dune; (c) formation 
. of stationary and migrating dunes (after von Bandat, 1962). 
· 
1 
~ t 
• 
' i ' 
Sometimes older dunes become stabilized by natural vegetation, and they' make decent foundations 
for highways and small struCtures. Because the sands are loose; heavier struCtures may require special 
foundations or stabilization of the sands to prevent unwanted differential settlements. Slope stability is 
a problem only if excavations are attempted into the dunes that' are steeper thim the angle of repose . 
. 
. Loess....:.Another important eolian deposit is loess (German: toss or l0/3). According to Handy 
.. ·· i (1995), it is variously mispronounced'as "lo-ess," "less," "hiss," or "lerse," because it seems that few out-
' side Germany know how to correctly pronounce the word. As described above, fine silt-size particles 
; :are carried in suspension by the wind and then deposited. Sources of silts are river valleys, glacial out-
wash plains, 'and. siltstone. and • sandstone ·outcrops that· may be. eroded by 'tlie ·wind: As you might 
: . expect, the thickness of loess is greater nearer the source and diminishes as the distance from the source 
· increases. For example, the 'flood phiin of the lower Mississippi River has produced loess deposits as 
thick as 30 m' on' the eastern side of the valley (prevailing winds are from' the 'west); Important loess 
I deposits ate often associated with the Pleistocene (Ice Age) or postglacial activities: Major loess 
deposits in the United States include a large area of Nebraska, Kansas, Iowa, andnorthern Missouri, 
eastern Washington state mid southern Idaho; east of the Mississippi River: valley all the way from 
Minnesota down to southern Illinois, and 'down the Mississippi to the mouth of the river. Loess is not 
very common in Canada or Alaska. 
. 
. ' . . l 
• 
' 
'!; 
Transverse dune 
Barchan 
dunes 
_....,..... ___ ~~~~-
~~'!"!i!o 
·~ 
•.. 
' 
· · 3.3 Geologic Processes and Landforms 
111 
Parabolic dune 
Deflation-=~~::: 
hollows 
FIGURE 3.33 Common dune shapes: (a) transverse; (b) longitudinal; (c) barchan; (d) parabolic (after 
Chernicoff and Venkatakrishnan, 1995). 
Because they were deposited by wind rather than by water, loess deposits have a very open and 
porous structure. In addition, loess particles are lightly cemented by montmorillonite (a clay mineral-
described in'Chapter 4) or calcite. Because of its porous structure, loess tends to have a rather high 
vertical hydraulic conductivity and drainage~ and this fact, together with. the .cementation, means that 
they are able to stand on high and very steep, almost vertical, cut slopes. Loess slopes can be quite stable 
even without special erosion protection or vegetation. However, if, for example, road cuts are made on 
an inclined slope, loess is very easily eroded, the slopes flatten rapidly, and drainage ditches and chan-
nels become filled with silt. The open porous structure of loess also· can collapse when wetted and 
loaded, such as might happen with a .water tank constructed on loess. The tank would .probably be 
quite stable on shallow foundations. However; if accidental leakage of the tank should occur, the loess 
structure would collapse and detrimental settlements of the foundation of the tank would occur. 
Sometimes, such deposits are pre~ wetted to induce their collapse prior to construction to reduce post-
construction settlements. See Sec. 6.7 for additional comments about collapsible soils. 
. 
' 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
3.3.7 
Volcanic Processes 
The geologic processes that result in the extrusion of magma (molten rock -:-Probably from the mantle) 
onto the earth's surface are collectively called volcanism. Volcanism produces volcanoes and a number 
of other features and deposits that are of major concern to civil engineers working in the Pacific Rim 
and other areas with volcanic activity. 
· 
· 
112 
Chapter 3; ; . Geology, Lan~forms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
-;l 
,::: 
--;,, 
Some of the Earth's most spectacular mountains are volcanoes. Notable examples include Mount 
Fujiyama in Japan, Mts. Etna and Vesuvius in Italy, Mt. Shasta and Lassen Peak in California, Mt. Hood 
· in Oregon, Mts. St. Hele~'s, Rainier, and Baker in Washington; Mt. Garibaldi in British Columbia, and 
. · Mt. McKinley in Alaska. The Hawaiian Islands are volcanic in origin, and a couple of volcanoes on the 
big island of Hawaii are still very active. Antarctica, New Zealand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Japan, 
Alaska (particularly the Aleutians), the Cascades Mountains of the Pacific Northwest, Central America, 
and the Andes Mountains of South America all have active volcanoes. Other important vobnl.ic areas 
include Iceland (22 active), many islands in the Caribbean, the south Pacific, and Africa. 
. 
· .When volcanoes erupt, materials such as lava and pyroclastic rocks and other debris are extruded 
or ejected, and these deposits can produce landforms of interest to civil engineers. Lava is essentially 
molten rock that viscously flows from the volcano in a fissure eruption (Fig. 3.34) and produces lava 
flows on the ground surface. Good examples of the lava flow landforms can be seen, for example, all 
over the Island of Hawaii and central Oregon. 
Flow 
:i.i\r 
::[\ 
\\.\\.\\\\\\.\\ 
••••••••••••••••••••••• 
(b) 
· .. 
FIGURE 3.34 Types of volcanic eruptions and volcanoes: {a) fissure eruption; {b) cinder cone; 
(c) shield volcano; {d) composite cone; {e) caldera-Spanish for ·~boiling pot''. {after West, 1995). 
3.3 
Geologic Processes and Landforms 
113 
· Depending on the force of the eruption and other local factors, ejected lava can cool as it is pro-
pelled through the air, and collectively this pyroclastic debris is called tephra (Latin: "ashes"). Tephra 
can contain everything from large rocks (volcanic bombs), gravel-sized debris called lapilli (Italian: 
''little rocks'?), cinders and pumice to volcanic ash (sand and silt sizes). The types of volcanic eruptions 
and their resulting volcanoes (landforms) are shown in Fig; 334;. 
If the eruption produces mostly cinders, a steep-sided cinder, cone [Fig: 3.34(b)] is formed 
·because of the angle of repose (Sec. 12.2) of the pyroclastic debris. A classic Cinder cone is Sunset 
; Crater in northern Arizona. On the other hand; shield volcanoes are very broad and quite flat, because 
the lava they produce is molten and quite liquid [Fig. 3.34(c)]. Good examples of shield volcanoes are 
Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea on the Island of Hawaii. Composite cones, sometimes called stratocones, 
are formed by alternating eruptions of lava and pyroclastics [Fig. 3.34(d)]: Classic examples of com: 
posite cones are Mt. Fujiyama in Japan and the volcanoes in the Cascade Range of California, Oregon, 
and Washington.A caldera is a huge collapsed or'explcided volcanic crater [Fig. 3~34(e)]; examples 
··include Mount Katmai in Alaska and Crater Lake, Oregon.:· . . 
. 
. 
· Volcanic eruptions, besides being potentially very deadly to ~irtually all life forms, can create seri-
ous problems for civilengine'ers. Eruptions can destroy or disrupt transportation networks, clog rivers 
and lakes with volc~nic' debris and cause earthquakes, tsunamis,' landslides, ancl volcanic mudflows 
called lahars. Lahars are mixtures of pryro-clastic debris of all sizes with water that is readily obtained 
from melting snow and glaciers on the volcano or from heary rainfalL Lahars move ~ith high velocity 
down stream and river chalmels, often for surprisingly large distances, ~nd they are particularly damaging 
··•·•to human life and infrastructure. Good examples of eruptioris.producing'damagmg lahars and mudflows 
_:are those of Mt. St. Helen's in Washington, Mt: Pinatuoo· i~ the Philippines, and Nevado del Ruiz in 
Columbia. This last eruption and its resulting mudflows killed nearly 23,000 persons. 
The effect of actual and potential volcanic activity on engineering works is described by Schuster 
and Mullineaux (1991). Some problems include siting of facilities in the potential pathways of lava and 
· pyroclastic debris, and design for transient ash conditions and for flooding and sedimentation. Under~ 
ground construction in volcanic rocks may present special problems due to joints, fissures, and tubes 
that are common in lava flows. . 
; 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
This completes our discus~ion :of surface· geologic· processes. The remainder of. this sectio~ 
describes subsurface groundwater, tectonic, and plutonic processes. and their influence on civil 
engineering construction. 
' 
3.3.8 · Groundwater Processes 
As you will learn during your study of geotechnical engineering, water is a very important constituent 
of naturally occur-ring soils and rocks, and it is involved in virtually all geotechnical engineering and 
construction problems. In fact, water is so important in geotechnical engineering that we devote two 
. entire chapters of this book to its various aspects. For purposes of the present chapter, you just need to 
know that in soils and porous rocks such as.sandstones, groundwater flows in the pores between the 
mineral grains; in other rock types, flow is primarily through joints and fissures. 
· 
Groundwater processes of importance to civil engineers include dissolution of soluble rocks 
and sapping and erosion (piping) that occur as groundwater exits from springs, glaciers, and slopes. 
Soluble.rocks such as limestone, dolomite, gypsum, calcareous sandstones, and salt are subject to dis~ 
solution. Karst and karstic features are described in Sec. 3.3.2.As with karst, the design arid construc-
tion of foundations on soluble rocks is difficult because of the highly variable subsurface and bedrock 
conditions. In projects in regions with soliible rocks; designers imd contractors must have a thorough 
knowledge of the subsurface geology, including the bedrock profile and the distribution and thickness 
of the overlying soils. Because weathering·and dissolution tend to develop along joints and bedding 
planes, information on these features should also be determined. The groundwater. conditions and 
114 
Chapter 3 ;·, Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
:' their variability as.well as any changes likely to be caused by .the construction should also be consid-
. ered. See James (1992) for practical solutions to the problems of soluble rocks.· 
. . . Two other groundwater processes that also can cause local engineering problems are sapping 
and piping that occur as groundwater exits from springs, glaciers, and slopes.· Sapping refers to the 
process of erosion of softer materials at the base of a cliff; causing the breaking away' of blocks of rock 
at the top of th'e cliff, while piping generally refers to the movement of finer. soil particles such as sands 
·and .silts. (Piping is also discussed in Chapter 7.) Slope instability, loss of foundation support, and 
.encroachment and potential flooding are the important engineeri~g problems associated with sapping 
and piping~ 
· 
., 
; 
:.(. 
3.3.9 
Tectonic Processes 
.. Tectonic pr~cesses, ~riginating in th~ earth's crust~nd shail~~ mantle, have important 'consequences, 
'. especi<illy in seismic~lly active areas,' and they produce 'a number of hln.dforms that ft'ave. important 
. engineering implications. Diastrpphism, sometimes called 'tectonism,n!fers' to verylarge:scale crustal 
··deformations and mountain building resulting from plate tectonic activity. Another tech tonic process is 
. ,, . crustal rebound due to the retreat of the large continental glacie~s; described .in Sec. 3.3.5 and by 
·NiChols ~ndCollins (1991). ·, ···· 
. · · 
: · . 
· · 
·. · · 
·. 
· · · 
.: : 
. Geologic structure is often a dominant factor in the .development of landforms, and a number 
of. important topographic fe'atures are associated with joints, folds, and faults are described in 
Sec. 3.2.4 on rock structure. Foldstructliressuch as domes, arches, basins,synct[nes, and anticlines 
ail may produce distinctive landscapes, and several of these are shown in Fig. 3.35·. A well-known 
' 
'. 
' 
';'"••'. 
·····" 
• 
'• 
·•.•• :_ 
' 
;,1 
•• 
' 
, 
. 
,· •• 
" 
-
' 
•" 
,_.,_ 
.. ,.' 
. ' ~ 
•·t 
FIGURE 3.35 
Geologic structures: (a) folds; (b) domes; (c).fault blocks; and (d) complex structures (after·· 
Thornbury, 1954). 
· 
·. , :. 
,;3.3 ·Ge-ologic Processes and Landforms 
115 
example of a dome with a very old crystalline· rock core is the Black Hills formation of South 
Dakota. Good examples of folding with anticlines and synclines are the Appalachian Mountains of 
the eastern United States. 
· ·· · 
· 
A~ you might expect,faults also produce distinctive landforms and topographic features. When a 
normal or thrust fault [Fig. 3.2(a) and (b)] extends. to the ground surface, a fault scarp is produced 
(Fig. 3.36). Its height depends, of course, on the amount of displacement, but its appearance today 
depends on how recently the faulting occurred. Other features that. are often evidence of previous 
faulting include stream offsets, lines of springs, and sag ponds and small lakes that indicate impounded 
drainage along a fault. Probably the best-known examples of sag ponds are found along the· San 
Andreas Fault in California. 
, 
,,/· 
' 
' ' ' ' 
' 
' 
'' 
'· 
' . 
' 
~/' < 
'1_ ' 
··.· .. :."":.·.· "' .. :: .... 
(c)·. 
' ' 
,),'·' 
',-. 
:.} 
,'1 
'·, 
'' 
j<.' 
. 
. ' 
FIGURE 3.36 , F~ult scarp: 
(a) b-efore displacement; (b) after 
· displacement; (c) after erosion 
of the fault scarp (after Emmons 
et al., 1955). 
', 
116 
Chapter 3 • . ·Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
I lVI~~. 
-
-'-'-
' ~. i 
::. 
FIGURE 3.37 
Block faulting with horsts and grabbens (West, 1995). 
:,, .: 
When block faulting occurs, airing narrow blockof the earth's ~rust is either uplifted or 
depressed between two faults along itssides. The higher block is termed a horst (German: "refuge") 
and the lower block a graben (German: "ditch".or "trench"), as shown iri Fig. 3.37; they occurin almost 
all intensely faulted regions. Death Valley in southern California, for example, has many such features. 
If block faulting occurs on a very large scale, block-faulted mountains are produced; these are very 
common in the Great Basin area of Nevada 'and Utah. 
. 
-
. 
·· 
In seismically active areas the location of faults is important-for two reasons. One is that, if at 
all possible, you want to avoid locating a structure or facility across a potentially active fault. The other 
is that faults that have moved in recent geologic time' are useful indicators of possible future seismic 
activity. Thus for the seismic design of civil engineering structures, the distance of a facility from a 
potentially aCtive fault, the bedrock. and surficial geology between the fault and the facility, and the 
return period of the design earthquake are·all usedto estimate the intensity of shakingdue to an 
earthquake. These design considerations· are even more critical for so-called lifeline facilities-(e.g., hos-
pitals) that are potentially important during earthquakes, and for long-lifespan facilities such as waste 
repositories and nuclear power plants. Kramer (1996) is a good reference on ali aspects of geotechnical 
earthquake engineering. 
· 
. ·._·-
; 
· · . 
· · 
.. · . · 
-
.· 
If you expect to practice in earthqmtke. country, you will' need to know something about the 
regional tectonics,local ground motions and the potential for ground failure, as well as the potential for 
other seismically induced problems such as landslides, liquefaction (Chapter 7), and subsidence. See 
Bonilla (1991) for a description of the effects of faulting and'eiuth_quakes on dams, power plants, 
·pipelines, and other civil engineering projects. 
3.3.10 PlutoniC Processes 
~ 
' . 
. . 
Subsurface volcanic activity or plutonism occurs when mag~a is intr~ded into older overlying rocks. 
Although plutonism produces a number of interesting features '(Fig. 3.38), most of them appear at the 
surface only after the overlying rocks are removed by erosion or other geologic processes. Plutonic 
rocks and structures may be locally important in the ·construction of tunnels and underground power-
houses. Plutonic activity niay also result in hydrothermal alteration of adjacent rocks and sediments . 
. Hot ascendhig sohitions may alter the minerals in the original rock so that a completely different rock 
.. results. Hydrothermal alteration can be found iriareas of past intrusive activity or of contemporary vol-
.canism: .Hydrothermally altered rocks are more erodible, more variable, and weaker Hiim unaltered 
.·rocks and thus are poorer foundation and construction materials~ ' 
. 
· ' '3.4 .: Sources of Geologic Information 
117 
>I 
•· FIGURE 3.38 · Plutonic forms (after Krinine and Judd, 1957): 
3.4 
SOURCES. OF GEOLOGIC INFORMATION 
Geotechnical engineers use several sources to obtain the geologic information they need in practice. 
Sometimes this information is available in the context of geographic information systems (GIS), 
· topographic, geologic, and agricultural maps, and aerial photographs and satellite imagery. In addi-
tion, valuable information can be obtained from water-well and other subsurface drill logs, reports 
and papers published by different governmental agencies, and articles in scientific and engineering 
journals: 
· 
. 
To start with, an excellent overall description of the geology and soil deposits of North America 
has been prepared by Woods, Miles, and Lovell (1962). They also discuss the various types of geo-
. · 
logic and pedologic maps as well as the usefulness of aerial photographs. West (1995) has a detailed 
description of topographic and geologic maps, including valuable information about· their use in 
engineering practice. Goodman (1993) gives information on how geologic maps and aerial pho-
tographs can be obtained. An excellent' compendium of similar information for Canada is given in 
'··the Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual(Canadian Geotechnical Society, 2006). The various 
state· geological surveys are also . an e~cellent source of detailed· information; You: are • probably 
. ,.,,familiar with topographic maps and how they give you both the geographic location and the eleva-
' tion of a site;:With some.experience, you can obtain certain surficial geologic information from 
topographic maps. The U.S: Geological Survey (USGS) produces 7.5 min quadrangle maps at a scale 
' ' 
of 1:24,000of most of the United States. Topographic maps of all of Canada are available at various 
; scales from the Map Office of the Department of Energy, Mines, and Resources (EMR) in Ottawa. 
'· · · · Maps of local areas are also available from various provincial map agencies, departments of natural 
resources, etc. 
Classic geologic maps show the type of rock or rock formation ori the bedrock surface as if the 
surface soils and vegetation were renioved. Thick overburden deposits are usually also indicated. 
Such maps provide very useful information, especially to engineering geologists, about' the type and 
age of the bedrock and general rock properties. They are available from the USGS, various state 
118 
Chapter 3, · , Geology, Landforms/and the Origin of Geomaterials 
geological surveys and departments of natural resources, the Geological Survey of Canada, and a 
· number of provincial agencies and departments (Canadian Geotechnical Society, 2006). 
Agricultural soil maps and soil surveys (maps) are prepared by soil scientists and agronomists 
primarily for agricult~ral purposes and land use planning; thus th~y concehtrate onthe characteristics 
of the topmost 1 m 
of the soil surface. Maps are available in the United States generally by county and 
. in Canada by agricultural district. Recent maps also contain some general engineering information 
such as the soii's suitaoility for siting homes, septic systems, roads, andhindfills. These maps are defi-
nitely worth consulting if. y~u have a project in a new a~ea. They are' prepared and sold by the Soil 
ConserVation· Service (ni:nv known as. the Natural· Resources Conservati6n: Servfce) -~f the U.S. 
Department'of AgriCulture; in Oinada, they are available from the various provincial agricultural 
. departments. ·· 
·· 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
· · · · . ~ · · 
· 
,\ 
:. o'ne of the most useful sources of geolo.gic information is aerial phbtographs. They are typi-
:\:ally about230~mm X230-mm panchroniatic-(black and white)photogr-aphs, used either
1aS a pho-
.. tomosaiC co_vering a liuge area or, more c~mmonly/as s.tereo.pairs. In the' latter. case, with a 60% 
overlap in the line of flight and15% side overlaps, adjacent photo pairs can beviewed stereoscopi-
.• caily, yielding a three-dimensional image tO" aid in geologic iriterpretation.Airphotos show not only 
geographic details; but also the tones (the shades of gray), textures, and patterns of the groundsur-
face, which we· can' use to identify, for example, landforms, soil types; rock. outcrops, external and 
subsurface drainage patterns, seepage :zones, •organic deposits, aggregate sources, andJandslides. 
Understanding of airphoto interpretation and photogeologyis a very valuable tool for a geotechni-
cal engineer. · 
· 
. 
.· 
. 
· · · 
· 
Traditional air photos covering most of the agricultural United States are available froni the 
USDA; in the American west, the U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and Bureau of 
Land Management are good source's of airphotos. The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric 
, Administration has photos of the U.S. coastlines.. . 
·· ·. 
· ·· · 
·. 
In recent y~ars, color photographs and color infrared (IR) imagery have become available, as 
.have various wave bands (red, green, and. two IR bands). ofimagery from satellites (LANDSAT). 
:, ·. 
These new interpretive tools have greatly expanded,the quantity and quality of information available 
to geotechniCal engineers. LANDSAT:informationis available fromthe USGS EROS Data Center. In 
Canada, LANDSAT imagery is available from the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing in Ottawa and 
· . : .., , at various regional centers located across the country.: 
• • · 
Most parts of the. earth are:now available through Google Earth and the USA National Atlas 
. Online (http://www.usatlas2000.com), although photo coverage and resolution can vary, even over 
short distances. 
· 
· 
· ·. 
· · 
In both the United States and Canada;· water-well logs are often available at state and provincial 
departments ofnatural resmirces; environmental protection, water resources, or similar agencies. Well 
. •:."". :logs can provide much useful information, such as depths to the water table and bedrock; as well as soil 
, · <:and rock types. Sometime's oil and gas logs are also available, although these tend to. be proprietary-
,the property ofthe.company, owning the drilling rights. Depending on the site and the.engineering 
, . : , · •. · problem, you rnay also want to obtain such things as flood-plain maps, hydrologic information, hydro-
graphic charts, land use and planning surveys and· maps, climate and' weather records, surface and 
. • underground mining reports, and local seismicity records.As you will see in your study of geotechnical 
: ~ ; engineering, geotechnical engineers need a wide variety of information and resources to assist them in 
,.,. , ;.project reconnaissance; planning, design, construction, and occasionally .. even the maintenance ofall 
types of Civil works. 
· 
We have emphasized throughout this chapterjust how important the knowledge of the geology 
.of a project site is to the successful practice of geotechniCal engineering. Knowing where to obtain that 
.. ·: . 
geologic information is a key first step in this process. 
\ 
~ .. ' 
'. ~ 
,-lo' 
,,,',·,.·,! 
PROBLEMS 
3.1 
Problems 
119 
, ' 
~' . ' 
' , ' 
Go online and find one or more-geotechnical and geologic maps that contains your university or home 
town. Determine from this reference as much geologic and geotechnical information as you can. Comment 
on.possible geotechnical problenis likely. to occur in your area during the constrilction of (a) sewer lines, 
. (b) streets and roads, and (c) low-rise commercial buildings. (d) Find a copy of Woods, Miles and Lovell 
(1962) and compare infonnation from that reference with what you fol.uid online. 
. . 
3.2 Use the web to find the USGS or GSC topographic niap that contains your u~iv~rsity or home-town loca-
tion. Write a brief des-cription of the location with sufficient information so that' another engineer could eas-
ily locate the same map. · 
· ; 
•· 
' 
.. ·. 
· 
·.· · : . . . ·. ' . 
'·· .. ·" 
· 
3.3 Find ge~logic maps of your state or province that include the locality of your university or home town. List 
the bedrock' type and units and any other pertinent geologic information about your area. . . 
3.4. ri~es yo~r state or p~ovince require that ~11 water:well drillers record the welll~gs with an appropriate ~gency? 
If so, what is the name of that agency? Find some well logs near your home and report the information. How is 
this likely to be useful in practice?.· 
· · 
· · 
' 
· · · 
· · 
· 
· 
' 
3.5 ·Use Goo'gle Earth to' locate yciu~ university or h~me town: List as: many' geologic features as you can that can 
be seen from the air photos. Comment on the implications of these features for infrastructure construction. 
Locate the mo~t recent USDA or CDA agricultural soil map or soil survey for your home county or district. 
Does the report give any useful engineering information? If so, comment on how this information would be 
useful for various types of construction. 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
The journal Environmenal & Engineering Geos~ience, formerly the Bulletin of the Association of Engineering 
Geologists, occasionally publishes articles as part of its "Geology of Cities" series, which describes the geology 
of the major cities of the world. Find the article for one of these cities and summarize its geology and likely 
construction problems for (a) urban housing development, (b) tunnels for a mass-transit system, (c) construc-
tion of a major wastewater treatment plant, and (d) expansion' of either the local airport or harbor. 
Review the geologic processes described in this chapter. Select two or three that are fairly ·common in the 
vicinity of your university or home town. For each process, list (a) the common landforms produced, 
(b) important soils or rock types produced, (c) geologic hazards, if any, associated with each, and (d) engi-
neering problems that may be caused by these hazards .. 
Search the library for books and manuals on air photo interpretation. Use a consistent bibliographic citation 
format, and prepare a list of what you find. Purdue and Cornell Universities have been leaders in the start of 
air photo interpretation as early as the 1940s. These would be good places to direct a web search to find 
materials on this topic. Select one of the references and explore the use of API in determining soil types 
through landform identification. Prepare a one page summary of this information. 
3.10 Get online and use the keywords geology and engineering to open a search. Refine your search as necessary. 
Prepare a list of websites and links related to geotechnical engineering. 
· 
3.11 The mission of the National Earthquake Information Center (NEIC) is to determine rapidly the location and 
size of all destructive earthquakes worldwide and to immediately' disseminate this information to concerned 
national and international agencies, scientists, and the general public. The NEIC/WDC for Seismology com-
piles and maintains an extensive, global seismic database on earthquake parameters and their effects. Using 
links available at the NEIC website http://earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/neic/, find the 10 largest magnitude 
earthquakes that have occurred in( a) the past week, (b) the previous month, and (c) so far this year. (After 
S. L. Kramer.) 
· 
3.12 For the the earthquakes you located in Problem 3.11, indicate (a) which earthquake you would expect to have 
produced the strongest ground shaking (on land), and (b) which one you would expect to have produced the 
greatest financial loss. Explain why you selected those earthquakes. (After S. L. Kramer.) 
' 
3.13 Name the appropriate landform or soil feature: 
(a) where fish keep their money' 
(b) where you go for a drink 
(c) something a tailor uses ... ·. 
(d) what a weather forecaster might say 
120 
Chapter 3 
Geology, Landforms, and the Origin of Geomaterials 
(e) what you might use when it's hot 
(t) what you use for catching fish 
(g) . part of a house 
(h) ·where Mr. Spock ("Live long and prosped")comes from 
· (i) what tool a mechanic uses (this is a real stretch). ' 
3.14 Anti61inesare upfolds a~d syncline~ are dowrifolds. Neverthel~ss, one often finds synclinal ridges and anti-
clinal valleys. Explai~ how each of these could be formed. 
' 
' 
· 
· 
3.15 The St. Lawrence River carries much more water to the sea thim the Colorado River. Using your knowledge 
of delta deposition, give two reasons why· the St. Lawrence ends in an almost unsediment<i:d estuary whereas 
the Colorado has been building a huge delta for thousands of years.' 
· 
3.16 If you were a ~onservation engineer and had to d~sign a plan for making soil form as quickly as possible on 
a fresh broken rock rubble left by construction or mining operations, ~hat would you do (without importing 
any soil from elsewhere)? 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
· · 
· 
3.17 E~gin~ers have made artificial cut-offs (see Fig. P3.17) in the lower Mississippi River and other meandering 
rivers. Considering the nature of meandering streams, can you suggest reasons for undertaking these projects? 
FIGURE P3.17 
3.18 A rainwater catch basin is to be built in loess terrain. The basin, which will be asphalt lined; will serve as tem-
porary storage of rainwater from storm sewers before the water flows into the wastewater treatment plant. 
What major considerations regarding the geotechnical performance of the loess do you have .to make: 
(a) during the construction of the basin? 
(b) during operation of the basin? 
Problems 
121 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE P3.19 
3.19 You have a choice between two building sites on a natural slope, both underlain by a weak shale. At one site, 
the beds dip into the hill [Fig. P3.19(a)]; at the other, the beds dip parallel to the slope [Fig. 3.19(b)J. Which 
do Y,ou prefer and why? What precautions will you take to ensure that the slope will not become unstable? 
3.20 Predict the probable sequence of events that would follow the building of a dam on a river that has an ample 
supply of sediment and, prior to the dam installation, has achieved an equilibria~ concave-upward shape. 
3.21 Why do dune sands tend to vary so little in grain size? Why are they generally free of clay? 
3.22 You are assigned to perform a site investigation of a terminal moraine. What characteristics of topography or 
till composition would you use to distinguish it from a ground moraine on the one hand, and outwash on the 
other? How might you distinguish it from an esker? 
3.23 What, if any, differences do you expect to find in the topography and soils of kames versus kame terraces? In 
other words, how might their deposition modes affect their characteristics? 
, 
3.24 ·A fjord basin typically has a characteristic rise or sill at its mouth, as shown in Fig. P3.24. Given what you 
know about their geologic origin, explain how such a sill develops.·, : · 
... --- -- -~-- ------ ------ ------ -----
-------- -.--- -,-·- -.-:--- :._----:--- -·--- -.-
.,. _______________________________ _ 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
-------------------------------
- - -:_-_-_-Fiord.:-_:_-:-_;__--~~.:.--_--:-~_-_---_-
< ·~.' 
C H ·A P T- E R 
4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock 
Structures, and Rock 
C:lass.ltication-
·.,} 
·:} 
"::, 
fo,< 
·:,~ 
4>1' 
INTRODUCTION 
; f 
In Chapter 3; we described 'the origin of geomaterials and the landforms where those materials are 
commonly found. We mentioned that weathering' of. rocks and other geologic processes results in 
certain rock structures and discontinuities as well as a wide variety of different soil types. In this 
chapter, we briefly describe the products of weathering and the important clay minerals that result, 
how those minerals are-identified;:and how they interact with water as well as with-each other. We 
also describe some of the iatest thinkiiigabo~t soil fab~ic aiidstructlire_:concepts fundamental to a 
good understanding of the_behavio_r_of both fine~ grained ~al'Id gr~:milarsoils,. 
___ ---
_--
In this chapte_r, we also briefly discuss soil profiles and hol'izons; som.:e special soil deposits that are 
of interest to geotechnical engineers, and transitional or intermediate geomaierials .:_ thos~. materials 
that are neit}ler -soii nor hard rock~ We conclude with a discussion of the properties, macrostructure, and 
classification of rock masses. 
' ' ' 
: ,-· ' ·-
. <' 
' 
< 
• 
' 
• -
' 
Three new symbols are introduced in thischapter.' 
Symbol 
A 
em ax 
emin 
Dimension· 
Unit 
Definition 
Activity- Eq. (4.1) 
Maximum void ratio 
Minimum void ratio 
4.2 
PRODUCTS OF WEATHERING 
122 
· In Sec. 3.3.2, we defined weathering as the alteration of the composition or structure or' rocks because 
of physical, chemical, or biological processes. Weathering produces all types of soils (called residual 
soils or residuum). The mechanical disintegration of rocks by physical weathering tends to produce 
4.3 -Clay Minerals 
123 
coarser-grained soils, ranging in size from boulders and cobbles down to gravel, sands, and even silts. 
Chemical weathering, on the other hand, tends to produce various types of clay minerals. For exam-
ple, the hydrolysis of feldspar and mica (biotite) !llinerals in granitic rocks produces the Clay mineral 
kaolinite, an importimt constituent offine-grained soils. Other types of clay minerals are produced 
from various rock-forming minerals that are subjected to different chemical, climatic; and drain.age 
conditions. Clay minerals are discussed in detail in Sec. 4.3. __ 
· ·_ 
'. 
In Sec. 2.4, we mentioned that the term clay may refer both to a type of s"oil and to specific clay 
minerals. Usually, in civil engineering, when we say "clay" we mean a soil that contains some clay 
minerals along with other mineral constituents, is "cohesive" and has plasticity at appropriate water 
contents, and hardens when dried. But, as Hatheway (2000) has noted, using the word "clay" without 
a qualifier or modifier is ambiguous and confusing, and may lead to serious misunderstandings. 
As we show in the next section, day minerals are-very sinall, generally crystalline particles that 
are very active electrochemically. Thus the presence- of even <l small amount of clay minerals can 
markedly affect the engineering properties of a soil mass. As the amount of clay increases, the behav-
ior of the soil is increasingly goveriied by the properties -of the clay. When the clay content is about 
25% to 35%, the coarser grains (silts, sands, or gravels) are essentially floating in a clay matrix and have 
little effect on th(!. s_oil's engineering behavjor. Another characteristic of clay soils is that water 
markedly affects their behavior, but the grain size distributionhasrelatively little influence. 
In contrast, certain characteristics of granular soils, such-as the' grain size distribution and the 
grain shape, strongly affect their engineering behavior, but'the presence of water, with a few important 
exceptions, has relatively little effect. · 
. 
You may recall from Sec: 2.4 that silts are both granular and fine grained. Their individual grains, 
like those of clays, are invisible to the naked eye, but silts an; noncohesive and non plastic. Water affects 
their behavior-'-' they are dilatant--.:yet they have little or no plasticity (PI = 0), and their strengths, 
like those of sands, are essentially independent of water content. Rock flour is. another example of a 
very fine-grained cohesionless s~il.. • 
. . . . 
' 
' . . . 
. 
. 
This might be a good time to go back to Sec. 2.4 and quickly review the discussion on the influence 
of water on the behavior of soils. 
4.3 
CLAY MINERALS 
Clay minerals are crystalline substances produced by chemical ~eathering of certain rock-forming 
· _ minerals. Chemically, they are hydrous aluminum silicates plus other metallic ions, and they belong to 
the class of minerals called phyllosilicates. Their crystals are colloidal sized (diameter less than 1 11-m) 
·.andean be seen only with an electron microscope. They look like tiny plates or flakes, and from X-ray 
·;.diffraction studies mineralologists have determined that these flakes consist of many crystal sheets that 
have a repeating atomic structure. In fact, there are only two fundamental crystal sheets, the tetrahedral 
. · or silica sheet and the octahedral' or alumina sheet. Jhe. particular ways in which these sheets are 
· stacked together, with different bonding and different metallic ions in the crystal lattice, characterize 
. the various clay minerals .. 
The tetrahedral sheet is basically a combination of silica tetrahedral units, consisting of four oxy-
, gen atoms atthe corners, surrounding a single silicon atom [Fig. 4.1(a)]; Figure 4.1(b) shows how the 
. · oxygen atoms at the base of each tetrahedron are combined to form a sheet structure in .which all the 
oxygens at the base of each tetrahedron are in one plane and the apexes of the tetrahedra all point in 
the same direction. A common schematic representation of the tetrahedral sheet is shown in Fig. 4.1( c). 
A top view of the tetrahedral (silica) sheet [Fig. 4.1(d)] illustrates how, the oxygen atoms at the base of 
each tetrahedron belong to two tetrahedrons and how adjacent silicon· atoms are bonded. Note the 
· h~xagonal "holes" in the sheet. 
· 
124 
Chapter 4 :. Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
. , .. (a) 
, (b) 
0 and 1:} = Oxygens · 
· i · ·o and e = Silicons:. · 
,_ 
-·,_ . 
. i· ,".' 
0 
· Oxygens in plane above silicons 
: 
silicons · 
'f· i 
• 
@ ·: · • · · Oxygens linked to form network 
. 
~ ; 
Outline of bases of silica tetrahedra. 
-- •' .. Outline of hexagonal silica network (two 
, . , 
, dimensional); also indicates bonds from 
(d) 
, silicons to,oxygens in lower plane (fourth 
bond from each silicon is perpendicular to 
plane of paper) · · · '' 
· · · 
· 
: ) 
~ ,, 
FIGURE 4.1 
(a) Single silica tetrahedron (after Grim, 1959). (b) Isometric view of the 
tetrahedral or silica sheet (after Grim, 1959). (c) Schematic representation of the silica 
sheet (after Lambe, 1953). (d) Top view of the silica sheet (after Warshaw and Roy, 1961). 
:: 
;. 
; The octahedral sheet is basically a combination· of octahedral units consisting of six oxygens or 
hydroxyls enclosing an aluminum, magnesium, .iron, or other metallic atom: A single octahedron is 
shown in Fig. 4.2(a), while Fig. 4.2(b).shows how the'octahedrons combine to form a sheet structure. 
The rows of oxygens or hydroxyls in the sheet are in two planes. Figure 4.2(c) is a schematic represen-
tation of the octahedral sheet. For a top view of the octahedral sheet; showing how the different atoms 
are shared and bonded, see Fig. 4.2( d) .• 
Substitution of different cations in the octahedral sheet is quite common and results in different 
clay minerals. Since the substituted ions are approximately the same physical size, this substitution is 
called isomorphous. Sometimes not all the octahedrons contain a cation, which results in a somewhat 
·. different crystalline structure with slightly different physical properties and a differe'nt clay mineral. 
' For example, if all the anions of the octahedral 'sheet are hydroxyls and two-thirds of the cation posi-
tions are filled with aluminum, then the mineral is called gibbsite. If magnesium is substituted for the 
; ; 
aluminum and it fills all the cation positions, then,the mineral is called brucite.' i: 
' . 
") 
All clay minerals consist of the two basic .sheets, tetrahedral and octahedral; that are stacked 
. ' together in certain unique ways and have certain cations present. The:variations in the basic sheet 
structures make up the dozens of clay minerals that have been identified. For engineering purposes it 
is usually sufficient to describe only a few of the more common clay minerals found in clay soils. 
4.3 
Clay Minerals 
125 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
0 and () = Hydroxyls or e Aluminums, magnesiums, etc. 
oxygens 
(d) 
tQl Hydroxyls in upper plane 
• Aluminums 
0 Vacant octah~dral positions . 
(would be filled in brucite layer) 
© Hydroxyls in lower plane 
Outline of those faces of 
--- alumina octahedra· parallel 
to lower plane of hydroxyls 
Outline of those faces of •. 
----- vacant octahedra parallel 
to lower plane of hydroxyls 
Bonds from aluminums to 
--- hydroxyls (6 from each 
aluminum) · 
FIGURE 4.2 (a) Single aluminum (or magnesium) octahedron (after Grim, 1959). (b) Isometric view of the 
octahedral sheet (after Grim, 1959). (c) Schematic representation of the octahedral or alumina (or magnesia) 
sheet (after Lambe, 1953). (d) Top_view of the octahedral sheet (after Warshaw and Roy, 1961): 
4.3.1 The 1:1 Clay Minerals 
The kaolinite-serpentine 'group con fain's at least 13 diff~rent min-
~ 
~ 
erals, of which kaolinite is the most important. The minerals in 
I AI 
I 
this group consist of repeating lay~rs or stacks of one tetrahedral 
/
J--8-i -------\\ 
(silica) sheet and one octahedral (alumina or gibbsite) sheet, and 
L-:-;:::============·::;--:: 
thus they are called 1:1 clay minerals (Fig. 4.3). The sheets are 
·. I AI 
I :E . 
held together i~ such a way that the oxygen atoms at the tips of 
/ 
\ 
0:72 n_ m, the silica sheet and one layer of oxygens of the octahedral sheet 
· L.--;::S=i=·=·=======::::;--
are shared and form asingle 1:1 layer, as shown in Fig. 4.4. This 
· I AI 
I 
· ' basic layer is about 0.72 nm thick arid extends indefinitely in the 
/1-• -S-i ____ _;__;_-\\ 
<?ther two directions. A kaolinite crystal, then, consists of a stack 
L.-~:====~===~...::.. 
of several layers of the basic 0.72-nm layer. Successive layers of 
' c: 
T 
J 
. the basic layer are held tog~ther by hydrogen bonds between the 
: 
hydroxyls of the octahedral sheet and the oxygens of the tetrahe-
1 
dral sheet. Since the hydrogen bond is very strong, it prevents 
hydration and allows the layers to stack up to make a rather large 
·. crystal. A typical kaolin cryst~l can be 70 to 100 layers thick. 
. Figure 4.5 is a scanning el<~ctron micrograph (SEM) of kaolinite. 
FIGURE 4.3 
Schematic diagram 
of the structure of kaolinite 
(after Lambe, 1953). 
126 
Chapter4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
FIGURE 4.4 .·Atomic structure of kaolinite (after Grim; 1959). 
:, ,' 
FIGURE 4.5 
Scanning electron : 
micrograph of a well-crystallized 
kaolinite from Georgia. The 
· 
lengthofthe light bar' is 5 J.Lm 
(photograph by R. D. Holtz). 
0 Oxygens 
@ Hydroxyls 
·• Aluminums 
, eOSilicons 
Kaolinite results from the w~athering (hydrolysis and acid leaching) of feldspa~ and mica (biotite) 
. in granitic rocks. According to Mitchell and Soga' (2005), kaolinites tend to develop in areas having rela-
. tively high precipitation but good drainage that enables the leaching of Mg, Ca, and Fe cations. In these 
areas, alumina is abundant and silica is scarce; and the. pH and concentration of electrolytes are relatively 
low. Kaolinite is the primary constituent of china clay, and in fact the name kaolin comes from a hill in 
Jiangsi Province of China called "Kao-ling" which means "high peak" or "high hill." Kaolinite is also used 
• • in the paper, paint,. and pharmaceutical industries.· For. example, as a pharmaceutical it is used in 
Kaapectateand Rolaids. It also is supposed to have health and curative benefits. · 
Another 1:1 mineral that is occasionally iniportant·in practice is halloysite. Halloysites are formed 
by the leaching of feldspar by sulfuric acid, a condition common in areas with volcanic parent materials 
and high'rainfall (Mitchell imd so'ga, 2005). They differ from kaolinite i~ that when they forffi, they some-
how become hydrated between layers, distortingthe crystal lattice so that the mineral has a tubular shape 
(Fig. 4.6).·The water can easily be driven out by h~ating or even air drying, so that the tubes unroll and 
~1I
J
;.: ' 
4.3 
Clay Minerals 
127 
FIGURE 4.6 . Scanning electron 
micrograph of halloysite from 
Colorado. The length of the 
\light bar is 5 ~m (photograph 
by R. o: Holtz). 
· 
. 
-
. 
t 
look like ordinary kaolinit~.1he· proce1s is irreversibl~; halloysite will not rehydmte and form into rolls if · · 
water is added later.This characteristic occasionally has import~nt consequences in civil engineering prac-
tice. Classification and compa,ction test~ (see Chapter 5) on air- or'oven-dried samples can give markedly 
different results than tests on samples at theirnatural water content.If the soil will not be dried in the 
field, it is ve~ important fo~ .valid results that laboratory t~sts be carried out at the field water contents. 
4.3.2 
The 2:1 Clay Minerals 
The 2:1 minerals are a large group; more than 40 have been identified. In addition to the clay minerals, 
probably the best-known members of this group are talc and the two micas, biotite and muscovite. In 
all cases these minerals are ~om posed of two tetrah.edralor silica sheets arid one octahedral or alumina 
(gibbsite) sheet in between (Fig. 4.7). There are three 2:1 subgroup~ that include fairly to very common 
clay minerals with important ·engineering· characteristics .. One 2:1 subgroup is the smectites, and its 
most important arid very common member is montmorillonite (named after the village in France, 
nH20 layers and· 
exchangeable cations 
I 
I 
I . 
. 
~ 
~-
. I 
I ! 
FIGURE 4.7 
Schematic diagram 
; of the structure of montmoril-
lonite (after Lambe, 1953). 
128 
Chapter 4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
Q Oxygens @ Hydroxyls 
• 
Aluminum, iron, magnesium 
0 and e Silicon, occasionally aluminum 
FIGURE 4.8 Atomic structure of montmorillonite (after Grim, 1959). 
Montmorillon, where the mineral was first discovered). In montmorillonite, the tips of the tetrahedra 
share oxygens and hydroxyls with the octahedral sheet to form a single layer, as shown in Fig. 4.8. The 
. thickness of each 2:Uayer is about 0.96 nm, and as in kaolinite the layers extend indefinitelyin the 
other two directions. The bonding (by van der Waals' forces) between the tops of the silica sheets is 
weak (compared, for example, to the hydrogen bonds in kaolinite), and there is a net negative charge 
deficiency in the octahedral sheet. Water and exchangeable ions can readily enter and separate the 
basic layers, as shown schematically in Fig. 4.7:Thus;montmorillonite crystals can be very small 
(Fig. 4.9), yet they have a very strong attraction for water. Soils containing montmorillonite are very 
susceptible to swelling as their water content changes (increases), and the swelling pressures devel-
oped can easily damage light structures and highway. pavements. 
,·.I·, 
·· , . 43 .. Clay Minerals 
129 
FIGURE 4.9 Scanning electron 
micrograph of Na-montmorillonite 
from Wyoming. The length of the 
light bar is 5 J.Lm (photograph by 
R. D. Holtz). 
According to Mitchell and Soga (2005), smectites tend to form where silica is abundant, the pH 
and electrolyte cmitenfare high, and where there are more Mg++ and ca++ than Na+ and K+ ions. Basic 
igneous rocks such as gabbro and basalt and volcanic ash can produce smectitesin arid or semi-arid 
areas where evaporation exceeds precipitation and there is poor leaching. 
Bentonite is a common name for clays and soft rocks that. contain significant amounts of mont-
morillonite. and other smectite minerals. Bentonite is produced by the chemical alteration of volcanic 
ash. Because of its swelling characteristics, it is used in geotechnical practice as a drilling fluid or "mud" 
to stabilize boreholes and slurry trenches, to seal boreholes, and to reduce the flow rates through 
porous soils. For example, when compacted clay liners are used in modern landfill construction, natural 
clays are often modified with bentonite to reduce their hydraulic conductivity (Chapter 7). Bentonite 
(montmorillonite) is also the primary constituent in kitty litter, and it has many important industrial 
and pharmaceutical applications. It is even used in chocolate bars! • 
· 
Illite, discovered and named by Professor R. E. Grim of the University of Illinois, is another . 
important constituent of clayey soils. It also has a 2:1 structure like that of montmorillonite, but its 
interlayers are bonded together with a potassium ion. Remember the hexagonal hole in the silica sheet 
[Fig. 4.1(d)]? The diameter of this "hole" is almost exactly that of a potassium atom, so that when the 
K+ atom just fills the hexagonal hole, it rather strongly bonds the layers together (Fig. 4:10). In addi-
tion, there is some isomorphous substitution of aluminum for silicon in the silica sheet.· ' · . ·' 
. 
Illites have a crystal structure similar to that of the mica minerals but with less pot~ssium and 
less isomorphous substitution;. thus they are chemically much more active' thari the .other micas. 
Figure 4.11 is a SEM of illite~ Conditions for forming illites are similar to those for smectites, except 
that potassium must be abundantly present. Parent materials often include igneous and metamorphic 
rocks rich in mica. Illites are a very common constituent of clay soils; they are particularly common in 
the glacio-lacustrine clay deposits in the central North American continent and in the clays found 
•: · ·· · · under' coal beds in that same area. 
· 
· 
. 
' : .. 
. _ ' . 
Verinicitlite is an.other fairly common 2:1 mineral similar to montmorillonite except that it has 
· · · ·· only two interlayers of water. After it is dried at high temperature, which removes the interiayer water, 
"expa~ded" vermiculite inakes an excellent insulation materiaL 
. 
; ' 
' ' 
4;3,3 
Ot~er Clay Minerals· 
"'>•F' 
.. ,• 
Chlorite is another common mineral found in clay soils, although technically it is a.group containing 
. several separate minerals. Chlorite consists of repeating layers of a silica sheet, an. alumina sheet, 
another silica, and then either a gibbsite (A1++:-) or brucite (Mg++) sheet (Fig . .4.12).It could be called 
130 
Chapter.4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
I;! 
'.l.'' 
· FIGURE 4.10 Schematic diagram 
· of illite (after Lambe,' 1953). · · · 
',> 
'' 
· . , FIGURE 4.11 
Scanning electron 
micrograph of,illite frorl'! Fithian, . · 
Illinois. The length of the light 
. bar is 5 f.un' (photograph by · · 
R. D., Hol7z). . 
' 
Si 
-
AI. 
-
Si 
____....:::..:: 
K 
---'<-:::':: 
Si -
AI -
Si -
I 
K 
-"-:::-:: 
Si 
AI 
,,J: 
Si 
~ 
I 
! 
.. 
',;,· 
,, 
. a~2:1:1 mineral. Some of the,chlorite. minerals have considerable isomorphous substitution and are 
.·missing an occasional brucite or gibbsite layer; thus they may be susceptible to swelling because water 
· can enter between the sheets. Generally, however, chloriteis significantly less active than montmoril-
. lon~te a~d illite. According to Mitchell and Saga (2005), chlorite. forms liy the alteration of smectite in the , 
.. ·presence of sufficient Mg++ to form the brucite interlayer .. Chlorites are often present in metamorphic 
rocks and iri soils formed from such rocks. 
· 
As mentioned above, clay minerals are numerous, and they have virtually every conceivable com-
bination of substituted ions, interlayer water, and exchangeable cations. A few of them are interesting to 
engineers. Attapulgite has a chain rather than a sheet structure; consequently it has a needle- or rodlike 
appearance (Fig: 4.13): Mixed-layer minerals are relatively common; they inClude; for example, mont-
. inorillonite mixed with chlorite or illite. Because allophane is a phyllosilicate, it is often classified as a 
day mirieral. However, it is amorphous to X~niys, which means it has no regular crystalline structure. 
,·;.;' 
. Gibbsite 
or brucite 
4.4 ·Identification of Clay Minerals and Activity 
131 
... ; 
"' '' 
FIGURE 4.12:' Schematic diagram 
. of chlorite (after 'Mitchell and . · . · • 
. Saga, 2005}. 
. " 
. : , 
FIGURE 4.13 Scanning electron 
:micrograph of aitapulgite from 
·Florida. The length of the space 
betweeri'the bars of light is 0.5 J.Lm 
: ... (photograph by R. D. Holtz}. 
· 
", .. , 
'. 
l:r 
Under specialized conditions ofweathe~i~~ ( es~~cially of soils of volCanic origin); it Il1~Y be a locally 
important constituent of day soils.· Some allopliari:es have rod- or. needle~shaped particles. that may 
make them difficult to compact or stabilize (Sergei Terzaghi, personal communication, 2005): 
f-~ . 
4.4 
IDENTIFICATION OF CLAY MINERALS AND ACTIViTY 
Since the clay minerals are so very small, their identificati~n by the usual optical mineralogical tech-. 
' 
-
. 
. 
niques used in geology is not possible; thus other means must be employed~ From your engineering 
materials courses, you may remember that materials ~ith regular or repeating patterns 'cifcrystal struc-
ture will diffract X-rays. Different minerals with· different. crystalline. structures will have different 
X-ray diffraction patterns, and in fact these patterns were used to :identify the minerals in the first 
place. The patterns for the common minerals an! published, and it i~· relatively simple to compare the 
diffraction pattern of your unknown with those of know~ ~inerals. Problems ar!se, however, with soils 
that are mixtures of clay minerals, soils that contain 'organics and other nonclay mineral constituents, 
and soils with mixed-layer minerals. Usually a detailed quantitative analysis is impossible""'about all 
. that one can tell is which minerals are present and roughly how much of each;.·· · · 
· 
132 
Chapter A: ; ·Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
Another technique sometimes used . to identify clay minerals is differential thermal analysis 
(DTA). A specimen of the unknown soil along with an inert control substance is heated in an electric 
furnace at a constant rate to several hundred degrees, and the temperature difference between the 
specimen and the inert substance is measured. Because water losses and phase changes occur at certain 
unique temperatures for specific clay minerals, the record of these changes may be compared with 
those of known minerals. In a similar process called thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) the loss in 
mass of the specimen that occurs during heating is measured. Often both DTA and TGA are con-
ducted in tandem. 
Although it is possible to recognize certain clay minerals in micr~graphs obtained from both 
transmission and scanning electron micro.scopy, the process is neither easy nor quantitative. See 
Mitchell and Soga (2005, Chapter 3) for detailed additionalinformation on the identification of clay 
minerals. 
A simple approach, suggested by Professor Casagrande, can also tell you just about as much, at 
least from an engineering point of view, as the more sophisticated X-ray diffraction and DTA-TGA 
analyses. The procedure is shown in Fig. 4.14. You simply locate the Atterberg limits of your soil speci-
men on Casagrande's plasticity chart, then compare its location with those of known minerals. If your 
sample's Atterberg limits plot high above the A-line near the U-line, chances are it contains a lot of 
active clay minerals such as montmorillonite. Even if the soil is classified as a CL-for example, a sandy 
clay-and it still plots near the U-line, then the clay portion of the soil is predominantly montmoril-. 
lonite. The glacial lake clays from around the Great Lakes region in the United States and Canada are 
mostly illitic and they plot right above the A-line. Scandinavian marine clays are illitic and they also plot 
in this region. Kaolinites, which are relatively inactive minerals, plot right below the A-line. Even though 
they are technically clays, they behave in an engineering sense like ML-MH materials. 
FIGURE 4.14.· Location of common clay minerals on Casagrande's plasticity chart' 
(developed from Casagrande,. 1948, and data in Mitchell and Soga, 2005). 
4.5 
4.5 . Specific Surface 
133 
Skempton (1953) defined the activity of a clay as 
... 
PI 
. ;__f = clay frl).c~ion ·' · 
(4.1) 
where the clay fraction is usually takeh as the pe~cent~ge by weight of the soilless than 2 p,m. Clays 
that hirve an aCtivity around 1 (0.75, .<A'<:: 1.25) are classified as· "normaP'; soils with :A < 0.75 are 
· inactive clays, and those with A > 1.25are active clays. . . 
· ' · 
• . .. The~e is a fair to good correlation between the activity and the' type of clay mineral, as shown in 
Table'4.1. Activity has also been 'used for certain classification and engineering property correlations, 
especially for inactive and highly active days. However, the Atterberg lirrtits alone are usually sufficient 
for these purposes, and the activity provides no'significant new information .. ; . 
. •. 
' 
. 
,' 
''-' 
' 
"' 
' 
' 
''>:', 
y 
'. 
' '  
·•;\.1'-·· 
TABLE 4.1· Activities of Various Minerals .. 
Mineral. 
Activity· 
Na-monimorillonite · . , 
4-7 
Ca-montmorillonite 
1.5 
~·---:-::----,-.-,.-------~·· 
_Kaolinite 
· 0.3-0.5 
Halloysite (dehydrated) 
~0.5~ 
Halloysite (hydrated) 
0.1 
Attapulgite 
0.5-L2 
Allophane 
0.5-1.2 
. Mica (muscovite)· 
'0.2·· 
Calcite 
0.2 
'Quartz 
0 · · 
After Skempton (1953) and Mitchell and Soga (2005). 
SPECIFIC SURFACE ... 
The ratio of the surface area of a material to either its mass or volume is called the specific surface. In 
terms· of volume· 
t \;· 
sp~cific 'surf~ce = surf~ce' area/unit v~lume 
•. The physical sigu'ificance of ~pecificsurface can be demonstrated using a cube 1. X 1 ·X 1 em: 
.·. 
. . 
. 
. . 
'• 
••• · ... 6(1 ~m2 ) . 
. .·· •·.. 
·.. 
: 
· , specific surface = 
. 3 
.= 6/cni ~ 0.6/mm · · 
· · · 
·.. 
·1cm 
· · 
.. 
. .If the cube is 1 mm on a side, the specific surface would be 
'!' 
6(1 mm2) · • 
-.,--,---:.-::;-3 -. = 6/mm 
.. 1~m 
If the cube is l p,m on a side, the speCific surface would be 
) 
J 
' ; 5 '~ J 
' 
6(1.p,m2) . ' 
· ...• ··.·: . ·. · : 
· 1 p,m3 
= 6/p,m = 6000/ni~, 
:: 
;;,. 
.. 
· .. 
,. 
J.: i 
·,;, 
(4.2) 
134 
Chapter 4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
These three examples illustrate that large particles; whether cubes or soil, have· smaller surface areas 
per unit of volume-and thus smaller specific surfaces-than small particles. To obtain the specific sur-
face in terms of mass, you just divide the value in terms of volume by the mass density Ps; units would 
then be m2/g or m2/kg. 
· 
· 
Now let us add just enough water to thinly coat the surface area of each cube in the above exam-
ples. Note that it will take te'n times as much water to wet the surfaces of all the cubes when they are 
1 mm on a side than when the same volume is. occupied by a single cube of 1 cm3• Also, if we. were try-
ing to remove water, there would be ten times as much to remove from the surfaces of the smaller 
cubes than those of the hirg~r ones. Or, in energy terms, it would take ten times as much energy to 
remoVe the water from the smaller cubes than from' the linger ones. _·. 
. 
. 
· . ·' .. · 
· By analogy, the specific surface of a soil is inversely 'proportibnal 'to its grain 'size. A given amount 
of soil made up of m~my small particles-would have on 'average a larger specific surface than that same 
amount made up of large particles. 
Because so many physical processes involving clay and other layer silicate minerals are closely 
related to their surface area, soil scientists and other Hungarians have developed test procedures to 
measure the specific surface (Carteret al., 1986). However, in geotechnical engineering, we generally 
do not need to know a numerical value of the specific surface of a soil-it is the concept that is impor~ 
tant. For example, from this concept, we would expect larger wate~ contents for fine-grained soils than 
for coarse-grained soils; all other things such as void ratio and soil structure being equal. 
You may recall from your materials courses that specific surface is a primary factor in concrete 
and asphalt mix design, because in both cases it is necessary to provide sufficient cement paste or 
asphalt to coat the aggregate surfaces. 
' 
. ' 
'. 
' 
. 
4.6 
INTERACTION BETWEEN WATER AND CLAY MINERALS 
As mentioned earlier, water usually has little effect on the behavior of granular soils. For example, the 
· shear strength of a sand is approximately the same whether it is dry 'or saturated. An important exception 
is the case of loose deposits of saturated sand subjected to dynamic loads such as earthquakes or blasts. 
On the other hand, fine-grained soils, especially clay soils, are strongly influenced by the presence 
of water. The variation of water content gives rise to plasticity, and the Atterberg limits are an indication 
of this influence. Grain size distribution only rarely governs the behavior of fine-grained soils. 
Why is water important in fine-grained soils? From the previous discussion, you know that the 
smaller the particle, the larger the specific surface. Clay minerals, being relatively small particles, have 
large specific surfaces, and all else being equal, you might expect them also to have very active surfaces. 
In fact, the size, specific ~urface; and activity of clay' minerals all relate rather well. 
The dimensions and specific. surfaces of four common clay minerals are, shown in Table 4.2. 
Kaolinite, the largest clay mineral crystal, h~s a thick~ess or edge dimen'sion or' roughly 1 ~m, while 
that of montmorillonite, the smallest clay mineral, is only a few nanometres. Since the crystals have 
roughly the same ~verage "diameter," at least within a~ order of magnitude, it is not surprising that 
their specific surfaces are so different. Of course, depending on weathering and other factors, there 
are rather wide. variations in the sizes of the crystals; and Table 4.2 gives only average values. Since 
surface activity is related to the particle size, you can see why montmorillonite, for example, is much 
more active than kaolinite. Look again at the'activity values in Table 4.1; note that they also roughly 
relate to mineral size and specific surface::Similarly, the surface activity of a sand or silt grain is 
extremely low. 
. : 
:. , 
:. :· 
I 
For the reasons described below, unbalanced force fields exist at the surfaces of the clay miner-
als, and this is the physical-chemical basis for the interaction between water, dissolved ions, and clay 
minerals. The interaction or' these force fields leads to various associations or arrangements of soil 
particles that we call the structure of clay soils, which ultimately controls their engineering behavior. 
j 
· 4.6 
Interaction Between Water and Clay Minerals 
135 
TABLE 4.2 Typical Dimensions, Specific S~rfaces, and Cation Exchange Capacity of the C~m~~n Clay Minerals 
Typical Thickness 
Typical Diameter 
Specific sui-face 
C~tion Exchange Capacity" 
Clay Mineral 
(nm) · 
'. (nm) 
(kni2/kg) 
(meq/100 g) 
Montmorillonite 
3 
0.7-0.84 
. 80-150 
Illite 
30 
0.065-0.1 
'10-40 
Chlorite 
30 
. 0.08 
10-40 
Kaolinite 
50-2000 
2-15 
"Defined in Sec. 4.6.2. 
After Yong and Warkentin (1975) and Mitchell and Sog~ (200S)~. 
4.6.1 
Hydration of Clay Minerals and the Diffuse Double Layer 
As noted by Yang and Warkentin (i975), it seems that clay particles in .nature are almost always 
hydrated; that is, layers of water molecules' surround each crystal of clay. This water. is called adsorbed 
water. How is water adsorbed on the surface of a clay particle? First, you may recall f~om chemistry or 
materials courses that water is a dipolar molecule (Fig. 4.15). Even though water is electrically neutral, it 
has two separate centers of charge, one positive and one negative. Thus the water molecule is electostati-
cally attracted to the surface of the clay crystal. Second, water is held to the clay crystal by hydrogen 
bonding (hydrogen of the water is attracted to the oxygen atoms or hydrox)rl molecules on the surface of 
the clay). Third, the negatively charged clay surface attracts cations present in the water. Since all cations 
are hydrated to some extent,' depending on the ion, cations also contribute to the attraction of water to 
the clay surface. Of these three factors, hydrogen bonding is probablytlie'most important. 
:The attraction of water to the chiy surface is very strong near the surface a~d diminishes with 
distance. It seems that.the water molecules right at the surface are very tightly held ·and strongly ori-
ented. Measurements show that the density and some thermodynamic and electrical properties of the 
water next to the clay surface are different from- those of "free water" (Yang and Warkentin, 1975; 
Mitchell and Saga, 2005).. . 
-· . . ... . 
.. 
· 
, 
. 
... · · 
, 
Whatdoes a clay particle look like with adsorbed water on it? Figure 4.16 shows 'schematically 
sodium montmorillonite and kaolinite crystals with layers of adso~bed water. Note that the thickness of 
the adsorbed water is approximately the same, but because of the size differences, it is not surprising 
that montmorillonite has much greater activity, higher plasticity, greater'swelling, more shrinkage, and 
larger volume change due to loading than kaolinite. 
· 
· · 
. 
· 
_· · · 
. . 
. Becimse the cations in the adsorbed water layers are more concentrated near the surfaces of clay 
crystals, they thermally diffuse away from the surfaces in an attempt to equalize cation concentrations 
. 
' . . 
. within the adsorbed water. But this diffusion is counterbalanced by 
'' ilie ekct~ical attraction of tli~ positively charged cations to the neg-
atively charged clay crystal surfaces. These two components-the 
i FIGURE 4.15 Schematic diagram 
. , clay particle surface,and the diffuse layer of ca~ions-;-;-together form · 
. the diffuse double liiyer. The diffuse. double layer, shown schemati-
cally iii Fig. 4~17' also ,inCludes anions'. that are, of course, repelled 
' from the negative forcefield of the clay crystal: 
. ' . . • 
The development and the mathematical equations describing 
· the 'diffus~ double layer a~e given: by, among others, Yang and 
. \Varkentin (1975), van ,Olphen : (1977).;and. Mitchell and Saga 
: · ; of a water molecule (after Lambe,· 
1953). 
· (2005). They also discuss the,influence of such factors as the con-
_centration of the electrolyte, cation valence, dielectric constant of 
the pore fluid, temperature, ionic size, pH, and anion absorption on 
136 
Chapter 4. ·, Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
Adsorbedwater 
~~ 
1 
Montmorillonite 
crystal 
(100 x 1 nmr· 
. 
' 
. . 
. 
FIGURE 4.16 Relative sizes of adsorbed water layers on sodium. 
montmorillonite and sodium kaolinite (after Lambe, 1958a). 
1<±) 
lG)<±> 
G) 
I 
-
I . 
G) -
G) 
G) 
G) 
G) 
I+ 
. 
le-ee·ee 
' l G) G) <±)_ ;, G) ' 
• 1 e 0 '+'e 
~ 
0 
G) 
al .1 
r::j:\ 
\:V 
-
. I.±; 
"t:l 
\..:.) 
' 
~l<±><±> ·<±> 
cJ I fDG) G) 
G) 
I r:L\ 
-
I~.±; 
I 
G) 
r:L\ 
I 
I.±; 
I G)-G) 
I 
G) 
G) 
G) 
-
G) 
G) 
G) 
l G) <±)<±)G) 
l<±><±> 
G) 
G) 
G) 
1<±) 
I 
c:· 
0 e 
E 
Q) g . 
. o 
(.) 
·Distance 
.; 
FIGURE 4.17 . Diffuse double layer in a clay-water system showing schematically.the distribution 
of ions .next to the clay crystal surface (Mitchell, and Soga, 2905). 
l·t 
the diffuse double layer. Thediffu~e double layer isan important concept for understanding the behav-
• ior of clay-water-electrolyte systems; and. it helps to explain clay properties such as plasticity, swelling, 
• and the interaction of clay particles. 
· 
.· .. : . · 
. 
· 
· 
· · 
. 
' 
' 
. 
. 
. 
4.6.2. 
Exchangeable Cations and Cation Exchange Capacity {CEC) 
' 
. 
( 
. . 
' 
. 
.. 
·-· 
. 
.· 
,· The negative charge at the surface of the clay crystal results from both isomorphous substitution, men-
.tioned earlier, and imperfections in the crystal lattice, especially near the mineral surfaces. "Broken" 
edges contribute greatly to unsatisfied valence charges at the edges of the crystal. Since the crystal wants 
I
' 
4.6 ' Interaction Between Water and Clay Minerals 
137 
to be electrically neutral; cations in the water may be strongly attracted to the clay, depending on the 
· amount of negative charge pres~nt. Different clays have different charge deficiencies and thus differ-
ent tendencies. to attract the exchangeable cations. They are called exchangeable because one cation 
can easily be exchanged with one of the same valence, or with two of one-half the valence, of the orig-
·inal cation;As might be expected from their relative sizes and specific surfaces, montmorillonitehas a 
much greater charge deficiency and. thus. a much greater attraction for exchangeable cations than 
> kaolinite. Illite and chlorite are intermediate in this respect.' 
i. ' 
The amount of exchangeable cations can be determined analytically or exp'erimentally (Yang 
and Warkentin, 1975; van Olphen, 1977; Fang, 1997; and Mitchell and Saga, 2005). The cation exchange 
capacity ( CEC) of the clay is usually expressed in units of milliequivalents (meq) per 100 g of dry clay. 
Sometimes this quantity. is referred to as the base exchange capacity (BE C) or the ion exchange 
capacity (IEC). 
1 
• 
• 
' ·. 
• 
. 
• 
• 
, 
· 
' 
. So, what is an equivalent? An equivalent is the' number of ions or electronic charges in one mole 
of solution, and Jt equals 6.02 .)( .1023 charges (you may r~call that the number6.02 X 1023 is Avocados 
I number1 ), The number Of equivalentS, then, iS. the Weight Of an element divided by itS atomiC Weight, 
times its valence-or, in equation form:. 1 , 
•. , . 
·' ' . : ->:.. 
- '''(weight of element)• 
· 
· 
one equivalent • = •. . 
.. -
_ . h 
(valence) · 
_ , - . 
-
: _ · atom~c wetg t , . : : , 
A millieq~ivale~t' (meq) is, of course; m-3 equivalents. N~te that 6.02X 1023 electrori charges= 
, 96'500 coulombs = 1 faraday (Leonards, 1962; Mitchell and Soga,2005). 
> 
• 
' 
·' ' - Typical values of CEC for the common Clay mineralsan:i given in Table 4.2. A' CEC of 10 
meq/100 g means that each 100 g of clay solids is able to exchang~ Hi X 16:_3' X 6 x 1023 -~ 6 x 1021 
, -
1 electron charges. If the exchangeable ion is rnonovalent(such as N a+), then6 X l021 sodium ions can 
' be replaced. If it is divalent,' such' as Ca++, then 3 X 1021 c;llch.im ions can be replaced pe~ 100 g of clay 
· (Le~mirds; 1962). · · 
- · --
·-
· · • ' 
·-·-
·· 
··· 
· 
' 
Calcium and magnesium are the predominant exchangeable cations in most soils except those of 
marine origin; potassium and sodium exist but are less common. Aluminum and hydrogen are common 
in acidic soils._The depositional environment as well as subsequent weathering andleaching will govern 
what ions are present ina particular soil deposit. As might be expected, the predominant exchangeable 
cations in marine clays are sodium and magnesium, because these are the most common cations in 
seawater. Cation exchange or replacement is further complicated bythe presence oforganic matter. 
Sulfate, chloride, phosphate, and nitrate are common. anions in ~oils. 
. . _-· _ . 
. _ 
· 
In addition to isomorphous substitution and broken bonds· 6~ ·edges, a' third ~ource of cation 
exchange capacity is replacement. The ease of replacement or exchange of cations depends on several 
factors, primarily the valence of. the cation. Higher valence cations easily replace cations of lower 
valence. For ions of the same valence, the size of the hydrated ion becomes important; the larger the 
ion, the greater the replacement power. A further complication is the fact that potassium, even though 
it is monovalent, fits into the hexagonal holes in the silica sheet. Thus it will be very strongly held on the 
claysurface, and it will have a greater replacement power than sodium, for example, which is also 
monovalent. The cations cim be listed it1-approximate order of their replacement ability. The specific 
order depends on the type of clay, which ion is being replaced, and the concentration of the various 
ions in the water. In order of increasing replacement power from left to right, iri general the ions are: 
u+ < Na+ < H+ < K+ < NHt .< Mg++ < ca++ < cu++ < AI+++ < Fe+++ ' 
~· 1 
' 
' 
1Named for Amedeo Avogadro (1776-1856), an Italian mathematician, who prop~sed that equal volumes of all 
gases contain the same number of molecules at the same pressure and temperature (Fox-and Hi11,'2007). 
138 
Chapter.4 '.' Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
4.7 
' 
· In some instances the specific order may differ slightly, depending on local conditions and variations in 
concentration. Replacement series may also. include different elements such as cesium, barium, thorium, 
. and rubidium. 
:. ; . , ' 
.There are several practical consequences of ion exchange. For one thing, it makes possible the 
use of chemicals to stabilize or strengthen soils. Lime (CaOH) stabilizes a sodium clay soil by replacing 
the sodium ions in the clay, because calcium has a greater replacing power than sodium. The swelling of 
sodium montmorillonitic clays can be significantly. reduced by the addition of lime (Chapter 6). 
This section has presented only a brief overview of the very complex subject of the interaction 
· between water and clay minerals. For additional information, you should consult Yong and Warkentin 
(1975), Van Olphen (1977), and Mitchell and Soga (2005) and the references therein.,·· 
~ ; 
INTERACTION OF CLAY PARTICLES 
:_,. 
The association of day minerals and their adsorbed water~layers provides the physiCal basis for soil 
'''structure. The {ndividual clay particles interact through their adsorbed water hiyers, and thus the pres-
ence of different ions, organic materials, different concentrations, etc.', contribute to the multitude of 
soil structures found in natural soil deposits. Clay particles can repulse each other electrostatically, but 
the process depends on the ioii' concentration,' interparticle spacing, and other factors. Similarly, the 
individual particles can be attracted due to the tendency for hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, 
and other types of chemical and organic bonds. The interparticle force or potential fields decrease with 
'increasing distance from the c~ystal surface, as sh~wn in Fig. 4.18. The actual shape of the potential 
curve will depend on the valence 'and concentration of the dissolved ion, dielectric constant of the pore 
fluid, temperature; and the nature or' the bonding' forces. 
· · 
·' 
· · .· · · '' 
. . . . 
Particles c~n flocculate or be repelled (disperse, sepanit~ ), Th~y ~an flocculate i~ several possi-
, ' ble configurations; edge~ to~ face is the m'ost common; but edge~to~edge or face-to-face is also possible. 
The tendency toward flocculation will depend on incr~asing one or more or' the following (Lambe, 
1958a, Evans, 199~,Mitchell an~Soga, 2005): 
. . . , .. 
1 
. 
. . . 
• 
• Concentration of the electrolyte 
· · '·' 
•; Valence of the ion 
or decreasing one or more of the following: 
• Dielectric constarit of the pore fluid 
• Size of the hydrat~d i~n 
> · ' · : 
• pH 
• . Anion adsorption 
FIGURE 4.18 Chemical, 
electrostatic, etc., potential 
versus distance from the clay 
crystal surface. 
•'. 
·'! 
· Distance : · 
4.8 Soil Structure' and Fabric of Fine-Grained Soils 
139 
The effect of temperature is somewhat ambiguous; in some cases, increasing the temperature results in 
flocculation, while sometimes the opposite seems to occur. 
· 
Just about all naturally occurring clay soils are fkicculated, to some extent. Only in very dilute 
solutio~s (at very high water conten~s) is qispersion of clay particles possible,· and this probably occurs 
only rarely in nature. However, dispersion is possible in high. water content slurries and sludges that are 
produced as waste products from coal-fired power generation, mineral processing, and other industries. 
4.8 
SOIL STRUCTURE AND FABRIC OF FINE-GRAINED SOILS 
4.8.1 
The structure of a fin~-grained soil str~ngly affects-or, some would say, e~en governs-the engineering 
behavior of that soil. All the clay structures found in nature and described in the next section result from 
some combination of the nature of the clay mineral, the geologic environment at deposition, and the 
subsequent geologic and engineering stress history of the deposit. These are very complicated factors, 
but we study them because they fundamentally affect the behavior' and the engineering' properties of 
soil. When cohesive soils are encountered in engineering practice, geotechnical engine'ers must consider 
the soil structure at least qualitatively. 
c 
In geotechnical engineering, we define the structure of a soil to include the geometric arrange-
ment or fabric of the paiticles or mineral grains as well as the interpaiticle forces that may act between 
. them: Soil fabric; then, refers only to the geometric arrangement of the particles. Because in granular 
soils the surface activity of the individual grains is very small, the interparticle forces are also very 
small: Thus both the fabriC and structure of gravels, sands, and to some extent silts are the same. On the 
contrary,however, interparticle forces are relatively large in fine-grained cohesive soils, and thus the 
structure of these soils consists of both these forces and the soil fabric. 
A complete description of the structure of a fine-grained cohesive soil requires knowledge of both 
the 'interparticle forces and the fabric of the pa~ticles. Since it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to 
directly measure the interparticle force fields surrounding clay particles, most studies of cohesive soil 
'structures involve· only fabric. Of co~rs.e, from the fabric 'of these' soils, certain inferences can be made 
about their interparticle forces. 
' . 
' 
., 
' 
> 
. 
, How do we obser~e and study soil faorics? Because of their r~latively large grain sizes, the fabrics 
. of sands and gravels can be visually observed. Sometimes thin sections are prepared from specimens of 
granuiar materials stabilized with epoxies or resins and then viewed under an optical microscope~ Fine-
grained soil fabrics require significant magnification, and manyof.the tTI:ethods desci-ibedin Sec. 4.4 for 
identifyingchiy minerals are also used to study clay soil fabrics. None of these procedures is particularly 
simple, and only a very few provide even crude numerical measures of fabric. See Mitchell and Soga 
(2005) for detailed description of fabric study using the polarizing microscope, electron microscopy, 
X-ray diffra,ction, x:radiography, pore ~ize 4istfibution, and' sev.eral indirect methods. 
Fabrics of Fine-Grained Soils 
'Although it was generally known that fine~grained soils sometimes behaved differently after remold-
• ing (such as reworking a soil by spreading, adding water or drying, and compaction), the influence of 
soil structure on soil behavior was not considered importatit"until the mid 1920s.Terzaghi (1925a and 
b) des~ribed the process of sedimentation and formation of fine-grained soils, and his inodelsof sedi-
.· mentation and the structure of fine~ grained soils are shown in Fig. 4.19: Casagrande (1932c), building 
on Terzaghi's concepts, postulated that during sedimentation; clay particles in suspension flocculate 
and settle to the bottom along with the larger silt grains. As shown in Fig. 4.20(a), the sediments form a 
honeycomb like open structure with very high water content and void ratio. '.' 
With additional deposition, the soil structure compresses at points of high stress' concentration, 
as shown in Fig. 4.20(b) (Casagrande, 1932c). The bonds between the flocculated clay 'particles are 
140 
Chapter A . . Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
"'! 
' 
,, 
' 
,, 
·-· 
' 
FIGURE 4.19 Terzaghi's (1925b) inodel.s for the fabric offine-grained sediments: (a) process of sedimen-
tation;. (b) structure of the floccul~ted sediment. 
0 
. t 
,':'..,. .. •! 
,-
, 
.. , 
,.,../, 
c;..;·: 
( 
.0 
:.• 
t 
'· 
I 
(a) 
.:r· 
Silt grain 
. 
"· 
. 
. 
. . 
• . 
' 
. , 
. 
' 
-, 
-
' 
. 
; 
. 
-
\ r 
•• 
•. FIGURE 4.20 . Casagrande's (1932c) concept of the structure of undisturbed marine clay: {a) during sedimen-
tation; and {b) after compression and densification of the sediment: 
. . 
' 
quite brittle, especially those formed in seawater; when specimen~ of these clay~ are tested in compres-
sion, the strain at failure is only 1% or less, and deformations are almost elastic (see Sec.11.3). 
In the 19508, because of increased interest in the physical-chemical-behavior. of clay soils, a 
· number of different fabric models were proposed. Two of the best known were by Lambe (1953) and 
. , , 
Tan (1957), arid they are shown in Figs. 4.21 and 4.22. Representation of fine-grained soil. fabrics by 
only a few clay particles, however, is not very realistic. Single-grain or single-particle units occur only 
. rarely in riature and then only in very dilute clay~ water systems under special environmental condi-
tions. From studies of real clay soils with the scanning-electron microscope (SEM), the individual 
clay particles seem to always be aggregated or flocculated. together in submicroscopic fabric units 
, called domains. Domains in turn group together,to form clusters, which are large enough to be seen 
··with a .visible-light microscope. Clusters group together to form peds and even groups of. peds. Peds 
(b) 
<' 4.8 SoiiStructure!and Fabric of Fine-Grained Soils 
141 
FIGURE 4.21 , Models of undis-
turbed clays deposited in (a) salt 
water and (b) fresh water (after' 
Lambe,1953). 
can be seen without a microscope, and they-together with other large visible features such as joints 
and fissures_-constitute the macrofabric system of the soil.A schematic sketch of this system pro-
posed by Yong and Sheeran (i973) is shown in Fig. 4.23; a microscopic view of a marine clay is also 
included (Pusch, 1973). · 
· 
· 
Collins and'McGown (1974) suggest a somewhat more 
elaborate system for describing macrofabric features in natural 
soils. They propose three types of features: 
· .1. Elementary particle arrangements consisting of single 
. forms of particle interaction at the level of individual clay, 
silt, or sand particles [Fig. 4.24(a) and (b)) or interaction 
between small groups of clay platelets [Fig. 4.24(c)] or 
"clothed'1 silt and sand particles [Fig. 4.24( d)). 
Particle assemblages, which are units of particle organiza-
tion having definable physical boundaries and a specific 
mechanical function: Particle assemblages consist of one 
~ oi inore forms. of elementary particle arrangements or 
: smaller particle assemblages, as shown in Fig. 4.25. 
3. Pore spaces within and between elementary particle 
arrangements and particle assemblages. 
FIGURE 4.22 . Schematic diagram of a 
· Collins and McGown (1974) show microphotographs of sev~ 
clay as proposed by Tan (1957). 
eral natural soils that illustrate their proposed system; Other 
142 
Chapter 4 -,,. Clay Minerals, Soil and RockStructures, and Rock Classification 
. 1 ~ : 
., ': 
3 
/ 
,' / 
/ 
/ 
3 
I 
----d 
---- \; 
micropores 
"--. 
Enlargement 
~ 
· .. ·.·. 
/ 
~ 
' 
'· 
' 
' 
' 
FIGURE 4.23 .Schematic diagram of the soil microfabric and macrofabric system . 
proposed by Yong and Sheeran (1973) and Pusch (1973): 1, domain; 2, cluster; 3, 
.. ped; 4, silt grain; 5, micropore; a.nd 6, macropore. 
' 
_:I· 
' j
: .· .. 4.8. Soil Structure and Fabric of Fine-Grained Soils 
143 
(a) 
(d) 
(e) 
FIGURE 4.24 Schematic representations of elementary particle arrangements: (a) individual clay platelet 
interaction; (b) individual silt or sand particle interaction; (c) clay platelet group interaction; (d) ."clothed" 
silt or sand particle interaction; (e) partly discernible particle interaction (after Collins and McGown, 1974). 
systems for classifying soil structure and fabric have been d~veloped by pedologists and soil scientists. 
A good example is the system proposed by Brewer (1976). 
A SEM microphotograph of a silty clay ped from Norway is shown in Fig. 4.26. Note how com-
plex the structure appears, suggesting that the engineering behavior of this soil is probably also quite 
complex. Also note how similar this real marine clay looks to the model postulated by Casagrande 
(1932c) shown in Fig. 4.21(b ). 
Figure 4.27 shows microphotographs of a compacted clayey silt from France. Figure 4.27(b) is 
magnified four times larger than Fig. 4.27(a). The large silt grain in the lower left center of Fig. 4.27(b) 
contains some clay platelets-probably kaolinite, as they are about 5 11m in the major dimension. 
Coatings of much smaller clay particles are also visible. Again, fabric complexity rather than simplicity 
is apparent. 
Because of their bound water layers, it is difficult io ascertain whether a~tual mineral contact 
occurs in clays. However, grain-to-grain contact of silt particles can readily be seen, especially in 
Fig. 4.27(b) and in Fig. 4.28. It is interesting that many of the fabric models shown in Figs. 4.23, 4.24 and 
4.25 can be seen in the SEM microphotographs of Figs. 4.26, 4.27 and 4.28. See Mitchell and Soga 
(2005) for additional microphotographs of real soil fabrics. 
4.8.2 
Importance of Microfabric and Macrofabric; Description Criteria 
Both the microfabric and macrofabric of a clay deposit reflect the deposit's entire geologic and stress 
history. This includes its depositional and environmental history, chemical and physical weathering, and 
stress history-that is, the changes in stress caused both by geological forces and by human activities. 
Virtually everything that ever happened to that s,oil is imprinted in some manner on its structure and 
fabric. 
· · 
' 
· 
Although microfabric is probably more ·important from a fundamental than an engineering 
viewpoint, understanding it improves one's ge11eral understanding of soil behavior: For example, day 
microfabric research has suggested that the greatest single factor influencing the final structure of a 
clay soil is the electrochemical environment existing at the time of its sedimentation. Flocculated struc-
tures or aggregations of particles (domains and clusters) can result during sedimentation in virtually all 
depositional environments, whether marine, brackish, or fresh water. Fabric characteristics such as the 
144 
Chapter 4, ;; . Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
'. 
Silt or 
·e1sand 
• 
~hv-.,._ 
/~~ 
97 
·.····-~-
~·Co""~. 
(b) 
(c) 
Connectors 
Regular 
i ' 
§<~'t't 
. aggregations 
\ 
;1p.ff?yrCfJ\1~ : 
~(/ 
. --~~t:.l!·~ c 
--: ·• • 
./"". 
__ !£:~~-~.-_:;j~-:fb 
... i~,,; 111;:;:,7}> 
/. 
~
I v~;·,,~,/ 
'fi!).'r:i_:) 
' 
. 
~~'"'-1 
IJ
_;,:;~~--
,~~1_,-.......,., 
_ 
I,J-i,..r~>:;-1. 
a. 
\; ')1.'.:.'!.-"'JI._ 1 
. ~ 
- ~'~;':/ 
. 
Stl! or 
,::_<'b<!-
sand 
. ' 
/ 
:. 
c'1!..~~..;J 
Irregular . . 
. 
aggregations 
(e) 
(I) 
(d) 
lnterw~1ivin9 - · 
. 
~ 
· · hes 
.... ~;::.~ 
·bunc~-. 
··::·: · 
~""-;--
·_-
; 
~~==-~~;?_? 
'.. 
=-:::-;;:,---c."''!/:::-,~ 
t<' 
}'(;--"'\-\~~ 
-r-;_ 
/;::?)"?/.; -..:::~~-
~~:;tl~~tkfi'<f, •·· ... ;? 
-=.:!7=?-~~-<.}'11:~?"' ..:=- _;_./-
•• 
~;.~~~!/=~--;-=-
//;;; 
-; :\' 
(h) 
.' 
:• .::;:-__,\,,_(;lay \matrix 
. --.~!_.~"A..,/,'.: ';; 
,_....._~~' :==-/"''-. 
y~.:;-\-.!1.. . 
~.rtr'-"'~ 
. . 
'1't "'" ,, , 
. ,:---,Cs.~K 
(~:~~;;-,: . -'~V{~:-: 
-~~~ .. >'1~:~/,&-~-?,p;~l,<;:l ' 
a~'~f.(i{b'traj\~-----o' 
.... _tt·b . 
-.... 
r 
I )t'~ 
,~ 
- , " ·-:: 
·s· .c:j, 
• 
·"/ -:J.t./1(. 'u 
-· 
G) 
~-
l 
• 
/."'/'/ 
-~--
Silt 
:, 
;> 
(i) 
(k) ~ 
. :,_ 
v, ,,/ ( /)\ f2p-' 
(g) 
. FIGURE,4.25 .· Schem~tic'represlmi:ations'of particle assemblages: (a), (b), imd(c) cOiinec-
tors; (d) irregular aggregations linked by connector assemblages; (e) irregular aggregations 
forming a honeycomb arrangement; (f) regular aggregations interacting with silt or sand 
grains; (g) regular aggregation interacting with particle matrix; (h) inter-Weaving bunches 
of clay; (i) interweaving bunches of clay with silt inclusions; G> clay particle matrix; (k) gran~. 
ular particle matrix (after Collins and McGown, 1974); ' ... ' 
· · '' 
· 
:::' 
'),· 
' 
l 
~ . 
(a) 
4.8 Soil Structure and Fabric of Fine-Grained Soils 
145 
.. FIGURE 4.26 Drammensilty 
clay: large ped ofsilt and clay 
with weak links to other peds 
(from Barden and McGown, 
1973; photograph courtesy of 
A. McGow,n). · 
FIGURE 4.27, Jossigny clayey .silt, quasi-statically compacted at 14.9% water conte~t and ,16.0 kN/m3: · 
(a) magnification of 500 times; and (b) magnification of.2000 times (Delage et aL, 1996; photograph 
,courtesy of P. Delage). , 
"· 
, ·; 
146 
Chapter 4.: .>Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
FIGURE 4.28 SEM of silt grain-
to-grain contact in Swedish till 
(from McGown, 1973). 
10 ILm 
shape and distribution of pores in the structure are also apparently influenced to a large degree by the 
clay mineralogy as well as the amount and angularity of silt grains present. 
. 
Macrofabric also has· an important influence on the engineering behavior of soil deposits, espe-
cially 'those comprised of fine-grained soils. Features such as joints, fissures, intermediate silt and sand 
seams andhlyers, root holes,yarves, and other "defects" often control the response of the entire soil 
mass to engineering loads. These features are also a challenge for the geologic and geotechnical inves-
tigation that prec~des any; design an"d construction; The macrofabric feature may be missed in the 
investigation, or tests (in situ and laboratory) may not involve the feature and thus the test results will 
be erroneous. The worst case is, of course, that faulty designs based on this information may result in a 
failure. Rowe's (1972) Rankine Lecture illustrates the importance of soil macrofabric to geotechnical 
practice. As a simple example, the strength of a soil mass is significantly reduced along a crack or fis-
sure. If this defect happens to be unfavorably oriented with respect to the applied engineering stress, 
instability or failure may occur. This is why shallow excavations for pipe trenches, for example, must 
always be· supported. If not, the fissures or defects in the surface soils may result in a collapse of the 
trench walls-a very dangerous situation for any workers in the trench. 
· 
· 
Another example is the influence of a sand or silt layer or seam on the drainage characteristics 
of a thick clay layer. As we shall see in Chapters 8 and 9, the rate of settlement of the clay layer strongly 
depends on the distance between drainage layers, and if intermediate drainage layers are missed dur-
ing the site investigation, erroneous predictions of settlement rates will be made. Accurate settlement 
predictions are very important in the design of foundations. 
· 
Consequently, in engineering problems involving stability, settlements, or drainage, the geotech-
nical engineer must carefully investigate the macrofabric of the deposit. Criteria have been developed 
by ASTM; USBR, and the California Department of Water Resources, among others, for describing 
the macrofabric and structure of intact soils. These criteria are summarized in Table 4.3. 
·In summary, the fabric of fine-grained soil deposits· is highly complex. The engineering behavior 
:'of these deposits is strongly influenced by both the micro- arid macrofabric:At presei1t;'though no 
established quantitative cOnnection exists between soil fabric and its engineering properties, it is still 
important to appreciate the complexity of the fabric of fine-grained soils an·d itsrelation to the engi-
neering behavior of the deposit. 
4.9 
Granular Soil Fabrics 
147 
TABLE 4.3 
Criteria for Describing the.Structure of Intact Fine-grained Soils 
Description 
Homogeneous 
Stratified 
Laminated 
Banded · 
Fissured 
Slickensided 
Blocky 
Lensed o~ seamed 
Mottled' 
Honeycombed· 
Root holes 
Criteria 
Same color and appearance throughout 
Alternating layers of varying material or color with layers at least 6 mm thi~k; note thickness 
Alternating layers of varying material or color with layers l~ss than 6 mm thick; note thickness 
Layers of same material but with different colors· 
Breaks along definite planes of fracture with little resistance to fracturing 
Fracture planes appear polished or glossy, sometimes striated 
Cohesive soil that can be broken down into small angular lumps that resist further b~eakdown 
Inclusion of small pockets of diff~rentsoils, such as small lenses of sand scattered through a mass 
·of clay; note thickness' and whether seams are 'continuous 
· 
Contains color blotches 
'· 
'· · · 
· Porous or vesicular 
Note presence of roots or root holes 
From ASTM (2010) D 2488; U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1990) 5005; and California DWR (1962) S-4. 
4.9 
. ' GRANULAR SOIL FABRICS 
Do granular materials, sand and gravels, actually have a fabric? At first, you might think that they 
don't, or if they do, that their fabrics are rather simple in comparison with deposits of fine-grained soils. 
In tun1s out that when granular materials are deposited either by wind or in water, they can have 
rather complex fabrics that in some cases significantly influence their engineering behavior: Go back 
and review the appropriate sections of Chapter 3 for a description of soil deposition by water (rivers, 
beaches, etc.) and wind (loess deposits and sand dimes;'grain sizes generally . < 0.05 mm) and the 
landforms that result from these geologic processes. 
Grains of soil larger than 0.01 to 0.02 mm settle out of a soil-fluld susp~ri.sion independently of 
other particles, because their weight causes them to settle and come to equilibrium in the bottom of the 
fluid as soon as the velocity can no longer support them in suspension. In this case, their ~abric is single 
grained. This is the fabric of, for example, a sand or. gravel pile, and some sand-silt mixtures. Single-
' grained fabrics may be ~'loose" (high void. ratio or. low density), as shown in Fig. 4.29(a), or "dense" 
· · (low void ratio or high density), as shown in Fig. 4.29(b). Under' some conditions of deposition a gran-
ular material can achieve a very open or "honeycomb" fabric [Fig. 4.29(c)], with a very high void ratio 
. 
. 
. (a) 
(b) 
(c) 
FIGURE 4.29 Single-grained soil structures: (a) loose; (b) dense; and (c) honeycomb. 
148 
Chapter 4 · .. Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
·· and low density. A honeycomb fabric is metastable; that is, the grain arches can support static loads, but 
the structure is very sensitive to collapse, especiillly when vibrated or loaded dynamically. The 'presence 
. of water in very loose granular fabrics also can signifiCantly influence tlieir engineering behavior. Good 
. examples are bulking, a capillary phenomenon discussed in Chapter 6, and quicksand and liquefaction; 
described in Chapter 7. 
· The fabrics of natural deposits of granular soils are often much more complex than those shown in 
. Fig. 4.29. Consequently, just as with the structure of fine-grained soil deposits, the geotechnical engineer 
must carefully investigate the macrofabric or structure of granular soil deposits. Descriptive criteria are 
summarized in Table 4.4 .. 
Depending on the shape of the grains, the grain size distribution, and the packing or arrangement 
of the grains (fabriC), granular soils can have a rather wide range of void ratios. The greatest possible 
void ratio or loosest possible condition of a soil is called the maximum void rGtio ( emax)· Similarly, the 
minimum void ratio ( emin) is the densest possible condition that a given soil can attain. The ranges of 
possible void ratios and porosities for typical granular soils are shown in Table 4.5. The maximum and 
minimum void ratios are usually determined in the laboratory using test procedures discussed in 
Chapter 5 . 
.. Void ratio or density alone is not sufficient to accurately characterize the fabric, and thus the engi-
neering properties, of granular soils. It is possible, for example, for two sands to have the same void ratio 
TABLE 4.4 Criteria for Describing the Structure of Coarse-Grained S~il~ in their. Natu,ral or In-Place ~ondition: . 
'Uniform 
Heterogeneous 
Stratified 
· · Lenses or seams 
Cementation 
··.-.. 
· Degree of "compactness" 
From California DWR (1962). 
...... 
Mixture of different sizes, shapes, hardness, or mineral composition 
Layers of different soils; note thickness, strike, and dip of beds/layers . 
· ·Thin layer or strata; note thickness 
·Detected by ,visual-manual inspection and/or the acid test 
.· Loose (high voids, settles with jarring); dense (no movement with vibration) 
1)'picai Values of Void Ratio and Porosity ofGranuiar Soils 
~ \ 
: ~ 
· Particle Size and Gradation • 
··void Ratio: 
Por~sity (%) 
emax ' 
.. 
emtn 
'llmax 
llmin 
Soil'fYpe 
Dmax 
(loose) 
(dense) 
(loose) 
(dense) 
1.· Uniform.materials: 
(a) Equal spheres 
-
-
-
1.0 
0.92 
0.35 
48 
26 
(b) Standard Ottawa sand 
0.84 
0.59 
0.67 
1.1 
0.80 
0.50 
44 
33 
(c) Clean, uniform sand 
-
-
··-
1.2 to 2.0 
1.0 
0.40 
50 
29 
. . .. (fine or medium) .. 
O.Oi2 . 1.2 to 2.0 · 
0.40 
• (d) Uniform, inorganicsilt 
0.05 
0.005 
1.1 
52 
29 
2. ·· Well~graded materials: 
(a) Silty sand 
2.0 
o~oos 
o:02 
5 to 10. 
'0.90 
0.30' 
47 
23 
. (b) Clean, fine to co!lrse sand 
2.0 
0.05 
0.09 
·4to6 
0.95 
0.20 
. 49 
17 
(c) Micaceous simd · 
-
-
_, 
-
1.2 ' 
.0.40 
55 
29 
(d) Silty sand and gravel 
100 
0.005, 
0.02 
. 15 to 300 
0.85 
0.14 
46 
12 
After Hough (1969). 
' .~ 
( . 
4.9 Granular Soil Fabrics 
149 
but significantly different fabrics (and different relative densities; see Chapter 5) and thus significantly 
different engineering behavior. Figure 4.30 shows a couple of two-dimensional examples of what we 
mean. Both "sands" in Figs. 4.30( a) and (b) are identical~ they hilYe the same grain size distribution and 
the same void ratio, but their particle arrangements or fabrics are obviously very different. Figures 4.30( c) 
and (d) show the effect of particie shape and orientation. Again, both "sands",have the same grain-size 
distribution and the same void ratio,but'the orientation of their particles and their fabrics are obviously 
very different: If the materials illustrated in Fig.4.30 were real sands, their engineering properties-such 
as hydraulic conductivity, compressibility, ;md shear stningth c.:.: would undoubtedly be very different. 
Finally, stress history is another factor that must be considered when dealing with sands and grav-
els in engineering practice. Deposits of granular materials that have been preloaded by nature or human 
activities will have' very different stress-strain properties and then!fore very 'different compressibility 
and settlement response (Lambrechts and Leonards, 1978; Holtz, 1991). 
· 
j 
• 
" 
< 
(a) 
(c) 
(d) 
FIGURE 4.30 .Potential ranges in packing of identical particles at the same relative density (a) versus 
. (b) (G. A. Leonards, 1976, personal communication) and particle orientations (c) versus. (d) of identical 
.·,.particles at the same void ratio (after Leonards et al., 1986). 
150 
Chapter 4 
·.Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
4.10, . SOIL PROFILES; SOIL HORIZONS, AND SOIL TAXONOMY 
, Many times, after a ge'ologic process(Chapter,3)has taken place, a freshr~ck surface or freshly trans~ 
ported rock and soil materials are exposed to 'the atmosphere and thus are subjected to weathering. As 
· .. discussed in Sec.3.3.2, weath~ring causes changesin the character of thetopmost soiLand rock layers. 
\ 
Depending on the tinie, cliriuite (temperature, precipitation, arid so on), topography, and vegetation, if any, 
a's oil profile oi weathering profile is formed. The most important' factors in soil profile development are the 
· parent niaterial, Climate, and time, although top~graphy arid the presence .of v~getation also contribute. 
,The soil profile typically develops several distinct zones or horizons with specific characteristics: 
-
-
. • 
.• 
• 
' •. ; 
' : 
'. 
/ 
• 
'· : ' 
• ' 
- • • • 
.; 
'~ 
' 4 
-
. -
-
' 
: 
( 
~-- • 
' 
• 
• • 
~ 
. • The 0 horiZon contains o~ganic matter, both f~esh' and de~omp6sed.' ·. 
• '. 
. . . 
• The A horizon: sometimes called topsdil, is rich in humus and organic pi ant r~sidues; therefore it 
is generally dark brown or black in color. This horizon is also a zone of leaching, where some cl~y 
rriine_rals and soluble. mineral salts have been leached out by rainwater. 
• The B horizon is the zone of accumulation be~ause materials leached out of the A~horizon 
accumulate in this horizon. In temperate climates, the B~horizon is often clayey and has a 
blocky texture (because of periodic wetting and drying). 
· · 
. 
· · 
. • The c horizon is also called the parent material, because it is generally assumed that the materials 
in the A and B horizons are weathered from this horizon. 
· 
• . The cmnpletelyunive~theredand unaltered b~drockis called the R-liorizon. 
Both the 0 and A horizons have very poor engineering propeities because of the o;ganic materi-
als present. They generailyare loose and therefore highly compressible, and they have a low density and 
shear strength. In temperate regions, because of the organic matter, the 0 and A horizons are used for 
agricultural purposes. In desert regions, however, due to the lack of rainfall to support vegetation, there is 
no 0 horizon and no lluinu~ in the A horizon. Even though a relatively large amount of organic matter is 
generated in hot; humid tropical regions, rapid oxidation of organic matter means that' tropical soils are 
generally not very good agricultural soils. 
. 
· 
· 
The B horizon cari be a problem for engineers in some areas because the clay minen1ls present 
may be montmorillonitic and therefore swelling (Chapter 6). If clay is needed, for example, to decrease 
the hydraulic conductivity of a dike or of the liner for a waste containment system, then the B horizon 
may be a good source of material for this purpose; 
· 
The C material is only slightly weathered, if at all, especially in temperate regions. However, in 
. areas of intense weathering, such as the tropics, it may accumulate weathering products from the 
B horizon: Parent material may be bedrock or freshly deposited alluvium, glacial till, loess, etc. 
·. Knowledge of the characteristics of these various soil layers is very often important in civil engi-
neering practice, because much of the civil infrastructure is relativ~ly shallow and its development 
occurs in or on one of these layers, especially in the B arid C horizons. Examples include the foundations 
of small structures, roads and airfields, and water and sewer lines. . / 
. 
. . 
. 
Another view of the soil profile is a vertical cross-section through the soil deposit, usually 
determined by means ofa geologic investigation and soil borings, or other. subsurface exploration 
techniques. In fmindation engineering, the soilprofileis usually illustrated iri a drawing or plot that 
shows the various layers and types of soils at the location or site of interest.Sometimes engineering 
properties are also shown on the same plot. Section 8.11 showssome typical soil profiles. 
Soil scientists have developed a comprehensive system of soil classification called soil taxonomy 
that is reasonably objective, semi-quantitative, and universally applicable. The system was designed to 
be independent of the classifier and presumably useful for both agricultural and engineering purposes, 
although it.is probably toodetailed for most geotechnical engineering applications: However, you 
. should kriow that such a system exists, so that if you see the'se names on soil maps or in a soils report, 
you won't panic! For detailed descriptions of the system, see the papers in TRB (1977), particularly 
j 
4.11 
Special SoiLDeposits 
.151 
· Fernau (1977). SMSSSS (1990), PCA (1992) and Mitchell and Soga (2005) are also recommended. If 
, you are working in Canada, then the Canadian System'of Soil Classification by the Soil Classification 
, Working Group (1998) is very useful. 
• 
4.11 
. SPECIAL SOIL DEPOSITS 
'In Chapter 3, we described a immber of different soils and soil deposits. associated with a specific 
limdform or geologic process. For example,' when' we discussed weathering (Sec. 3.3.2), we briefly 
described residual and tropical soils and provided references for additional information on the engi-
ll(~ering ciuirai:teristics of thesesoils. In our discussion of eolian landforms(Sec. 3.3.6),we described 
· · some of the engineering problems associated with foundations on loess, and so on. 
There are a few soil deposits that are not really associated with a specific landform or process, 
· yet they are of interest to geotechnical engineers since they present challenging design and construc-
tion problems. If you ever have a project in these areas, you will at least have some idea where to go for 
additional information. Collapsing and swelling soils are discussed in Chapter 6. ·,. 
. '. 
4.11.1 Organic Soils, Peats, and Muskeg 
You may recall from Chapter 2 that organic soils are silts or clays with sufficient organic content to 
influence their. engineering properties (USCS symbol OL or OH): Soils. consisting primarily of 
organic matter are called peats (USCS, symbol Pt). Depending on how much decomposition has 
occurred since. deposition, peats can range in texture from fibrous to amorphous. ASTM (2010) stan-
dard D 4427 classifies peats depending on their fiber. content, ash content after burning a specimen to 
constant weight at 440°C, water-holding capacity, and, if appropriate, their botanical composition. 
' There are standard tests for these characteristics. ' ' ' 
' 
, , We mentioned several landforms i~ Chapter 3-a~ong them fluvial, coastal, glacial, and 
lacustrine,-that' may have organic soiis or peat associated with them. Thus it is important, if your 
, project is located in these areas, tliat you look for these materials at your site. Identification and 
characterization of deposits of peat and organic soils is important, because these deposits tend to 
have very poor, engineering properties. They .are often soft •and. weak;' and •thus ·the· stability of 
embankments and foundations constructed on them may be marginal. Furthermore, they are highly 
compressible, so even lightweight structures and low embankments may experience large and unde-
sirable settlements, which can continue for a very long time. These deposits are often very acidic and 
thus corrosive.to buried steel pipes, piles, anchors, and the like .. Finally, underground construction in 
, organic soils can be dangerous because of trapped methane in the soil.. 
: ·. Muskeg is a terin applied to relatively flat and mostly treeless areas consisting of mostly decaying 
, and decayed grasses and plants that thrive in wet, acid soil in areas of abundant rain and cool summers . 
. : The origin of the term muskeg is somewhat obscure, but it is thought to be derived from an Ojibwa word 
"mashkig," meaning swamp or marsh (Pihlainen, 1963). The term muskeg may be applied to an "organic 
terrain'' or peat bog, and sometimes it refers to the organic materials in the bog, which means basically 
it is synonymous with peat. Sphagnum moss is the main constituent of muskeg. Muskeg covers about 
10% of southeast Alaska and about 15% of Canada: Construction on muskeg, especially in the summer 
months, is problematic, to say the least, and often some type of "floating" foundation is necessary. 
4.11.2 Marine Soils 
Because an importimt part' of'geotechnic~l piadi~e is ~~ar'or offshore' in· a ~arineeriviro~ment, w~ 
need to be able to classify marine soils as well as to have some idea of their engineering characteristics. 
Our discussion in Sec. 3.3.4 emphasized the soil types most ~ommonly encountered in coastal landforms, 
1 but what do you do if, for example, your project is to build a dock and quay, an oil exploration or pro-
.; duction platform, or a moorage 9r ship anchorage facility in deep water? 
152 
Chapter 4 · · : :Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
· Noorany (1989) has devised a classification system for marine sediments that includes both 
their . composition' and- depositional· characteristics .. There are, three main: classes 'of sediments: 
lithogenous, hydrogenous, and bio'genous. Lithogenous sediments. come from the· land, while 
hydrogenous sediments are mostly precipitates that include oolitic sands, nonskeletal· carbonates, 
etc. Biogeneous sediments come from marine organisms and include_ calcareous arid siliceous oozes 
and bioclastic granular materials: Details are given in Noorany (1989):'. 
. 
' 
. 
One deposit that presents problems for offshore pl<!-tform construction is that of calcareous sand 
materials. Formed from the calcareous skeletal remains· of coral, mollusks, and algae; these materials 
ar.efound in .large areas offshore of North Afrbi in the Mediterranean:Sea; as well as offshore of 
Southeast Asia, Brazil, a:Ud Australia. During sit~ exploration,they appear·t~ be fairly strong, almost a 
soft rock. However, because these sands are biogenic in origin, they are only weakly cemented, and 
they easily crush when large-diameter piles, for example, are driv~::n into them. Thus, pile capacities are 
often much lower.than predicted by common onshore methods (Murff, 1987, and Poulos, 1988a). 
_. 
.·For. a good description of the_ engineering properties of marine soils, see Noorany and Gizienski 
(1970), Poulos (1988b ), and Noorany (1989). 
· 
· 
4.11.3 Waste Materials and Contaminated Sites 
. 
-
' 
· Waste materials and contaminated sites pose special problems for civil engineering construction. They are 
·often encountered in urban areas. Even in rural areas, however, there are old landfills, dumps, and aban-
, doned mines or other industrial sites, and you·need to be aware of any applicable environmental regula-
tiorisas well as the geotechnical conditions at these areas. It is important that any potential construction 
site be thoroughly investigated as to its previous uses and possible contamination. Many otherwise fine 
• construction sites have been spoiled by the discovery of contaminants in the subsurface soils, and if con-
struction has al~eady started, expensive delays can_result and construction costs can increase enormously . 
. Landfills and dumps•are highly.variable in their material properties, depending on how old the 
·landfill is and how it was operated. Older facilities with loosely dumped municipal wastes can experience 
large total and differential settlements under new construction. Some sort of improvement is normally 
required at these sites for virtually all except the lightest structures. Other factors that rriake construction 
•· work diffiCult include foul odors, flammable gases; rodents and other pests, and exposure to potentially 
·hazardous materials. In rural_ areas,· you· may ·encounter· illegally discarded' garbage,· used appliances, 
wrecked cars,· used tires, and the like that have been dumped in ravines, swamps, and tidal flats, on river 
and stream banks, etc. 
· ' • · · · · 
. Other wastes sometimes of concern to civil engineers include industrial bypro ducts such as slags, 
bottom and fly ashes, and inorganic sludges as well as sediments dredged from harbors and rivers: If these 
materials are contaminated with organics or heavy metals, they require special handling and treatment. In 
. 
. 
. 
any event, geotechnical design and construction at sites with these materials is neither simple nor inexpen-
' sive. (See the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: http://www.epa.gov/ for additional information.) · 
Both surface and underground mining operations typically leave rather unusual deposits and con-
ditions that may cause foundation subsidence or slope instability in the area. Special treatment of loosely 
dumped spoil materials from strip mines is required for foundations at these sites. Mineral processing 
operations produce wastes in the form of tailings imd slurries (slimes) that; if encountered, are very diffi-
cult to stabilize: At all such sites, be sure that all environmental regulations are strictly followed. 
,i, 
4.12 
TRANSITIONAL' MATERIALS: HARD SOILS VERSUS SOFT ROCKS 
' \; . ,' j ' 
".' 
: ' ' 
'. 
' ' 
1 ~ • 
• 
; : • ' 
', ', 
, Geotechnical engineers commonly think of soils and rock as two distinctly different materials, even 
·• though the line between.hard soils and soft rocks is quite fuzzy. Traditionally, soil mechanics and soil 
. engineering differ from rock mechanics and rock engineering; although they may use· the same engi-
neering mechanics, theories of elasticity and plasticity, seepage through porous media,~pi"inciple of 
j 
• ;, 
; . 
·4.12 Transitional Materials: Hard Soils Versus Soft Rocks 
153 
· effective stress, andother theoretical concepts. The world is not composed of only recent deposits of 
soft clays or old intact hard rock .. There are a wide range of geo-materials in that transitional area 
' between soil' ana rock, arid their engineering properties arid behavior are: often quite ambiguous . 
. Sometimes these transitional materials are called intermedtategeo~materials. For example, when tran-
, I';' sitio:~al or illtermediate geo-inateriaiS eire lOad~d in sh~'ai,' their fitilure is n6it~er brittle (occurring at 
small strains) nor ductile (occurring at large strains).'Do excavations in these materials require drilling 
·· 
· and blasting, or can' they be excavated by machinery? With regard to stability and s'eepageproblems, 
the influe'nce of joints and fissures in trimsitional materials may or may not dominate their behavior. 
. . Treating these materials as 'traditional soft soils or hard rocks is totally inappropriate. It is better to 
think of the geotechnical: world as consisting of the 'entire range of possible geologic materials, with 
most materials somewhere between soft soil and hard rock. The geotechnical profession is well aware 
of the gap between soils and rock engineering, arid a number of conferences and symposia have dealt 
with this problem. The papers arid speCial reports in Kane and Amadei (1991 ), Anagnostopolous et al. 
(1993), and Santi and Shakoor (1997) are especially recommended. 
· 
· 
· 
Examples of the transition between soil and rock can be found particularly in· residual and 
tropical soil profiles (see Sec. 3.3.2). In these profiles it can sometimes be difficult to determine when 
the soil ends and rock begins, because the profile gradually transitions between softer soils at the 
top, becoming harder with depth, perhaps with more and more highly fractured and weathered rock 
that may be rather weak and soft, and finally becoming less and less weathered and harder with 
depth. An example is shown in Fig. 4.31. . . 
. 
. 
. 
, 
Kane and Amaoei (1991) and the papers therein 'deal specifically with the soil-rock interface-
how it is detected, specified, and handled during construction. Particularly valuable in this regard are 
Kulhawy et al. (1991) arid Smith et al. (1991). ' 
. 
· 
Tlie soil-rock interface is an area of major and often costly disputes between design engineers 
' and contractors, because what is shown on the plans ana given in the specifications may be very differ-
• ent than what is actually found at the project site. There are frequent disputes about the' depth to rock 
' '' 
shown on the plans and about' the strength, jointing, and nature of the interface,' as well as about the 
problem of rock versus soil excavation.:...:whether drilling and blasting are required or machine excava-
tion can be used: The cost diffen:irice'between soil and 'rock excavation maybe a factor of five to ten or 
more, so large ammints ofmomiy can be involved; depending on the size of the project, depth and 
amount of excavation,and contract details.' ·. : 
' 
' 
' 
. ' ' . 
Topsoil 
Residual· 
soil : 
{saprolite). 
Partially 
weathered 
rock 
Unweathered 
rock 
'i ;· 
FIGURE 4.31 
Schematic of a 
residual soil and weathered rock 
· profile {adapted from Kulhawy 
et al., 1991). {See also Fig. 3.6.) 
154 
Chapter 4 . -· 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
4;13 · . PROPERTIES, MACROSTRUCTURE, AND.CLASSIFICATION OF ROCK MASSES 
: ·· Similar to soil deposits, the macrostructure of a rock inass has an importimt influence on its e~gineering 
·.behavior. This is becimse rock masses almost always contain discontinuities'imd other "defects" that, 
depending ori their physical and geometric characteri~tics, can have a. major influence on stability and 
performance. Whenever we construct a'Joundation on rock o~ ,ex~avate a tunnel in rock, the stability 
. and performance of that. f~imdation or tuniteL is strongly. influenced by the characteristics of.the 
.... · discontinuities in the rock. (Discontinuities include joints, faults, bedding planes, cleavage planes, shear 
. ·_,zones, solution cavities, and so on; and they constitute planes or zones of weakness tha'i may significantly 
reduce the strength and deformability of the rock mass.) Even if the .intact rock is very strong, overall 
· behavior of the foundation or tunnel is controlled by the discontinuities. They must be located and their 
' ' characteristics determined as part of. the geologi~ and geotechnical investigations that precede design 
an'd construction. If these discontinuities are missed in the site investigation or not properly considered 
indesign,failuresmayoccur .. 
· ..... 
··· 
.-·~ 
· 
... 
: ..... . 
In this section, we describe some of the engineering properties of rock masses, some of the charac-
.' teristics of discontinuities in rock, and finally ho~ engineers consider properties and discontinuities in 
.the classification ofrock masses. . . 
' 
' ' ' ' ' ' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' ' 
. . 
. ; 
4.13.1 Properties of RockMasses ... 
. The determination of the strength, modulus, and other engimiering properties. of intact rock is a well-
. developed piutof rock mechimics arid'geotechnical engineering. Most' of the 'common rock mechanics 
tests· are now ASTM standard tests, and they are discussed in Chapter t2~ " · 
· · · ·. , , 
. 
Intact rocks can be classified according to their geologic characteristics (type, mineralogy, crystal-
lography, texture, etc:--:-see Sec. 3.2.3) anct/or their engineering properties (compressive strength and 
. . , modulus r Us11ally only the compressive strength is used to classify intact rock, arid Table' 4.6 presents 
· ' · ·the International Society for' Rock MechaniCs (ISRM) grade, strength classification, field identification, 
' and approximate range of uniaxiill compressive strengthof intact rock: 
' '·' ' 
', . :. 
' . 
' 
. 
.·• 
You may recall from our discussion ofrock structure in Sec .. 3.2.4 that folding, shifting, or faulting 
of rock inasses results in structural features such as joints, folds, 'and faults. (Rock structures also pro-
. 'duce several interesting landfonns, as discussed in Sec. 3.3.9.) In any everi(the rock 'mass inCludes the 
blocks of intact material as well as structural features and discontinuities. ' . '' ' 
' . ''. 
4.13.2 Discontinuities in Rock 
Joints are by far the most common discontinuity in rock masses, and a knowledge of th(!ir orienta~ 
tion, length, spacing, surface characteristics, and the nature' of any infilling is essential for any rock 
engineering design. Goodman (1989) and Wyllie (1999) •· give·. details as to how rock joints. are 
observed, measured, and tested for strength and frictional characteristics. The International Society 
for Rock Mechanics (1981) developed a very a comprehensive procedure for quantitatively 
describing a rock mass (see also Wyllie, 1999, and Sabatini et al., 2002). The procedure gives details 
on five items: 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
L Rock material 
• Type 
• Compressive strength 
• Degree of weathering 
2. Discontinuities · · · 
·. 
. 
• Type (e.g:, fault: bedding, foliati~!l· cl(!avage, schistosity, joints) 
• Orientation (dip angle and direction). 
4.13 Properties, Macrostructure, and Classification of Rock Masses 
155 
TABLE 4.6 Strength of Intact Rock 
Approximate Range 
·of Uniaxial· 
·Point Load 
Compressive Strength· · 
Index 
ISRM 
Description or 
Field Estimate 
Grade 
Classification 
MPa 
psi 
MPa 
psi 
of Strength · 
Examples 
R6 
Extremely 
>250. 
::;36 000 
>10 
>1500 
Rock can only be 
Fresh basalt, chert, 
strong rock 
· , chipped by a geologic 
diabase, gneiss, 
hammer 
granite, quartzite 
R5 
Very strong . 
100-250 15 000-;36 000 . 4-10 
600-1500, Requires many blows of 
Amphibolite, sandstone, 
rock 
. geological hammer to 
basalt, gabbro, gneiss, 
cause fracture 
granodirite, peridotite, 
rhyiolite, tuff 
R4 
Strong rock 
50-100 
7000-15 000 
2-4 
300-600 
Requires more than one 
Limestone, marble, 
hammer blow to cause 
sandstone, schist 
fracture· 
R3 
·Medium 
25-50 
3500-7000 
1.:_2 
150-300 
Cannot be ~craped or . 
.. :' cod crete, phyllite, 
stro~g rock 
· · peeled with a po~ket ' 
schist, siltstone 
.. 
knife; can be fractured 
' with a single blow of.' :. 
',), 
geologic hammer . 
R2 
Weak rock 
5.0-:25 
725-3500 
Can be peeled by a pocket , ·chalk, claystone, 
' ' knife with difficulty; 
potash, marl, 
' " 
~ '" ' 
shallow indentations, . , .. , 
, siltstone, shale, 
. made by blow with point 
of geologic hammer 
rocksalt·. 
yerywe~k,, 
R1 
1.0.:.5.0 
150-725 
cru'mbles u~der firm: 
Highly weathered 
rock 
... 
: blows with point of . 
or altered rock, shale 
'' 
· geoi<:lgical hammer 
RO 
Extremely 
0.25.:.1.0 
35..:150 
a 
Indented by thumbnail·· 
Stiff fault gouge 
weak rock 
•Point load test results on rock with an uniaxial compressive strength less than about 25 MPa (3600 psi) are highly ambiguous. 
After International Society for Rock Mechanics (1979 and 1981 ), Wyllie (1999), Marinos and Hoek (2001 ), and Canadian Geotechnical Society 
(2006). 
• Roughness (e.g., smooth, slickensided, stepped, undulating, .etc.) 
• Aperture width (whether open or closed, etc.) 
3. Nature of the infilling (type/width) 
• Mineralogy, particle sizes, water content, hydraulic conductivity, fracturing of rock walls, etc. 
4. Rock mass description (e.g., massive, blocky, tabular, columnar, crushed, etc.) 
• Joint spacing (close, moderate, wide, etc.) 
• Persistence (areal extent or size within a plane area) 
• Number of joint sets 
• Block size. and shape (small to large) 
5. Groundwater (seepage) conditions (quantities from joints and the rock mass) 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
, 
I, 
·,' 
' 
As an example, Table 4.7 gives the terms used to describe the spacing of joints in a rock mass. The 
ISRM procedure does this for all of the above items, but the table will show you how the system works. 
i ! ! 
I ! 
'l 
1 
156 
Chapter 4 , ·Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
TABLE 4.7 Spacing of Discontinuities in Rock Masses 
Description 
Extremely wide 
. Verywide 
Wide 
· · Moderate ·· 
Close 
Very dose 
Extremely close 
.>6 ;::· 
2-6 . 
0.6-2 
0.2-D.6 
0.06-D.2 
0.02-D.06 
<0.02 
··After International Society for Rock Mechanics (1981), . 
Wyllie (1999). 
4.13.3 Rock· Mass Classification Systems 
., . 
A number of systems have been developed for classifying rock masses. The ASTM (2010) standard guide 
D 5878for rock mass classification lists eightsuch systems, and ~ne of those-the Japanese Society of 
Engineering Geology system-:-has seven subsystems depending oiL the specific applicatiorl (e.g., railway 
tunnels, highway tumiels and slopes, water tunnels). Perhaps the development of so many classification 
systems is not surprising, given the variety of geologic conditions likely to be encountered in practice, the 
different excavation and exploration procedures in common use, and the specific engineering applica-
. tions (tunnels, foundations, excavations, mining, etc.). 
The rock quality designation or RQD attempts to quantify the degree of fracturing and, other 
alteration of the original rock mass. The RQD was developed by Professor Don Deere of the Univer-
sity of Illinois in the early 1960s (Deere, 1963). It is based on the rock cores recovered from core bar-
rels taken during the exploration program. The rock cores are obtained by diamond drilling (preferably 
with a "triple tube': core barrel to get the best-quality rock cores). The cores are placed in core boxes, 
an example of which is shown in Fig. 4.32~ Then the intact fragment lengths are measured and the RQD 
is obtained by summing up the total length of the core pieces that are 10 cm(4 in.) or greaterin length, 
and dividing that sum by the length of the core run. It is usually expressed as a . percentage. 
FIGURE 4.32 
{a) Rock core box from Cumberland, Rhod~ Island showi~g degree of weathering and 
. · fracture from {foot by Kevin Broccolo); {b) close-up of rock core box.· 
' 
. 
· ;, 4.13 
Properties, Macrostructure, and Classification of Rock Masses 
157 
Figure 4.33( a) illustrates the process; care should be taken to distinguish between natural discontinuities 
and those caused by the drilling process. As shown in Figs.4.32(b) and 4.33, sometimes rock defects are 
at an angle with the direction of drilling, and thus it may be difficult to decide what core length actually 
is. Figure 4.33(b) shows how to make correct length measurements for the RQD. Deere and Deere 
(1988) give some additional background arid engineering uses of the RQD. The standard test method 
for determining theRQD ofrock cores is'AsTM (2010) D 6032. · 
',,. 
Core recovery 
Calculation · 
L = 250 mm 
L = 200mm 
'! .• 
L = 250 mm 
L':'190mm 
L =60 mm 
L=Omm 
, I 
I 
I 
(a) 
ROD 
Calculation 
L =.250 mm 
L= 0 
Highly weathered 
·does not meet 
soundness 
requirement 
. L ~ 0 
, 
.Centerline : 
pieces < 100 mm 
and highly 
weathered 
~ 
0 
L = .190 mm 
· . o 
< 100 mm 
No recovery: 
.'j 
C 
·. 
CR 
_T..:.o_:ta_l_le_n-"'g_th_o_f_ro_c_k_r..:.e_co..,.v_e_re_d 
ore Recovery, 
= 
· · Total core run length 
CR = (250+200+250+ 190+60+80+ 120) mm 
1200 mm 
~ Length oi soun.d pieces ; 100 mm 
ROD=~ 
. 
. 
. 
, .· Total core run length 
ROD = (250 + 190 + 
200) mm. * 1 OO~o 
• . 1200 mm 
ROD;, 53% 
(b) 
FIGURE 4.33: (a) Illustration of how RQD is determined; (b) core length determination (after Samtani and 
Nowatski, 2006). 
· ·. · 
· :.:: ' 
1c~ · .• :· ·; 
' 
158 
Chapter4-.': ·,Clay. Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
' . 
.. Example ~.1 
, .r 
,.. 
''·.·, 
:; 
Given: 
,; ·:A core boxcont~ining anmof 4.7ff(1433 mm)ofrock core, as sh6wriiii Fig. Ex:4'.1: 
, , fi,( .-_, 
·:;: ,'" 
. 
.·,:···,;: 
." 
I 
:;· 
: . .. : ;. 
k----- 2.9 
4
.
7 
" ..... · : .. : 
'I 
I 
o.e·· 
1 o.s· 
1 o.s·· 1 0.4· ·1 0.4' 
10.1'10.2'10.1'~.11 
u3· ...•... · . 
1 
... 
.... 
... 
).(: 
.... . 
........ ) 
............ ~.. 
. 
. 
-
. 
'-· 
. 
. 
-i . -~-?'S~--=z---=t:±A~Missing;=;t-
BJ 
BJ 
JT 
JT .MBJT JT? BJJT FRACTUREZONE 
FIGURE Ex. 4.1 
(After U.S. Dept. of Interior, 1998.) 
Required 
Compute the RQD. . 
' 
. 
Solution: Data from the fieldis show~ in Fig. Ex. 4.l..Note the symbols used: In (bedding joint), ir 
Goint), MB (mech!micalbreak);and FZ (fraCture zone). Other ,symbols that may be used are:IJ 
(incipient joint), IF (incipient fracture), and RF (random fracture). · 
· 
Q 
.. Sum of length of pieces 2:: 0.33 It (4 in.) 
. 
2.4 . 
R D = 
X 100 =-X 100 =51% 
· 
.. 
(total length of core run) 
· 
. 
4.7 
• 
1" i.,· 
'. 
, 
From Fig. Ex. 4.1, the lengths of core along the centerline great~r tha~ 4 in. (100 mm) are 0.6 + 0.5 + 
0.5 + 0.4 + 0.4, or a total of 2.4 ft. With a total core run of 4.7 ft, the RQD is 2.4/4.7 X 100 = 51%. 
Hunt (2005) grouped rock cl~ssification systems into those that are reiatively simple, depen-
.. dent on one or two properties, and those with more complex algorithms. The "simple" classification 
systems depend primarily on rock quality designation and velocity indexoeThe velocity index iscom-
puted by dividing thein situ velocity (reduced by rockdefects) by the laboratory-measured seismic 
velocity on an intact piece of the rock; and squaring this ratio. This ratio and thus its square will be 
less than or equal to unity. There is a reasonably well-defined relationship between the velocity index 
and RQD. Table 4.8 shows typical classifications based on RQD and velocity index. Recognize that 
these types of general classifications cannot be used for any detailed evaluation of rock engineering 
properties. 
· . 
.· 
· 
. 
. 
. 
Prior to developing the ASTM (2009) Standard Guide D 5878, ASTM sponsored a symposium 
focused on the different rock mass classification systems in use at that time (Kirkaldie,1988). The ratio-
nale for each system was explained by its developers, and its strong points as well as its weaknesses 
were described. In this section we summarize four such systems. For details, see ASTM (2009) standard 
guideD 5878 and the papers in Kirkaldie (1988). : 
J
4.13 
Properties, Macrostructure, and Classification of Rock Masses 
159 · 
, 
~ r; 
" 
, , 
, -
. 
TABLE 4.8 Rock Mass Classifications Bas~d'6n RQD ~nd V~locityinde~ 
' 
; 
• ' 
• 
• 
' > ' 
: 
• 
' 
• 
: 
' ! 
' . ' 
~ 
·, 
RQD,%·· 
90-100 
75-90 
50-75' 
. 25-50 
o.:..25 .. 
After Hunt (2005). 
Velocity Index 
0.80-1.00 
0.60-0.80 
0.40-0.60 
0.20-0.40 
: Description of Rock Quality 
Excellent· 
. Good, 
-; :,' 
_·l_; 
The Unified R~ck Classification System (URCS) was pattern~d after the Unified S~ii Classifica-
tion System (Williamson and K~lm, 198S), ·and it relies .on four. fundamental properties: oegree of 
.. · weathering, uniaxial compressive strength, discontinuities, ·and density. Although it ignores the rela-
. tionshipbetween geologic structure and slope or excavation orientation, the URCS has apparently been 
· successfully applied to excavations and slopes, as well as to foundations and the blasting characteristics 
of earthen materials. Basic elements of the URCS are given in ASTM (2010) D 5878. 
The Rock Mass Rating system (RMR)-sometimes called the Geomechanics Classification-
was developed by Professor Z. T. Bieniawski in the early 1970s (Bieniawski, 1988). The RMR is based 
on six parameters: uniaxial compressive strength of the rock, RQD, spacing, condition and orientation 
. of discmitinuities, and groundwater conditions. For each category a point total or rating is assigned, 
imd this is used to categorize the rock. The RMR rating can then be correlated to ground Jngineering 
practices, such as niquirements'for excavation support and tunnel support, as well as rock strength 
. parameters. It was originally developed for tunneling, but has also been successfully applied to min-
ing, slopes, foundations, ripability, arid rock bolting. The RMR classification .system also includes 
adjustments that consider the effect of the-orientations of strike and dip in tunneling arid adjustments 
for mining applications. . 
• 
. 
.. 
. . .·. 
' 
. 
·The Q-system or NGi System was developed by N. Barton at the Norwegian Geotechnical 
Institute for selection of reinforcement and support systems for. tunnels in rock.The"Q" comes from 
the rock' mass quality (Q) arid is based ·on six input parameters: RQD,number of joint sets, joint 
roughAess, joint alteration (filling); amount of water, and a stress reduction factor. The o~system was 
developed from case histories of tunnels in Scandinavia where the rock is mostly granitiC, but it has 
also been used for underground chamber support requirements, seismic stability of roof rock, and 
ripability imd excavatability of softer rocks. 
· · 
. . . 
. . 
.. 
Marinos and Hoek (2004) note that RMR and Q are q~iteOKwheri behavior is controlled by 
sliding and ro!ation on discon~inuity surfaces with relatiydy 'tittle faihire of the intact rock. These 
. authors, however, were less successful iri applying these classifiCation systems to massive rock at great 
depths and also tovery weak rock masses. They suggest that the Geological Strength Index. (GSI) pro-
vides more reliable estimates of the. strength and deformability of rock masses for tminds. 
,, The GSI system, devel<;>ped by Hoek and Brown (1997) and extended by Marinos and Hoek 
·, (2000), is .based on a matrix of rock structure versus surface conditions. As shown in Table 4.9, a rock 
mass is characterized according to the intersection of.these. two criteria. Structure is defined. as the 
degree of interlocking among rock pieces; and these "pieces" may include relatively intact rock with 
., : only planes of discontinuity separating them. Surface conditions have to do with the rough~ess, degree 
of weathering, and nature of any fillings' (e.g;, brokeii rockorclay) in fnictures/ : . . .· . .· 
, 
· An excellent example of the use of the GSI for a heterogeneous rockm~ss (flysch)is given by 
Marin<;>s and Hoek(2000) and Hoek (2007). 
. 
. ' 
·: 
' 
·•.· 
· · 
. .c 
; • 
,·'.(' ., 
' 
-
·-- ·- ------· --
--·~ --- ---·· 
')i 
1'\ 
.. •' 
,.,, 
160 
,' J 
1 
' ' 
• ' 
j 
" 
'~. 1._, 
< 
' 
' 
TABLE 4.9 Geological Strength Index Classification System 
GEOLOGICAL STRENGTH INDEX FOR 
JOINTED ROCKS (Hoek and Marinos,ioooj 
From the lithology, structure and. surface condi- ' : : 
tions of the discontinuities, estimate the average · 
value of GSI. Do not try to be too precise. Quoting 
a range from 33 to 37 is more realistic than stating 
that GSI = 35. Note that the table does not apply to 
structurally controlled failures. Where weak planar 
structural planes are present in an unfavourable 
orientation with respect to the excavation face,· 
!:2. 
these will dominate the rock mass behaviour. The 
~ 
shear strength of surfaces in rocks that are prone 
0 
to deterioration as a result of changes in mois-
z 
ture .content will be reduced if water is present. 
8 
When working with rocks in the fair to very poor 
~ 
categories, a shift to the righi may be made for ' : ~ 
wet c?nditions. Wate~ pressure is dealt with by 
·~ g:. 
effective stress analysts: 
· 
::> 
~ " ! 
; ' ; 
(/'J 
'STRUCfURE 
INTACT OR MASSIVE- intact 
rock specimens or massive in situ 
rock with few widely spaced 
discontinuities· : 
· 
rill 
I 
.. :.~ 
· 
BLOCKY- well interlocked un: ' 
· : e:l 
· disturbed rock mass consisting··. · · 
~ 
' 
of cubical blocks formed by three 
u~ 
intersecting discontinuity sets 
~ 
l 
~ 
.., 
~· 
~ 
ii 
Cl .., 
oO.:::. 
0.d 
0 gf.· 
.: ~ 8 
"''~' 
.• .... ..,. 
.;>;;> 
~ 
::;;. 
"'. 
"0 
·~ 
</), 
~ 
.§ 
'tf. 
e 
.., 
~ 
~ 
£ 2 
<t> 
0,.0 
01:Jl 
0 g 
OP:: 
<t> 8 i 
] 
ca 
"0 § 
"0 e .s 
ro 
~ 
~ 
'§ .., 
·"0 
0 s 
' 
.S, 
p:; o· 
;z ~··· 
tl..VJ 
~ 
0. 
~ 
-5 
·~ 
<nl!J 
8 c:: 
.E s 
!3 
I:J) 
"' ro 
"O<l:: 
.., .... 
'"' ro 
..,_ 
.d :::l 
... 
I:J) 
ro 
~ 
.., ro 
~ .... 
>,0 
~~ 
:.a;E 
-oG 
.., 
.... 
:'52 0, 
p:;~~ 
o] .::: 
0 .~ ~ 
P.Vi8 
~ 
0 
.;:: 
~ 
~ 
~ 
::;; 
"' 
"0 e 
.., 
.d 
~ 
>. - "' 
:§an 
..... ..:::.::: 
o"'·e 
0.., .... 
p.] ~ 
~].§ 
g: '-' ro 
:.::: 0 
VJ '-' 
c=:::> 
N/A 
' tl.. I 
{ 
v 
f 
( 
'(! 
( 
A 
I 
I I 
1----------:-----:-----:---:-.' 0 
' 
JC 
} 
} 
} 
} 
} 
11 
} 
} 
partially disturbed mass with 
2;i 
multi-faceted angular blocks 
t3 
formed by 4 or more joint sets . . 
3 
I 
:VERY BLOCKY- interlocked, ' 
: 
• CJ · 
~ t--;f--.--'.,.-,'1---:--;f----'--:f--< 
BLOCKY/DISTURBED/SEAMY-
. folded with angular blocks formed . 
by many intersecting discontinuity' ' 
· sets. Persistence of bedding planes 
., or schistosity ' ' '.' ' 
' 
DISINTEGRATED -'poorly 
interlocked, heavily broken rock· 
. mass with mixture of angular . 
and rounded rock pieces ... 
; r • 
J 'i 
' ~ ; 
"' , 
LAMINATED/SHEARED -Lack. 
·Of bJockiness due tO close spacing 
of weak schistosity or shear planes 
From Marinos and Hoek (2000). 
-
N/A 
'Problems 
161 
PROBLEMS 
·.: l 
4.1 Calcuhite the specific surface ~fa~uti'e' (a) 10mm, (b); l ~n;_, (c)) JJ:m, and (d) 1 nm'o~ a side. Calculate the 
specific surface in terms of both are~s ~nd m2/kg. Assume for the latter cas~ that Ps ;= .2.65 Mg/m3• 
4.2 . Calculate the specific surface of (a) tennis· balls, (b) ping pong balls, (c) ball bearings 1.5mm in diameter, and 
(d) fly ash with approximately spherica1 particles 60 11m in diameter. 
4.3 
4.4 
Describe briefly. the. crystalline or. atomic structure of the following ten minerals. Also list any important 
distinguishing characteristics. 
(a)Sm~~tite . 
. 
'., . ' 
(b) Brucite 
· . 
(c) Gibbsite· .. •: 
(d) Attaimlgite 
(e) Bentonite 
(f) Allophane 
(g) Halloysite 
(h) Illite 
(i) Mica 
(j) Chlorite 
; ',! 
. i ·~ . 
' ' '~ 
Describe the following types of bonding agents fourid .with clay minerals. 
(a) Hydrogen bond 
·(b) Covalent bond 
(c) van der Waals forces 
(d) James bond 
(e) Ward Bonds 
(f) War Bonds 
.. ' 
"• 
. 4.5. Verify that the maximum arid minimum void ratios for perfect spheres given in Table 4.5 are reasonable. 
· 4.6 Which sheet, silica or aluilli~a, would you wear to a tog~ party? Why? 
4.7 A specially processed clay llas particles that are 500 nm thick and 10 000 nm X 10 000 nm wide. The specific 
gravity of solids is 2.80. The particles lie perfectly parallel with an edge: to-edge spacing of 400 nm (i.e., they 
look like thin bricks stacked perfe~tly parallel). 
· · 
. , . 
· 
(a) Initially, the cation valence in the double layer is + 1, resulting in a face-to-face spacing of 1500 nm. How 
many particles per cm3 will there be at this spacing? .What are the void ratio and water content, assuming 
· that the soil is at 100% sattinition? · · · · 
· 
' 
· '·co·'\:· 
· · 
(b) Another sample ofthe clay is mixed such that the cation valence is +2.What are the new void ratio and 
. water content under these conditions? Assume the edge-to-e.dge spacing remains 400 nm and that 
s = lOO%.(After c. c. Ladd.) 
· · 
· 
· 
4.8 Let T be. the layer thicknes~ of a deposit of illite mi;_ed with kaolinite that depositedin fresh water at 
pH~ 7. What would be the effect on' T(increase, decrease, remain the same) if the mixture had been 
deposited in salt water having a high pH? Determine the effect on T by looking at the individual effects on 
the illite and kaolinite. Explain your answer. 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
4.9 Given the particles in Fig. 4.30, is it realistic to show that all the particles are in conta'ct with each other for 
this given plane? Any given plane? Why? 
· 
· 
4.10 A client has ~property that she thinks contain~ chiy minerals of sufficient quality and quantity that it may be 
possible to mine the clays, process them, and seiJ them commercially. She requests that you visit the property, 
obtain samples, determine the type of clay or clays present, and estimate the approximate quantity of day 
available. With what you know so far from the first four chapters, (1) outline the field and laboratory proce-
dures that you would use to find the clay type, and (2) outline the procedures you would use to find the 
extent of the clay materials on the property. 
4.11 At a site near San Francisco Bay, Bay Mud has been dredged and redeposited as a slurry, and it is desirable 
· now to strengthen the dredged material. What chemical(s) additives could be used to improve the strength 
and other engineering characteristics of this slurry? • '· 
162 
Chapter 4 
Clay Minerals, Soil and Rock Structures, and Rock Classification 
\ ·,· 
:': 
'., 
'i' 
4.12 In many areas of the world, soft clays are dredged from a coastal area near the sea and placed inside con~ 
tainment dikes with wiers for water to escape. The idea is to develop areas above the water surface for future 
construction. What chemicals could be added to the slurry to enable it to gain in strength in a shorter time 
· ' than would be possible without. the chemicals? ' · 
· 
· · · 
· · 
4.13 . Describe the fabric of a relict structure soil. In what part of North America would such structures most likely 
be found? 
· 
' . 
' 
' 
4.14 Can a soil have a low void ratio and a high density at the same time? Explain. · 
4.15 Three sections of rock core are shown in Fig. 4.32. The rock comes from nearCumberland, RI, and is called 
Corbormite (Capt~ James T. Kirk, personal communication, 2007). The length of the first (top) run is 56 in. and 
the computed RQD is 82%. For the second run (middle), a length of 60 in. was recovered and the RQD is 
100%. Finally, the third run (bottom) is also 5 ft long and the RQD is 95%. Verify that the calculated RQD 
values for the top and bottom runs are correct. 
4.16 In one core run of 1500 mm selected from cores obtained during drilling for'a bridge foundation in hard 
limestone, the following core recovery information was obtained: 
· 
· 
,.,. 
'· 
] II 
Core Recovery 
(mm) 
· 2so··· · 
so 
so 
.75 
JOO 
125 
75 
·100 
150 .· 
100 
so 
125 
·"' 
Sum=· 
Length of Core Pieces 
> 100mm 
shill.'= 
150 
100 
125 
100 
. 150 .. : 
.100. 
125 
'\'\ .' 
) ' 
~ ·' ' .. 
,' ' ' l 
·.' '; ; .. ·, 
' 
<' 
\ .-l : t 
~' 
: ' 
·. 
''. ; ': 
. ; 
,'' 
: 
' 
Determine (a) the percent core recovery, and (b) the ROp. B~sed on this RQD, what is the rock quality? Why? 
r;·.·. 
.·:· ·,; 
1·'J 
,. 
" 
;; 
; ,' 
~>·'·; 
j 
L' 
5.1 
; -: ; ' 
' ; -~ 
~ .. 
C' H A P>T E R 
5 
I'}' 
INTRODUCTION ·· · · 
., Often iri dvil6ri.gineeri~g p~actice the s~ils at a given site are less than ideal f~·r the. intended construe-
. tion. They niay be \veak, highly compressible, or have a higher hydraulic conductivity than desirable 
from an engineering or economic point of view. It would seem reasonable in such instances to simply 
relocate. the structure or. facility. However,· considerations other. than geotech~i~al often govern the 
location of a stnieture, and the civil engineeris forced to design for the site at hand. One possibility is 
. to adapt the· structure's fmi.ndations io the geotechnical conditions at the site. Another. possibility is to 
. try to'stabiliz(/oi improve the erigineeiing properties of the.soils at the site. Which approach provides 
''the most economical solution will depend on the specific circumstances of the project. . 
. ' 
. 
stabilization methods are usually mechani~at or cliemicat, buteven thennal and electrical stabi-
. lization have. occasionally been used. or considered. In this' chapter. we are primarily' concerned with 
mechanical stabilization or densification, also called compaction. Ch~mical stabilization includes the 
injecting or mixing into the soil of chemical substances such as Portland cement, lime, asphalt, or cal-
cium chloride. Chemical soil stabilization is usually covered in advanced courses in highway and air-
. field pavement engineering and graduate-level geotechnical engineering. Methods for stabilizing poor 
foundation soils will be briefly described at the end of this chapter. 
' ' . ' . ' 
. . 
Compaction and stabilization .are especially impoitant when soil is used as an engineering 
material;.that is, the structure itself is made of soil. Examples of earth structures include highway and 
railroad embankments and fills, earth dams, and levees along rivers. If soils or rocks are loosely 
dumped or otherwise placed at random in a fill, the resulting embankment will have poor stability 
and probably will experience large and undesirable settlements. In fact, prior to the 1920s, embank-
ments were usually constructed by end-dumping soils from wagons or trucks. There was very little 
··attempt to compact or densify the soils and rocks; and failures of even moderately high embank-
ments were common. Of course, earthworks such as levees and diversion dams have been built .for 
, , .. 
thousands of years. However, these structures, for example in ancien( China of India, were con-
structed by, people carrying small baskets of earth and dumping them in the embankment. People 
walking over the dumped materials compacted and thus densified the soils. In some countries even 
163 
164 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
elephants have been used to compact soils, but research has shown that they are not very good at it 
(Meehan, 1967). 
The following symbols are introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol 
g 
D 
D, 
H 
Id 
RC 
Wopt or· 
OMC 
Pdmax 
Pdfield 
Dimension 
L/Tz 
L 
L 
M/L3 
M/L3 
Unit 
.m/sz 
M 
(%) 
M 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
Mg/m3 
Mg/m3 
Definition 
Acceleration due to gravity, 9.80665 m/s2 
Depth of soil improvement for dynamic compaction 
Relative density- Eq. (5.4) 
Drop height for dynamic compaction 
Index density or index unit weight- Eqs. (5.6) and (5.7) 
Relative compaction- Eq. (5.9) 
Optimum water content; sometimes called the optimum 
moisture content (OMC) 
Maximum dry density 
Field dry density 
5.2 
COMPACTION AND DENSIFICATION 
5.3. 
Compaction is the densification of soils and rocks by the application of mechanical energy. It may also 
involve a modification of the water content as well as the gradation of the soil. Granular soils are most 
efficiently compacted by vibration. In the field, hand-operated vibrating plates and motorized vibratory 
rollers of various sizes are very good at compacting sand and gravel soils. Rubber-tired equipment can 
.. also be used to densify sands. Even large free-falling weights have been used to dynamically compact 
loose granular deposits and fills: These techniques are described later in this chapter (Sees. 5.5 and 5.9). 
Fine-grained soils may be compacted in the laboratory by falling weights and hammers and 
by special "kneading" compactors and may even be statically compressed iri a laboratory press or 
loading machine. In the field, common compaction 'equipment inch.ides hand-operated tampers, 
"sheepsfoot" rollers, rubber~tired'rollers, and other type~ of motorized compaction equipment 
(Sec. 5.6). Considerable compaction can also be obtained by pioper routing of the hauling equip-
ment over the embankment during construction. 
. ' 
. ; 
. ' . ., . 
. 
The overall objective of compaction is 'the improvement of the enginee'ring properties ~f the soil 
mass. Specifici:tlly, by compaction: ' 
~ 
· •· 
, i, . 
· ' 
. 
• Detrimental settlements can be reduced or prevented. • · 
• Soil strength can be increased and slope stability improved. 
• Bearing capacity of pavement subgrades can be increased. 
• Hydraulic conductivity can be decreased. . 
. . 
. 
''' ' 
• Undesir~ble volume changes-cau~ed, for exampl~, by frost a~tion, ·~welling, and shrinkage of 
fine~ grained soils~ may be controlled. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
... ' 
THEORY OF COMPACTION FOR FINE-GRAINED .SOILS 
'I 
. 
,, 
· Our understanding of the fundamentals of compaction offine-grained soils is relatively new. R. R. 
Proctor in the early 1930s was building dams for the old Bureau of Waterworks and Supply for the City 
of Los Angeles, and he developed the principles of compaction in a· series of articles in Engineering 
News-Record (Proctor, 1933). In his honor, the standard laboratory compaction test that he developed 
is commonly called the Proctor test. · • • 
•' · · 
l
5.3 Theory·of.CompactionJor Fine-Grained Soils 
165 
' , . Proctor noted that compaction is a function of four variables: (1).dry density Pd, (2) water 
. content w,-(3) compactive effort; and (4) soiltype_(gradation;preseilce of clay:minerals, etc.). Dry 
density and water content you already know from Chapter 2.:They are determined in the laboratory 
.andinthefieldasrequired:· 
,,;.. 
. 
. 
,:,, .. 
Compactive effort is a measure of the mechanical energy applied to a soil mass. It has units of 
energy per unit volume, or N-m/m3 (Note: 1 N-m =·1 joule.) In British engineering units; compactive 
effort is ft-lbf/ft3.Inth'e field, compactive effort is the number of passes or "coverages': of the roller of 
a certain type and weight on a· given volume of soil. In the laboratory, static,. vibratory, impact (or 
dynamic), or kneading compaction is usually employed. During impact compaction, the most common 
laboratory type, a steel rammer is dropped several times on a soil specimen in a mold. The mass of the 
rammer, height of drop, number of drops per layer; number of layers of soil; and the volume of the 
mold are specified, so compactive effort iS'eiisily calculated, as shown below in Example 5.1. First, you 
should know that there are. two. standard laboratory compaction tests in common use: the standard 
Proctor test and the. modified ·Proctor test. The ASTM specifications for each' test • 'are given in 
:i; 
I Table 5.LThe modified test was, developed' during Wod,d 'Ya,r II by the U.~; Army Corps of Engineers 
to better represent the compaction required for airfields to support heavy aircraft. 
As indicated in Table 5.1, the standard and modified tests differ only in terms of the rammer 
weight, height of drop, and number of layers of soil placed in the mold. Methods A, B, and C depend 
only on the gradation of the soils to be ~onipacted. AAS'i-ITO (2010) also has two standard compaction 
tests, Designation T 99 and T 180, that are very similar to the two ASTM compaction tests, D 698 and 
D 1557, for standard and modified effort; respectively. Instead of three methods (A-C),AASHTO has 
four methods (A-D) for different mold sizes arid niaximum'pariicle size of the- soil sample. See 
'AASHTO (2010) for details. 
· 
· 
· 
1 
' 
· 
· 
TABLE 5.1 
Specifications for, th~ Tho Proctor Laboratory Compaction Tests 
Test 
Standard Effort (ASTMTestMethod D 698) 
Modified Effort (ASTM Test Method D 1557) 
·• 
Method 
A 
B 
c 
A 
·::: 
B 
\·.·· 
c 
. -
Rammer 
5.5 lbf (24.4 N) : 
5.5 lbf (24.4 N) 
. ' 
5.5 lbf (24.4 N) 
10 lbf ( 44.5 N) , 
10 lbf ( 44.5 N) 
10 lbf ( 44.5 N) 
weight 
'• 
Height 
12 in. (305 mm) 
12 in. (305 mm) 
12 in. (305 mm) 
18 in. (457 mm) 
18in. (457 mm) 
18 in. (457 mm) 
of drop 
,. 
I 
Mold 
4 in. (102 mm) 
4 in. (102 mm) 
6 in. (152 mm) 
4 in. (102 mm) -
'4 in. (102 mm) 
6 in. (152 mm) 
diameter 
Mold 
'0.0333 ft3 
0.0333 ft3 . '. 
',_ 0.075 ft3 
, .. 
·'· 
0.0333 ft3 ' 
0.0333 ft3 
0,075 ft3 
volume· 
(944 cm3) ' : ' ; 
(944'cm3)': . II' 
(2124 cm3) 
;II 
(944 cnh 
-•> 
. 'I '(944 Cm3) 
.. 
(2124 cm3) 
Material 
Passing No.4 
·Passing 3/8 in. 
Passing 3/4 in. 
Passing No.4' 
· · Passing 3/8 in. 
Passing 3/4 in. 
I 
(4.75 mm) sieve. 
(9.5 mm) sieve :") (19 mm) sieve ' '.; (4.75 mm) sieve' 
(9.5 mni) sieve' 
· (19 'mm) sieve 
Layers 
3 
3 
3 
"5.'" L 
5 
.. ,, 
5 
Blows 
25 
25 
56 
25 
25 
56 
per layer 
. ,; 
.,. 
·' 
·.> ·' : "··· 
·, . 
Compactive 
12 400 ft-lbf/ft3 
. 1 12 400 ft-lbf/ft3 
12 400 ft-lbf/ft3 
56 000 ft-lbf/ft3 
56 000 ft-lbf/ft3, 
. 56 000 ft-lbf/ft3 
· effort ; 1 1 '· 
(600 kN-inlm3)' • (600 kN-rn!ni3) 
' (600 kN-rnlm3) 
(2700 kN-rnJci3)' 
(2700 kN-rn!m3) 
'(2700 kN-rnlm3) 
use 
:525% by mass . , :525% by weight i _:s30% by weight 
:s25% by mass 
; :525% by mass 
. · !s30% by weight 
·'. 
.. ''retained ori' 
. 
retained on . . 
- retained im . .. 
'' 'r~iained on .. ' : 
retained •'on. 
. retained on 
,• 
" 
No.4 sieve 
9:5mmsieve 
19mmsiev'e 
•I 
: No.' 4 sieve 
9.5'mm sieve 
,);., '' 119 mm sieve 
d 
., 
., .. 
., 
·-·' 
. ,. 
After ASTM (2010). 
166 
Chapter 5. ;; · Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
'·' 
ASTM Standard Practice D 4718 discusses how to calculate the densities and water contents of 
soils containing oversize particles when you know the data for the soil fraction with oversize particles 
·removed. Sometimes this is called the ."rock correction" factor. The practice is valid for soils with up to 
40% retained on the No.4 sieve, and it may also apply to soils with up to 30% retained on the 19-mm 
sieve (ASTM,2010). • 
:.1 
,'·;'' 
· · Exampl,e 5.1· · · 
·;· 
;,, 
' ~ I ... 
'. 
Given: 
: 
1 ,, 
,f ,. 
I 
, 
, •••"' 
, 
·,..ii 
Standard Proctor test specifications (seeTable 5.1 ). 
!';' 
, Required: , . 
·:: 
:Calculate the compacti~e effo~fin both SI and British Engineerin.g'units. Do this for'the 102 mm 
diameter mold:·' 
· · 
·' 
· 
. 
: • ··· 
" · 
: '·' 
:' l 
· · Solution: See Table 5.1 for appropriate dimensions and AppendiX A for relevant unit conversion factors. 
) ~ '!' 
' 
1 
' 
> 
: 
, 
• '' 
' 
: 
: 
: 
: 1 
',;-
' •• 1 
\. 
:-
• -: .,\ 
' • '. : 
·: 
j '. 
. . : . · ; · . , a . . : SI units: 
. , . , , , 
, ":·~ ... , 
From Table 5.1,: 'we ,k~ow that the weight of.the r~m~er 'is 24 N (rammer mass is 
5.3.1 
2495 kg X 9.81 m/s~. = 24 N), and the height ofdrop, of the rammer is 305 mm. The soil is 
placed in three layers, and each layer is tamped 25 times. The volume of the 102 mm diameter 
mold is 944 cm3• Therefore the compactive effort ~s 
' .. 
(24 N)(305 mm)(3layers)(25 blows/layer).. . . . 
3 . 
. 
. 
. 
= 59l.kN-m/m3 
· 
· 
944cm 
· 
· '• 
-· 
· or, as ASTM calls it; 600 kN-m/m3. This is, of course, equivalent to 600 kJ/m3• 
' 
. 
. 
b. British engineering u~its: 
; 
5.5lbf (lft)(3)(25) 
compactive effort = · 
3 
'= 112,375 ft-lbf/ft3 
0.0333 ft 
. 
or, as ASTM calls it; 12,400 ft-lbf/ft3. · .. 
·,r,· 
. , For other types of compaction, the calculation of coinpactive effort is not so simple. In k~eading 
COmpaction, for example, the tamp~r applies a given pressure for a fraction of a S(!COnd. The kn(!ading 
action is supposedto simulate the compaction produced by a ~'sheepsfoot" rolier.and·other·types of 
field compaction equipment. In static compaction,-the soil is simply pressed into a mold urider a con~ 
stant static stress in a laboratory testing machine.·; - -
,-:-
Process of Compaction 
. The process of compaction of fine-grained soils can best be understood by looking at the common lab:' 
'oratory compaction or Proctor test. Several specimens from the same soil sample are prepared at dif-. 
ferent water contents. Theneach specimen is compacted accordingto the Proctor'compaction test 
. specifications given in Table 5.1. Typically, the total or :wet density and the actual water content of each 
compacted specimen are measured. The dry density for each sample can then be calculated from phase 
relationships we developed in Chapter 2. 
'· 
· 
· 
- ;':, 
2 5.3 Theory of Compaction for Fine-Grained Soils 
167 
::._·Mt 
p--:- v 
... '' 
t 
:p 
Pd = 1 + w 
(2.6) 
. (2.14) '' 
When the dry densities. of each specimen are determined and plotted versus' th~ir respective 
water, contents, then ll curve called ,a compactiOf1:. curve for the particular Proctor c,ompactive effort is 
obtained. For example, in Fig. 5.1, curve A shows the results of a staQdard Proctor test conducted on a 
sample o'fglaciai till from Indiani. E~ch-data point on the curve represents' a single compaction test, 
and usually atleast'four or five indiv~dual compaction tests are required to completely determine the 
compaction curve .. This curve is unique for a givensoil type, method of compactimi, and (constant) 
compactive effort. The peak point of the compaction curve is an important point. The' water content 
corresponding to the maximum dry density is lmciwn as the optimum water content (also known as the 
optimum moisture content, OMC).Not~ that the maximum dry density is only a maximum for a spe-
cific compactive effort and method of cmnpai:tion: This does not necessarily reflect the maximum dry 
density that can be obtained in the laboratory or in the field. 
' . 
. 
Curve B in Fig. 5:1 is the compacticm curve obtained by the modifiedPro~tor co~paction test on 
that same glacial till s~il. Recali from Table 5,1 thai.this tesiJ.!tilizesa heavier hammer ( 4.5 kg or 10 lb ), 
a greater height of fal1(457 mm or 18 in.), and five layers tamped 25.times into either.a 102 mm (4 in.) 
or 152 mm (6 in.)'diameter Proctor mold.'Note that increasing'the compactive effort increases the 
maximum dry density, as expected, but at the same time the optimmn water content decreases. This is 
an import~nt observation'that we will use later in this chapter . 
. · Why do we'get compaction curves such as those shown in Fig:5J? Starting afa low water con-
tent, 'as the water content increases,: larger and larger water films develop around the soil particles. This 
process tends to "lubricate'? the particles imd makes it easier 'for them to b'e moved about and reori-
ented into a denser configuration. However, we eventuallyreach a water conte~t'where'ih.e density 
does not increase any further. At this point; water starts to replace soil particles in the mold, and since 
Pw << Ps, the dry density curve starts to fall off, as shown in Fig. 5.2. 
. : , 
' 
' 
, 
' 
'' 
' 
- ~ 
' 
' 
' \ y.. 
. -( 
-' ., 
, 
Q, 
~ 
'(j) 
c: 
Q) 
"C 
~· 
'0· 
,;, 
(B) Modified 
Proctor 
.. 
· .. 'Water content, w (%) 
FIGURE 5.1 .• Standard 
~d modifi~d Procto'r com'paction curv~~· 
for Crosby B till. 
168 
Chapter 5. , Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
t',' 
··:,, 
1.; .. 
"' -§, 
5 
· .• 
<:l: . 
.i-
·c;; 
c: 
Q) 
0, 
·'· 
Density Pwet• as __ _ 
.c,ompacted 
:•;) 
Density when . 
. 
compacteddry 
~ 
plus mass of 
' water added 
·',! 
I 
. Water content, w (%) · 
.FIGURE 5.2 The water content-density relationship indicating the increased density. 
··~resulting from the addition of water and that due to the applied compaction effort .. , , , , .. · 
, Soil is a silty day, LL = 37, PI = 14, standard Proctor compaction (after.Johnson and, .. 
Sallberg, 1960). 
' 
· · 
· 
· · 
.. . 
· . · 
· . 
· 
",,}' 
,, 
5.3.2 
Typical Values; Degree ofSaturation 
, Typical values of maximum dry density are around 1.6 to 2.0 Mg/m3 (100 to 125 lbf/ft3) with the maximum 
range from about 1.3 to 2.4 Mg/m3 (80 to 150 lbf/ft3). (Densities are also given in British engineering units, 
because you are likely to encounter them in United States practice.) Typical optimum water contents are 
between 10% and 20%, with an outside maximum range of about 5% to 40%. 
' 
Also shown on Fig. 5.1 are curves representing different degrees of saturation of the soil. From 
Eqs. (2.12) and (2.15), we can derive the equatim1 for the'se theoretical curves. 
. 
PwS 
pa=-.--
w + Pws 
Ps 
.' 
(5.1) 
The exact position of the degree of saturation curves depends only on the value of the density of the 
soil solids Ps· Note that at optimum water content for the soil in Fig. 5.1,S is about 75%. Note, too, that 
the compaction curve, even ~thigh water contents, never actually reaches the curve for "100% satura-
tion" (traditionally called the zero air voids curve). And this is true even for higher compactive 
efforts-for example, curve Bin Fig. 5.1.'Even if you keep adding water to the sample, it will never 
quite become completely saturated. 
. 
. · 
Also shown in Fig. 5.1 is the line of optimums (LOO). This is the line or curve drawn through the 
peak points of the compaction curves determined at different compactive efforts; but on the same soil. 
The LOO line will be almost parallel to the 100% S curve. · 
· · . 
' · 
· :, .. 
_______. 
:' 5.3 Theory of Compactio'n for Fine-Grained Soils 
169 
Ofteri ill. geotechnical practice, compaction properties are given in terms of unit weights rather 
than densities. In fact, both terms may be used interchangeably, especially .in discussions of field com-
paction and testing. Using the principles given in Sec. 2:3.2, you can convert the density equations given 
.above to equivalent unit weight equations. For example, Eq. (2.6) becomes y = W 11V1 [Eq. (2.20)], and 
Eq. (2.14) becomes 'Yd = yl(l + w).: · 
· · 
:, Another way to determine the water-content density relations is the chart shown in Fig. 5.3. The 
··ordinates are in terms of both density and unit weight. On this figure, relationships for 0%,10% and 20% 
' ' 
13 
' 
..9: 
' 
:;!. 
' 
110 ' 
" 
1: 
' ' 
Q, 
"Cl 
~ 
'Qi 
'iii 
$: 
c: 
-
Ql 
·c: 
'C 
:::> 
c:-
i::'. 
0 
0 
' ' ' ' 
' ' 
90 ' ' 
' ' 
' ' 
' ' 
,. 
80 
' 
0 
~ ' 
' ,' 
S= 90%. S= 100% 
~~· 
' ' -
' 
·c: 
' 
:::J 
' ' 
' 
' 
' 
' ., 
' 
' 
' 
' ' 
' ' ,e ' 
,-· 
\ 
c: 
rJi 
'C 
'Ci >· 
E 
Ql 
~ 
Ql 
a.· 
Moisture content, w (%) . 
0.333 
0.43 
0.54 
0.67 
0.82 
1.0 
·FIGURE 5.3 . Solution of the soil solids water-voids relationships of soil masses:. 
(Bureau of Public Roads, now the Federal Highway Administration). 
/ 
'l: 
Cll 
0 
~ 
'C 
'Ci > 
170 
Chapter 5. 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
. air voids (S =.100%, 90%, and 80%) are plotted for specific gravities Gs of 2.55, 2.60, 2.65, and 2.70. 
Also contained on this figure are lines of wet unit weight and porosity. 
To use this figure, plot your compaction curve and determine the maximum. dry density and 
optimum water content as usual. Assume you obtain the values at point 0, or a water content of 17% 
and a dry density of 106 pcf. Also assume that the specific gravity Gs is 2.70 for this soil. Then use the 
dashed lines to find that the .wet density is 124 pc£ Now for this point; interpolate for the percent air 
voids between 0% and 10% and find the percent air voids equal to ;...,8%. Also, for point 0, the poros-
ity, n, on the 0% air voids curve (or the 100% saturation curve) is ~37%. Using the nomograph in the 
upper right of the figure, find the void ratio equal to ,.:,0.59. You can use Fig. 5.2 to solve for similar 
compaction problems. 
Other useful equivalent equations are developed in Example 5.2. 
Example 5.2 
'/t 
Given: 
Equations (2.12) and (5.1). 
. 
. 
Required: 
Convert these equations to their equivalents using unit wei~hts. 
Sob1tion: For Eq. (2.12); go hack and look at Exampl~ 2.10. Or . 
G;yw 
I'd = .r.+ e 
:',' 
/1 
To convert Eq. (5.1), use the basic relationshipsfor p 'andy dev~loped in Se~. 2.3.2, 
Pw +S 
Pd = 
. Pw S 
w+-
Ps 
If S = 100%, Eq. (5.2) becomes 
I'd 
g 
'yw S 
g: 
__ ....::;_.:_'Yw-- = 'Y d = 
. w + .( 
·g )s 
'Yw 
.. 
Gs g 
'YwGs 
'Y d = Wsat G s + l 
,·Yw S . 
w+~ 
,Gs 
(2.28a) 
(5.2) 
(5.3) 
Equations (5.2) and (5.3) can be easily re~rranged to give useful relationship's for Wsat as a function of 
~.~.~.md~ . 
· 
" > 
5.3.3 
Effect of Soil Typeand.Meth~d of Compaction.: 
Typical compaction curves for different types of soil are illustrated in Fig. 5.4. Notice how a well-graded 
sand with silt (SW-SM soil, No.1) has a higher dry density than a more·uniform sand (SP, No.8). For 
clayey soils, the maximum dry density tends to decrease as plasticity increases:' 
2.2 
2.1 
M' 
~ 2.0 
~ 
"" 1.9 
Q. 
:;;. 
'iii 1.8 
c: 
Q) 
'0 
2:-
1.7 
Cl 
1.6 
5 
Soil No. 
53 • Theory ofCompaction for Fine-Grained Soils 
171 
'.o' 
Zero air voids, 100% S 
Water content,; w (%) ' 
' 
,· 
' 
' 
' 
' 
. 
' 
FIGURE 5.4 
Water.'~ontent-d~y 
density relationships for eight 
soils compacted according to the 
standard Proctor method (after 
Johnso~ ~md Sallberg, .1960). 
. . 
Description and USCS Symbol 
Sand, _ Silt 
LL 
PI . 
. Well~graded sand with silt SW~SM · 
Well-graded silt SM · 
· 
: : ; , 
Clayey sand SC 
· ,, 
Sandy lean clay CL 
.. · 
Lean silty clay CL 
Loessial silt ML 
Fat clay CH. 
. . 
.·r 
PoOriY graded salld SP. 
;10' ., 
; 15·; 
9 
33 
. ':}. '64 
85 
22 
6 
<·16 ·, . ':NP 
. ;. i6.. 
NP 
. 22 
.4 
28 
9 
36 
15 
26 
2 
,67 
.. 40. i 
···NP 
. Go back at look again at TableS,l and note the limitations in terms of particle sizes for the use 
of theProctor compaction tests (last row of the table). What do you do if the percentage of coarse or 
'.'oversize" material is greater 30%? One possibility is to use the compaction test procedure developed 
by the .U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, method USBR 5515, that uses a large compaction mold with a vol-
ume of about 0.04 m3 (U.S. Dept. of the Intefior: 1990). You should never replace the coarser fraction 
:·!·'with' an' equivalent mass of finer-grained soil, as this will give incorrect results (Torrey and Donaghe, 
. 1994). The presence'ofa significant amount of oversize material in earth and earth~rock fills causes 
problems both in tests for design and in compaction control in the field (discussed in Sec. 5.7.2). 
· · · Another problem with compaction tests on especially 'coarser-grained residual soils (see Sees. 3.3.2 
and 4.12), is that the soil particles break down or'degradedue to theimpactof the Proctor hammer 
'' ' : during compaction: This 'phenomenon causes 'an- increase in maximum· dry density 'as the material 
··becomes finer grained. The problem is that the test value may not be representative of field conditions. 
Parenthetically this is the reason why both ASTMD 698 and D 1557 specify that compacted soil cannot 
· l · · · be reused for subsequent compaction 'testing. Gap-graded soils also present problems for compaction 
· · 
tests and theirinterpretation: · 
· 
:: ' .· 
' 
· Compaction behavior of fine-grained soils as described in Sec. 5.3.1 is typical for both field and 
laboratory compaction. The curves will have different shapes and positions on the Pd versus w plot, but 
·in general the response will be similar to that shown in Fig. 5.5, iri which the saine soil is compacted 
under different conditions. The standard and modified· Proctor laboratory tests were developed as a 
· standard of comparison for field compaction.:... that is, to see if the rolling or compaction was sufficient. 
172 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
120.---~--~--------~--~------~--~ 
~ 110~--~~~-+----~----~--~~----r----1-----j 
.c 
:::.. 
90~--~~~--~~--~--~--~--~--~ 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Water content(%). 
1.9 
1.8 ,;;-
..§ 
Cl 5 
~ 
·u; 
c 
CD 
"C· 
~ 
1.6 _Cl 
1.5 
FIGURE 5.5 · Comparison of fi~id and laboratory com pactio~. (1) Laboratory 
static compaction, 2000 psi; (2) ·modified Proctor; (3) standard Proctor; · 
(4)1aboratory static compaction, 200 psi; (5) field compaction, rubber-tired 
load, 6 coverages; (6) field compaction,sheepsfoot roller, 6 passes. · 
Note: Static compaction from top and bottom of soil sample. (After Turnbull, 
1950, and as cited byLambe and Whitman, 1969.) (See also USAE WES.1949.) 
The approximation to field ~ompaction is not exact, as mentioned,b~cau~e"the standard laboratory 
compaction is a dynamic-impact type, whereas field compaction is essentially a kneading-type com-
paction. This difference led to the development of the Harvard miniature compactor (Wilson, 1970; 
U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990, Procedure 5510) as well as larger laboratory kneading compactors. 
Field compaction control procedures are described in Sec.'5.7 .. · 
!;' 
,- .. 
~ {-1,, 
;I 
5.4 •- '-STRUCTURE OF COMPACTED FINE~GRAINED SOILS 
: 
•'!c' 
The structure that results from the compaction of fine-grained soils depends on the method or type of 
compaction, the compactive effort applied, the soil type, and on the molding water content. Usually the 
_ _water content of compacted soils is referenced to the optimum water content for a given type of com-
paction. Depending on their position on the compaction curve, soils are called dry of optimum, near or 
. at optimum, or wetofoptimum. Research on compacted clays has shown that when they are com-
pacted dryof optimum, the soil structure is essentially independent of the type of compaction (Seed 
·,and Chan, 1959). Wet of optimum, however, the type of compaction has a significant effect on the soil 
structure and thus on the resulting engineering properties of the soil..· 
:' .. , :. 
· 
. :The real structure and fabric of compacted clays is about as complex as the fabric of natural clays 
described in Chapter 4. At the same compactive effort, as the water content increases, the soil fabric 
. becomes increasingly oriented. Dry of optimum fine-grained soils are always flocculated, whereas wet 
of optimum the fabric becomes more oriented.or dispersed. In Fig. 5.6, for example, the fabric at point 
. , . C is more oriented than at point A. Now, if the compactive effort is increased, the soil tends to become 
, more oriented, even dry of optimum. Again, referring to Fig. 5.6, a sample at point E is more oriented 
' than at point A. Wet of optimum, the fabric at point D will be somewhat mor~ oriented than at point B, 
. Water content. 
5.5 :Compaction of Granular Soils 
173 
,, :· 
,',;: 
®: i t 
. 
I I 
\Low 
. 
1 compactive 
'"effort . 
FIGURE 5.6 • Effect of compaction ·. 
.. 
on soil structure {after Lambe, 
1958a) . 
alth~ugh the, effect is less significant than dry of optimum. Because a clayey soil compacted dry of 
optimum has a wate~ deficiency, its structure is more sensitive to change than if it were compacted wet 
of optimum. , 
. 
. · · · · . . . 
. 
. _·. . 
. 
.. _ , 
. . · . 
. . . 
._ 
.. 
_ 
.· . 
· 
The engineering properties of compacted fine~ grained soils, deperid greatly on the structure and 
fabric of the soil, because, as we have seen, the structure depends ()n the molding water content, com-
pactive effort , and type of compaction. We discuss the effects of compaction on shrinkage and swelling 
characteristics of soils in .Chapter 6. Hydraulic conductivity of compacted clays is described in in 
Chapter 7, ~hile the·. compressibility of compacted clays is discu~sed in Chapter 8. ·Finally, the shear 
: , strength properties of fine-grained soils are discussed in Chapter 12.' 
· · · 
· 
5;5 ' 
COMPACTION OF GRANULAR SOILS 
· · · 
';> 
F 
We mentioned earlier in this chapter that granular soils are mostefficiently compacted or densified by 
vibration. This is true both in the laboratory and in the field. n{ese parti~les have no inherent cohesion; 
they are large enough so that gravityforces between particles are greater than surface forces (Chapter 4). 
Theyare easily moved froma looser into adenser configuration or packing through vibration. 
· 
· 
. The variables that influence vibratory densifi~ation' are the characteristics of the (1) soil and 
(2) equipment, and (3) procedures used in the field: Soil characteristics include the initial density, grain 
size distribution and particle shape, and water coli tent. From our discussion of granular soil fabrics in 
Sec. 4.10, it should be obvious that densification applies only to loose granular materials; dense mated-
: ,als.ordinarily donotneed additional compaction. Well-graded materials are generally easier to compact 
; than uniform materials; similarly, dry soils are easier to densify than wet soils. The thickness of the layer 
. o_r deposit a!soiriflu7nces densification. 
· · 1 
. . , . , , .• 
Equipment characteristics include the mass and size. of the vibratory. equipment and its frequency 
and amplitude of vibratiop. Sometimes the frequency and amplitude of vibration are varied to improve· 
densification. Field compaction equipmentisdiscussed in Sec. 5.6 .. , : , . . 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
For compacted fills, field procedures include the number of passes of the vibratory equipment, 
thickness of the lift or layer being compacted, frequency of 'the.vihrator, and the towing speed. Several 
, diffe~ent procedures. are. available for, densification of deep deposits. of granular, m<derials, and these 
arebriefly,described in Sec. 5.5.2. Compaction ofrock fills is discussed in Sec. 5.5.3.• .... 
: .· 
174 
Chapter 5 : , :Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
5.5.1 
Relative or Index Density 
1.: 
Recall from Sec. 4.10that granular soils can have a rath~r wide range of void ratios and densities. The 
actual range depends on the grain shape, grain size distribution, and the fabric of the soils. We also 
defined maximum void ratio (emax) or minimum density (Pamin) as the loosest possible condition of a 
dry granular soil. The corresponding densest possible condition of that soil is· the minimum void ratio 
(einin) and maximum dry density (Pamax)· 
. 
. 
Determination of the maximum and minimum values is not so easy. Laboratory test results are 
often highly variable and operator-dependent,(Selig and Ladd, 1973). Even the ASTM (2010) tests, 
D 4253 for maximum density and D 4254 for minimum density, do not necessarily give .the absolute 
maximum or minimum density values; thus they are called maximum and minimum index densities. 
The corresponding void ratios are emin• the /minimum index void ratio and emax• the maximum index 
void ratio. For completeness, the maximum and minimum index unit weights are also defined. 
Often in practice it is useful to know just how loose or how dense a sand specimen or granular 
soil deposit is relative to the maximum arid miriimum possible conditions. This leads to the concept of 
index density (or index unit weight), also co~monly referred to as relative density. The index density D, 
is used to compare the void ratio e of a given soil with the maximum' and minimum void ratios. Index 
density is defined as 
· 
,,) 
· · 
e 
- e 
' D, = 
max 
·,X 100(%). 
• 
,, 
> 
•• 
~inax -
emin 
(5.4) 
. , It is us11ally expressed as apercentage. Index or relative density can also be stat~d in' ~en~s of maxi-
. mum and minimum index densities and index unit weights as 
' 
,, 
. 
'v'=<tlpd~:d·~·llpd':>~ 100
~·.·. l'd::_l'amin .(Ya~a~):x 100
···· ''· 
' · llpj~i~ _: llpa:nax ', ·. 
· 
/'dma~- I'd min 
I'd 
. . 
. 
(5.5) 
• 
: 
j 
> -~ 
',' 
' 
' 
-
' 
• 
• 
The parameters Pd max and Pd min are, respectively; the maximum and minimum dry density of a soil 
obtained from ASTM standards D 4253 and D4254. The pj max corresponds to the minimum void ratio 
( emin), and Pd min to the maximum void ratio ( emax). The density index I a is the ratio, expressed as a per-
centage, of the difference between the value of any given dry density (or unit weight) and the minimum 
dry density (or unit weight) to the difference between its maximum and minimum dry densities (or 
unit weights)>In equation form: 
. · 
, · 
; 
. •': ; . ' 
· 
· ' ' 
.\ 
. ' . 
: Pa- Pdmin 
X·100 (%) 
'Ia = 
. . 
. 
',. 
Pdmax .-:- Pdmm· 
(5.6) 
or 
!1' 
' 
Ya - Y~min X 100 (%.) 
I = 
. 
. 
, 
d 
.I'd max ;-:-,./'dmm 
(5.7) 
The maximum-minimum index density tests are applicable to' clean, free~draining granular soils 
'·. · · · 
containing a maximum of 15% passing the 75 11m or the No. 200 sieve. An approximate density classi~ 
fication based on D, is: forD,<: 15%, the soil is classified as very loose; fcir 15-35%, loose; 35-::-65%, 
medium dense; 65-85%, dense; and >85%, very dense. 
. 
The relative density .of a natural soil deposit very strongly affects its engineering behavior. Con-
sequently, it is important to conduct laboratory tests on speCimens of the sand at the same relative den-
sity as in the field. Sampling of loose granular materials, especially at depths greater than a few metres, 
is very difficult. Since these materials are very sensitive. to everi the slightest vibration, one is never sure 
the sample has the same density as the natural soil deposit. Therefore, different kinds of penetrometers 
are used in engineering practice that test the soil while it is still in the ground (or in situ), under the 
assumption that it has not been significantly disturbed. The penetration resistance values are roughly 
~~-
5.5.2 
:5.5 Compaction of Granular Soils 
175 
correlated with relative density. For deposits at shallow depths where direct access is possible, other 
techniques have been developed to measure the in-place density of compacted soils. These techniques 
are discussed in detail in Sec. 5.7. 
Densification of Granular Deposits 
When structures are to be founded on deep deposits of loose granular materials, settlements usually 
control the design. In earthquake-prone areas if the groundwater table is high, these deposits are sus-
ceptible to liquefaction (Chapter 7); Deep foundations can always be used, but they are relatively 
expensive, and it is often more economical to densify the subsoils to decrease settlements and mitigate 
liquefaction potential. Because densification by heavy surface vibratory rollers is usually insufficient, 
as we shall see in the next section, other techniques must be employed that carry the vibratory energy 
to greater depths. These techniques include. dynamic compaction, densification by blasting, vibro-
compaction and vibro-replacement techniques, inundation with water (for collapsible deposits, 
Chapter 6), and compaction piles. All these techniques are obviously applicable only to new construc-
tion, and blasting is used only at very remote sites needing densification. 
In this section, we discuss only the most . common techniques: dynamic compaction, vi bra-
compaction, and vibro-replacement. For a detailed discussion ofthese and other soil improvement 
methods, see Hausmann (1990) and Holtz et al. (2001), among others. 
· 
Dynamic Compaction-The method basically consists of repeatedly dropping a very heavy weight 
(10 to 40 tons mass) some height (10 to 40 m) over the site. The impact produces shock waves that cause 
densification of unsaturated granular soils. In saturated granular soils, the shock waves can produce par-
tialliquefaction of the sand, a condition similar to quicksand (discussed in Chapter 7), followed by con-
solidation (discussed in Chapter 8) and rapid densification. The variables include energy (drop height and 
weight of pounder), the number of drops at a single point (3 to 10), and the pattern of the drops at the sur-
face (5 to 15m center-to-center). Figure 5.7 shows a pounder just impacting the 'surface of a loose sand 
layer. Eventually this site will look like a set of organized moon craters. The craters can be filled with sand 
and additionally tamped, or the area between them can be smoothed out by the pounder itself. 
Dynamic compaction was apparently first used in Germany in the mid-1930s during construction 
of the Autobahns (Laos, 1936). It has also been used in the USSR to compact loessial soils up to 5 m 
deep (Abelev, 1957). In the United States, Bob Lukas of STS Consultants about 1970 used a wrecking 
ball to compact loose building rubble in Chicago. He soon found that a flat-bottom weight (either a 
stack of steel plates, or a steel box filled with concrete) was more effective. About the same time, 
dynamic compaction was further refined and promoted in France and elsewhere by Louis Menard 
(Menard and Braise, 1975), Menard also developed v~ry heavy pounders (up to 200 metric tons mass) 
. , and massive tripod cranes for lifting them to drop heights up to40 m. Improvement is claimed to depths 
down to 40 m. In North America, dynamic compaction has been used on a more modest scale by con-
. tractors using ordinary equipment (Leonards et al., 1980; Lukas, 1980 and 1995). Modest depths can be 
. . densified by ordinary construction cranes, but for heavier weights and great drop heights, special 
cables, crane clutches, and stronger booms are required to avoid damaging the crane. 
The depth of influenceD, in metres, of the soil undergoing compaction is given by Lukas (1995) as 
. D = n(W>< H)vz 
where D = depth of improvement in m~tres~ 
. 
· n = an empiricafcoefficient that is less than LO~. · 
. W · = mass of tamper in megagni~s, · · 
H ~ drop height in metres. : 
(5.8) 
The value of n varies from about 0.35 to 0.6 'depending on the soil type, the ease with which water will 
flow through the soils, and the degree of saturation. Leonards et al. (1980) recommended n = 0.5. 
176 
Chapter 5: 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
;.1 
'',, 
i;' 
•I; 
_.' 
I , ' 
~; 
'~;, •, • I. 
'FIGURE 5.7. ·Dynamic com-
paction at a site in Bangladesh . 
. The 100-ton crane isdropping 
a 16-metric-ton weight 30 m . 
(courtesy of S. Varaksin, 
; .• Techniques Louis Menard, 
., · · Longjllmeau, France):. · · 
... 
'·: 
The heavier the weight and/or the'greaterthe drop height, the greater the depth of compaction, 
. . and several-researchers have tried to develop relationships between applied energy and surface area 
·'-''treated. Leonards et al. '(1980Yalso found that the amm.int of improvement due to compaction in the 
'·z~ne of maximum improvement correlates best\vith the product of the energy per drop times the total 
·:;·:'energy applied per unit of surface area. Lukas (1995) noted that the mass of the tamper;drop height, 
grid spacing, and the number Of drops at each grid poiiit location all influenced the ~pplied energy and 
therefore the effectiveness ·of the densification. Research has. shown that there is a limit to how much 
'improvement is possible, even with heavier weights and greater drop heights.: • 
. 
. 
Not all soil deposits are conduCive to dynamic compaction, especially if a significant percentage of 
fines is present or if the soils have some plasticity. Clean granular deposits, mine spoils; loosely dumped 
fills, and even garbage dumps have been succe~ullydensified with dynamic compaction. Treatment of 
silt deposits has been less successful and the method is notrecomniended for clay or peat deposits. Den-
sification of stratified sites also has not beeri yery successfuL For example, even a.thin clay layer will 
absorb much of the dynamic' energy arid prevent densification of the loose sands belo\V it. 
Lukas (1995) gives detailed information on the design of dynamic compaction: Actual construe-
; . , , , tion is most often done by specialty foundatiop contractors. 
·· 
· · · 
· · 
,, 
~ 
. '· 
5.5 : Compaction of Granular Soils 
177 
. 
Vibro-Compaction-Vibro-compaction refers to the densification of granular deposits with some 
• ·. type of a vibrating probe that is vibrated, jetted, or otherwise inserted into the ground. Probes are usually 
~ : supported by a crane, and several different types hilVe been developed by contractors and engineers. 
·: They can be tubes or pipes, both closed and open ended, rods with wings or blades attached, or beams or 
. ; . :plates of various shapes, some with holes in 'the web. Cylirldfical probes have typical diameters of 300 to 
450 mm, and that is the approximate widthof the:piate~n'ct wing-type probes. Some systems have the 
:vibrating engine in the bottom of the probe, while ~the}s llave the vibrator attached to the top of the unit. 
Most systems use a constant-frequency vibrator, typicaily 12-20Hz, but a few have variable vibrators that 
· allow the engineer to match the frequency io the resonance of the sand deposit. 
Often a cone of settlement 9c.curs 'at the ground surface around the probe due to densification, 
so the contractor adds·cleari sand to fill the area around the probe. As sand is added, the probe is 
repeatedly raised arid lowered into the probe hole, and it is gradually withdrawn as the added sand and 
the area around the probe densifies. 
) 
· 
· 
. · 
· 
Vibro-floatation, probably the oYclest vibro-compaction system, was developed in Germany in 
the 1930s for the construction of the Berliri subway. It has a vibrator at the bottom of the probe and 
• . uses water jets to excavate the hole ahead of the probe:Vntil the 1970s, Vibro-floatation was the only 
vibro-compaction system available. Since th~n, a number of systems have been developed in Japan 
(Fudo Compozer sand piles; Vibrorod), Sw~deri · (Vibrowing), Belguim (Franki Y-probe ), Germany 
(MUller resonant compaction, MRC), a_nd the United States (Terra probe), among others. 
Applicable soil deposits for vibro-compactions include sands and gravels with less than about 
20% fines, mine ~p6ils, and dumped fills, depending on the nature of the fill. It is less successful in silty 
· deposits, and it is not appropriate for clays, peats,' and garbage. 
· 
· .. 
· 
. · 
Design begins with a thorough geotechnical site investigation and laboratory testing program to 
. ' ' determine the gradation of the soils and their variability including macrofabric (Chapter 4). From a settle-
. . . :. ment analysis, the . geotechnical engineer establishes the . compaction requirements, in~luding numerical 
' perfo~marice pn!dictions, and develops the vibro-compaction scheme. For example; do you densify the 
:. entire area, or only under columns and footings? This pattern and the desired degree of improvement will 
~depend on the project niquireinents and the experience and judgment of the geotechnical'engineer. The 
:· • : ·final step is to develop QC/QA plans, and this typically involves the common in situ tests (discussed later 
in this book). 
· 
· · . 
Typical spaCing of the vibro-centers is from about 1 m up to 3.5 m. Density will, of course, be 
increased as the vibro-center spacing is decreased. Probe. pattern is either square or trhingular. The 
depth of improvement will depend on the need and the capability of the equipment, but typical depths 
. · are 10 to 20 m. Vibro-compaction is most often done by contractors who specialize in this type of work. 
· 
Vibro-Replacement-Vibro-replacement is a little more complicated than vibro~compaction 
because some of the less desirable subsoil is actual replaced-or displaced-with high-quality granular 
'·,: materials or even concrete. Depending on the site conditions and economics, replacement can be with 
sand only (sand columns), sand and gravel (sand-gravel columns), gravel columns, often called stone 
columns, and concrete columns (vibro-concrete columns). 
Vibro-replacement is often used at sites where vibration alone will not work. It seems especially 
appropriate for deposits of loose stratified sands and silts to mitigate liquefaction potential. It is also applic-
able to sites with predominantly cohesive soils, because the added coarser materials reinforce the subsoil 
and increase strength and decrease compressibility and settlements. However, if the subsoils are very soft 
(e.g., very soft sensitive clays, organic soils and peats), stone columns can get very expensive, because they 
can require so much stone that the soft materials are displaced rather than replaced. Stone columns are also 
good for mine spoils and dumped fills but inappropriate for garbage dumps. To 'provide some additional 
compressive strength, sometimes Portland cement is added to the stone to make vibro-concrete columns. 
. 
Design of vibro-replacement is very similar to vibro-compaction design described above: perform 
· a geotechnical site investigation and laboratory testing program; predict settlements and liquefaction 
178 
:.1, 
Chapter 5 . · .. 'Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
potential, if appropriate; establish the .improvement requirements, including numerical performance 
predictions; design the vibro-replacement scheme; and establish the QA/QC criteria for the. contractor. 
Design of the.vibro-replacement scheme (pattern; spacing, depth, replacement ratio, etc.) is often 
done by a specialty contractor as part of a design-build project or as a subcontractor. In this case, the pro-
, . ject geotechnical engineering should be closely involved, as the desired degree of improvement will depend 
on the project requirements. On typical stone column projects, between 15% and 35% of soil volume is 
·replaced; As before, columns are installed in a triangular or rectangular pattern at a typical center-to-center 
-.1' 
'-...,_ 
' 
spacing of 1.5 to 3.5 m. Lengths of columns are commonly 6-12 m, but they can be installed up to 20m. 
Successful :installation of stone columns usmllly' requires. the services of an· experienced specialty 
foundation contractor. The probes are typically 300 to 450 rnni:iri diameter and are basically of two types-
top feed or bottom feed. With top feed, thestone.arid sand is fed.into the hole from the top and then 
vibrated to densify the loose materials and expand the column laterally into surrounding soft or loose soils. 
At a site where the hole can be drill~d and will remain open for some time, small charges of stone are 
repeatedly dumped into .the hole and vibrated with equipment inserted into the hole until the column is 
. completed. With the bottom~ feed method, stone and sand are fed into a chamber at the top of the probe via 
· ,; . a hopper hoisted by a crane. The chamber is closed, and air pressure is used to feed the stone out the bot-
tom through a valve into the hole (dry method). Sometimes water jetting is used similar to vibro~floatation 
. ; to aid in advancing the probe (wet method). The treated columns are typically 0.6 to 1.2 min diameter. 
5.5.3 .· .. Rock Fills 
; 
~ . 
5.6 
5.6.1· 
. ; As with rock classification sy~te~s (Sec. 4.14), the definitions and methodologies related to rock fills 
ha~e evolved considerably over the past 4o years. Today, rock fills are defined as those granular fills 
. thathave at least 30% by'dry w'eight of clean rock (i.e., exch.iding fines and organics) retained on the 
.· 3/4 in:(19 mm) sieve, and that contain less than 15% minus No. 200 (O.D75 mm) material (Breitenbach, 
· 1993arid2010). The goat'is a free-draining rock fill with a rock-to-rock contact structure that will be 
effectively compacted by vibratory compaction devices (Sec. 5.6.2), Rock fill materials are usually 
0 btained by ripping or blasting rock deposits, or they can be derived from mine waste rock, referred to 
as tailings. Like other compacted fills, well-graded rock fills will tend to provide the densest, and there-
fore most stable; structure that is least prone to future settlements: 
· 
. . 
Early embankments made of rock fill were often placed in large single lifts 10 to 50 m (35 to 165ft) 
. . in depth, whiCh were not mechanically compacted but then were flooded with water in an attempt to den-
. sify them. This si:Halled ."sluicing" method probably had.its origins in the California gold~mining era of 
thelssos (she~ard:et at., 1963). Th.e other m~thod that became commori'withthe a'dvent'of compaction 
. equipment was placing the rock in 1 to 1.5 in (3 to 5 ft) thick iifts that were compacted by a non vibrating 
. steel drum or rubber-tired rollers. In the early 1960s, the Corps of Engi~eers performed tests on rock fills 
compacted using vibratory compactors at the 136 in (445ft) high Cougar Dam near Eugene~ Oregon. This 
testing led to more objective rock fill grad~tion classifications and also'provided performance data on 
the use of smaller lift thicknesses for' compacted r?ck fills. Today, rock fill is placed in even thinner lifts 
of 0.3 to 0.9 m (1 to 3ft), and vibratory rollers are used for the 'most effective compaction results. This 
stabilization of rock fills results in saferand more economical embankment designs. 
. 
. 
. . 
·-
. 
-
. 
'' 
''' 
. . . 
' ~. 
• 
' 
. 
: 
1 ; ' 
FIELD COMPACTION EQUIPMENTAND PROCEDURES 
Compaction of Fine-Grained Soils 
Soil to be used in a ~ompacted fill is excavated from a borrow area. Power shovels, dragline~; and self-
propelled scraper~ or ''pans" are used to excavate the. borrow material. A self-l~ading scraper is shown 
. ·:in Fig. 5.8(a) ~nd an elevating scraper in Fig. 5.8(b ). Sometimes "do~ers'~ ar~ .~ecessary. to help load the 
5.6 
Field Compaction Equipment ·and Procedures 
179 
FIGURE 5.8 Two types of scrapers: (a) conventional or self-loading scraper. Sometimes 
a "dozer" or two helps push the "pan" to load up; (b) elevating scraper, where the' 
elevating machine loads by itself and eliminates the need for a pusher (photographs 
courtesy of Caterpillar Inc.). 
180 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
scraper. Scrapers may cut through layers of different materials, allowing soil types to be mixed, for 
example. The power shovel mixes the soil by digging along a vertical surface, whereas the scraper mixes 
the soil by cutting across a sloping surface.where different layers may be exposed. 
The borrow area may be on site or several kilometers away. Scrapers, which can operate on 
and off the road, are often used to transport and spread the soil in layers called lifts on the fill area. 
Trucks may be used as well, on or off the highway, and they may end dump, side dump, or bottom 
dump the fill material [Fig. 5.9(a)]. The hauling contractor usually tries to spread the fill material 
when dumping in order to reduce the spreading time. Where possible, the contractor directs the 
earth-moving equipment over previously uncompacted soil, thereby reducing the amount of com-
pactive effort required later. 
Once borrow material has been transported to the fill area, bulldozers,* front loaders, and motor 
graders, called blades [Fig.5.9(b)], spread the material to the desired lift thickness. Lift thickness may 
range from 150 to 500 mm (6 to 18 in.) or so, depending on the size and type of compaction equipment 
and on the maximum grain size of the fill. Unless the borrow materials are already within the desired 
FIGURE 5.9 
Examples of equip-
ment used for hauling and 
spreading fill materials: (a) fill 
material being hauled by end 
dump truck; (b) motor grader 
spreading and preparing fill sub-
grade (photographs courtesy of 
Caterpillar, Inc.)~ 
*Genus bovinas masculinus sonambulorum. 
/ 
5.6 · Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
181 
water content Tange, the soil may need to be wetted, dried; or othe'rwise reworked. Usually motor 
graders and dozers are used to spread the soil to facilitate drying or mixing, although occasionally 
contractors use farm implements such as disc harrows for. this purpose; ; c 
The kind of compacting equipment .or rollers used on a job will depend on the type of soil to be 
compacted. Equipment is available to apply pressure, impac('vibration, and kneading. Figure 5.10 
shows two types of rollers. 
· · ·. , ~' · 
· 
' 
(b) 
.~ 
< • '. ' 
.. ,. 
' 
FIGURE 5.10 
Ty"pes of rollers: 
(a) smooth-wheel roller; (b) rubber-'·' 
tired roller (photographs courtesy 
· 
of Caterpillar Inc.).· 
· . 
182 
Chapter 5; ; : Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
· • A smooth-wheel, or drum, roller [Fig. 5.10(a)] supplies 100%. coverage under the wheel, with 
ground contact pressures up to 400 kPa (55 psi), ~nd may be used on all soil types except rocky soils. 
The most common use for large, smooth-wheel rollers is for proofrolling subgrades and. compacting 
_,, 
.. asphalt pavements. The pneumatic or rubber-tired roller [Fig. 5.10(b )] has about 80%.coverage (80% of 
.•. the total area is covered by tires), and tire pressures may be up to about 700 kPa (100 psi).A heavily 
loaded wagon with several rows of four to six closely spaced tires is self-propelled or towed over the 
soil to be compacted. Like the smooth-wheel roller, the rubber-tired roller may be used for both gran-
ular and fine-grained earthfills, as well as for earth dam construction. · 
. 
Probably the first roller developed and perhaps the most common type of compactor used today 
for fine-grained soils is the sheepsfoot roller. These rollers are usually towed in tandem by crawler trac-
tors or are self-propelled, as shown in Fig. 5.11. The sheepsfoot roller, as its name implies, has many 
round or rectangular shaped protrusions or "feet" attached to a steel drum. The area of each protru-
sion ranges from 30 to 80 cm2 (5 to 12 in.2). Because of the8% to 12% coverage, very high contact 
pressures are possible, ranging from 1400 to 7000 kPa (200 to 1000 psi), depending on the drum size 
and whether the drum is filled with water. The drums come in several diameters and weights. The 
sheepsfoot roller starts compacting the soil below the bottom of the feet (projectingabout 150 to 250 
mm from the drum) and works its way up the lift with each successive pass of the roller. Eventually the 
roller "walks out" of the fill as the upper part of the lift is compacted .. The sheepsfoot roller is best 
suited for compacting fine-grained soils. 
Other rollers with protrusions have also been developed to obtain high contact pressures for 
better crushing, kneading, and compacting of a rather wide variety of soils. These rollers can be either 
towed or self-propelled. Tamping foot rollers (Fig. 5.12) have approximately 40% coverage and generate 
·high contact pressures ranging from about 1500 to 8500 kPa (200 to 1200 psi), depending on the size of 
the roller and whether the drum is filled for added weight. The special hinged feet of the tamping foot 
roller apply a kneading action to the soil. These rollers compact similarly to the sheepsfoot in that the 
roller eventually "walks out" of a well-compacted lift. Tamping foot rollers are best for compacting fine-
grained soils. 
Still-another type is the mesh, or grid pattern, roller with about 50% coverage and pressures from 
about 1500 to 6500 kPa (200 to 900 psi) (Fig. 5.13). The mesh roller is ideally suited for compacting rocky 
soils, gravels, and sands. With high towing speed, the material is vibrated, crushed, and impacted. 
Another development also suitable for a wide variety of material is the "square" or impact roller devel-
. oped in Australia by Broons. The compactors ~eigh 13 800 to 18 200 kg and are 1.3 to 1.95 m wide, all 
designe~ to b~ towed by a tractor. 
· 
· . 
. . 
FIGURE 5.11 'Self-propelled· 
sheepsfoot roller. (photograph 
courtesy of Caterpill?r l,~c.), .. 
\J 
5.6 ·. Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
183 
FIGURE 5.12 
Self-propelled 
tamping foot compactor 
(photograph courtesy of · 
Caterpillar, Inc.). 
FIGURE 5.13 
Mesh or grid roller (photo courtesy of BOMAG Americas, Inc.). 
. 
.' \' 
5.6.2 
Compaction of GranUlar Materials 
l 
.•. 
! 
" 
• 
Several compaction equipment manufacturers have attached vertical vibrators to smooth-wheel and 
tamping foot rollers to make them more suitable for densifying granular soils. Figure 5.14 shows a 
vibrating drum on a smooth-wheel roller compacting a gravelly material. In areas where the larger 
rollers cannot operate, compaction is accomplished by rammers ("jumping jacks") and vibrating plates 
of various sizes and weights. Rammers are motorized but hand guided and weigh between 50 and 
150 kg; they have a compacting plate of about 60 to 100 cm2• Self-propelled but hand-guided plate 
vibrators weigh from 50 to 3000 kg (100 to 6000 lb) and have a typical plate areas of 0.4 m2 to 1 m2• 
· , Effective 'compaction depth for even the larger plates is less than 1 m. 
Broms and Forssblad (1969) have listed the.different types of vibratory soil compactors, their 
mass and frequency of operation, and their practical applications (Table 5.2). 
184 
Chapter 5 . 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
FIGURE 5.14 Vibratory roller (photograph courtesy of Dynapac, Inc.). 
TABLE 5.2 Types and Applications of Vibratory Soil Compactors 
'fYpe of Machine. 
Mass, kg 
(Weight, lb) 
Vibrating tampers (rammers): 
Hand-guided 
50-150 · 
Vibrating plate compactors: 
Self-propelled, hand~ 
guided· 
· 
Multiple-type, mounted 
on tractors,etc. 
Crane-mounted" 
Vibrating rollers: 
Self-propelled, hand-
guided (one or two 
drums) 
Self-propelled, tandem-
(100..:.300) 
50-3000 
(100--600) 
200-300 
'(400-600) 
Up to 20000 
· (2o tons) 
250.:::1500 
(500-3000) 
700-10000 
type 
· (0.7-10 tons) , 
Self-propelled, rubber 
. 4_000-25 000 
tires 
(4-25tons) 
Tractor,drawn . 
1500-15 000 
(1.5:-15 tci~s) 
• 
i .• 
"Only limited use. 
After Broms and Forssblad (1969). 
Frequency 
(Hz) 
Applications 
>:e10 
12-80 
30-70 
10-15 
40-80 
30-80 
.:.'-
20-40 
,20-50 
Street repair. Fills behind bridge abutments, retaining and base-
ment walls, etc. Trench fills. 
Base and subbase compaction for streets, sidewalks, etc. Street 
repair. Fills behind bridge abutments, retaining and basement 
' walls, etc. Fills below floors. Trench fills. 
Base and subbase compaction for highways. 
. 
' 
. '' 
··.··, 
Base, subbase, and asphalt compaction for streets, sidewalks park-
ing areas, garage driveways, etc. Fills behind bridge abutments 
and retaining walls. Fills below floors. Trench fills. 
Base, subbase, and asphalt compaction for highways, streets, side~ · 
walks, parking areas, garage driveways, etc. Fills below floors. 
' ~ 
' ' 
Base, subbase, and embankment compaction for highways, streets, 
parking areas, airfields, etc. Rock-fill dams. Fills (soil or rock) 
used as foundations for residential and industrial buildings. 
Base, subbase, and embankment compaction on highways, streets, 
parking areas, airfields, etc. Earth- and rock-fill dams. Fills (soil 
or rock) used as foundations for residential and industrial 
buildings. Deep compaction of natural deposits of sand. 
~ 
'o 
· 5.6 · Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
185 
As discussed in Sec. 5.5, several .variables control the vibratory compaction and densification of 
granular soils. They include: 
1. Characteristics of the compactor 
• Mass 
• Size 
• Operating frequency and frequency range 
• Amplitude of vibration 
2. Characteristics of the soil 
• Initial density 
• Grain size distribution 
• Grain shape 
· · . 
• Water conte~t · • 
3. Construction p~ocedures: 
• Number of passes of the roller 
• Lift thickness 
• Modification of the vibrator frequency during compaction 
• Towing speed 
The compactor characteristics influence the stress level, density increase, and depth of influence of the 
dynamic force. For example, as shown in Fig. 5.15, when oscillation is added to a static component, 
the density is significantly increased. The influence of operating frequency for various soil types is 
·shown in Fig. 5.16. Note how a peak in the density-frequency curve develops for most of the soils, even 
clays. The frequency at which a maximum density is achieved is called the' optimum frequency. It is a 
function of the compactor-soil system, and it changes as the density increases during the process of com-
paction. It is desirable for a compactor to have the capability to vary its operating frequency and to have 
the range required to obtain maximum density. However, the peaks are gentle, and, on a percentage 
basis, a wide frequency range is not all that important. 
· 
Soil conditions are also important. The initial density in particular strongly influences the final 
density. For example, the upper 300 mm of medium dense sand may never become denser than the 
initial density, whereas dense sands will become looser in the upper 300 mm.This phenomenon is also 
illustrated below. 
125 
2.00 
&>' 120 
1.92 &>' 
' ,, 
.:::: 
~ 
;;::: 
@. 
6 
~ 115 
1.84 
~ 
'iii 
'iii 
c: 
·Ql 
C:· 
'0 
Ql 
Compactio'n results 
~ 
'0 
FIGURE 5.15 
~ on 30 em (12 in.) layers of silty 
0 
110 
1.76 
0 
sand, with and without vibration, 
using a 7700 kg (17 000 lb)towed 
105 
1.68 
vibratory roller (after Parsons 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
. 22 
· : et al., 1962, as cited by Selig and 
Water content(%) 
Yoo, 1977). 
186 
Chapter 5 · 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
· Symbol 
•· Rollerwt: 
Symbol· 
Roller wt. 
A 
fl. 7500 lb 
3400 kg 
v 
'7 8600 lb 
3900 kg 
o----<:l 7500 
3400 
<> 
<> 5800 
2630 
o----o 17 000 
7710 
X 
X 3600 
1633 
150 
'I 
I 
I 
2.40 
I 
Well-graded 
Cohesive sandy gravel 
sand I 
1401--1 ---j~--\ 
: 
12.24 
I ~-
-~- i ~-~ 
_--._ 
1-::::--Siag 
"' E 
::0 = 
~, 
~-"" I 9...-i--:--' 
I 
L 
D ~o 
i. 
--o 
I Gravel-sand-clay 
I 
I 
1"' 
I . 
I 
Gravelly sand 
1 
. 
1 · 
Gravelly sand 
1l 
130 
~ 120 
I 
I 
I 
I . -~· 
i 
SandJclay-
. :. Sand\ystil 
c: 
Q) 
-c_ 
2:' 
.Cl 
1.60 
,....-xt--x 
I 
x 
I_.•:(>< 
~~~~---+
1 ----~+
1 ----=x~~---~ ·\ 
I 
I / 
I 
Clayey soil 
~--"\....L 
I 
I 
I 
. 
. 
I 
100~tl -~ 
\ 
Uniform sand 
- r . \ .I 
. ·I 
Fat clay 
' . ~ . j· 
. .I ; . Fat clar .. ·. . 
1. 
I : 
•. 
. 
i . 
. . 
I' 
I 
I 
1.44 
90 
.. 2000 
110 
1000 
Vibration freque'ncy (cpm) -
Vibration frequency (Hz) 
FIGURE 5.16 Variation with frequency of compaction by smooth-drum vibratory 
rollers (after several sources as cited by Selig and Yoo, 1977). 
After the compactor is chosen, construction procedures essentially govern the results. The influ-
ence of the number of passes of a roller and the towing speed is shown in Fig. 5.16 for a 7700 kg roller 
compacting a fat (high LL) clay and a well-graded sand. Notice how the density increases as the num-
ber of passes or coverages increases, up to a point. Not so obvious is that, for a given number of passes, 
a higher density is obtained if the vibrator is towed more slowly! The results in both Figs. 5.16 and 5.17 
indicate that vibratory compaction can work even in materials with some clay fines (Selig and Yoo, 
'1977). Also, for soils compaCted on the dry side of optimum, adding the dynamic component results in 
increased density.·· 
· The effect of lift thickness may be illustrated by the work of D' Appolonia et aL (1969)';'§hown in 
Fig. 5.18.A?670 kg roller operating at a frequency of27.5 Hz was used to compact a 2.40 m thick layer 
.. 
·.· 5.6 Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
187 
(a) Fat clay 
(moisture= 21%) 
(b) Well-graded sand 
(moisture = 7.5%) 
Roller cgverages 
1.52 
. FIGURE 5.17 :Effect of roller 
travel speed on amount of com-
. paction with 7700 kg (17 000 I b) 
towed vibratory roller (after 
Parsons eta( 1962, as cited by 
Selig and Yoo, 1977). 
of northern Indiana dune sand. The initial relative density ~as about SO% to 60%. Field density tests 
were made in test pits before and after compaction. Note how the density varied with depth. In the 
upper 150 mm (6 in.), the soil is vibrated loose, whereas the soil reaches its maximum density for a 
given number of coverages at about 45 em; thereafter the increase in density tapers off. When com-
pacting past fiveorso coveniges, there is not a great increase in density. 
(:', 
Example 5.3 
,' '.' 
Given:. 
Five coverages of a certain roller anc! operating frequency. 
' 
-
. ..r 
__..-
-· 
--
---·-
. 
,, 
Required: 
Determine the maximum lift thickness required to obtain a minimum relative density of 75%. 
. 
.• 
Solution: Using the data shown in Fig. 5.18, trace the relative density versus depth curve for five passes. 
Superimpose that drawing over the original one, and slide it up and down until the desired relative 
density of 75% is obtained (shown in Fig: Ex. 5.3). About 0.45 m (18 in.) is indicated as the maximum 
thickness. Actually, however, the lift thickness could be greater, as compaction of the top layer densifies 
the lower layer with successive passes. 
· 
· · · 
'. 
188 
0 
I ~ 
E. 
' 
c3 1 
; 
Relative density(%) 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
0.---.---.----.~-. 
g2 
.c a 
Ql 
0 3 
4 
Density-depth 
relationship for 
large lift height 
·. 
using 5 roller passes 
· ••·· Relative density(%) 
60 
70 
80 
90 
.,.___ Minimum 
allowable 
relative 
density = 75% 
FIGURE Ex. 5.3 
Approximate method for determining lift thickness required to achieve a 
minimum compacted relative density of 7S% with five roller passes, using data for a large 
lift thickness (after D'Appol~nia et al., 1969). : 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Relative density(%) 
. Relative density(%) 
Dry density (lbf/ft3) 
Dry density (lbf/ft3) 
95 
100 
105 
110 
95 
1 00 
1 05 
11 0 
oro 
0~------~------~------
) 
..... 
22 
~ 
'I 
I 
£:; 3 !--OJ k$'7'51 I 
" 
rt 
g. :, 
g2 
0 
5 
6 L----..1.<.<:"""-'---------'--------' 
. 
. 
.' ;·'' 
,, 
. v 
.• .. · 
,. 
_,. 
. 
, 
'·. 
FIGURE 5.18 
Density-depth relationship for a 5670 kg (12 500 I b) roller operating at . 
27.5 Hz for a 240 em (94.5 in.) lift height. 
· 
· 
· ·· 
· · 
·! 
5.6 
Field Compaction Equipment and Procedures 
189 
5.6.3 
Compaction Equipment Summary 
·' Figure 5.19 summarizes the applicability of sarious types of compaction equipment as a function of soil 
. type, expressed as percentages of clay to sand to rock. These "zones" are not absolute, and it is possible 
for a given piece of equipment to compact ·satisfactorily outside the given zone . 
. 5.6.4 
·compa~tion.of Rockfill 
If available, sound, hard, and durable rock' is best for rockfills: However; when properly compacted, 
satisfactory embankments have been constructed of poorer quality rock; Shales and other softer or 
poorly cemented· sedimentary rocks may be susceptible to weathering and degradation· in service, 
even when they appear to be sound at the time of excavation' and placement. Such materials need to _ 
be identified early on, and avoided if possible. 
· 
' 
As discussed· in Sec. 5.5.2; the methods for. placing and compacting rock fills' have evolved 
considerably in the past40 years, primarily due to the development of vibratory compactors. This 
equipment enables engineers to produce more s~able embankments' by increasing fill strength. 
Loose lift thickne.sses (Le., after placement and prior to compaction) are typically 0.3 to 0.9 m (1 to 
3 ft);but should be thicker than the nominal diameter of the maximum rock size. A rule 'of thumb 
is that the maximum rock size should be two~ thirds of the loose lift 'thickness. Vibratory smooth 
steel drum rollers have been found to be niost effective for compacting rock fills, operating at 20 to 
25 Hz and at a roller speed of about 3 kph (Breitenbach, 1993); Further, static roller weights of 8000 
kg on level ground, and a minimum dynamic force of 80 000 kN, are recommended, with 4 to 6 passes 
per lift seetimi as the optimum coverage. Equipment recently developed in 'Europe by LandPac 
specifically for compaction of rockfill is a towed 12 Mg compactor with a noncylindrical roller. The 
roller has three lobes, and the shape is reminiscent of a three-leaf clover. Improvement is claimed as 
deep as 5 m. 
, For additional information on the treatment of rock fills, see U.S: Dept. of the Interior (1987, 
1998), Hilf (1991), Jansen (1988), and U.S. Arrny Corps of Engineers (1999). 
Compactor and zones of application · 
100% 
Clay 
Sheepsfoot 
100% 
Sand 
Vibratory 
Grid 
• I 
• 
Smooth steel drums 
' 
' 
Towed tamping foot 
High-speed tamping foot 
Rock 
Type of compaction 
Static weight, kneading 
Static weight, kneading 
Static weight, vibration 
Static weight 
Static weight, kneading 
. Static weight, kneading 
Static weight, kneading 
Static weight, kneading, 
impact, vibration . 
FIGURE 5.19 
Applicability of various types of compaction equipment for a given soil 
type (modified after Caterpillar, Inc., 19n). 
190 
Chapter 5 · ·Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
5.7 
SPECIFICATIONS AND COMPACTION CONTROL 
For earthwork and other types of compaction, control of the contractor's compaction process is essen-
tial to obtain a satisfactory design and the desired performance of the project.Appropriate control of 
the compaction process depends on the compaction specifications, and it is the design engineer's 
responsibility to prepare specifications for the project. The design engineer should also be responsible 
for the construction, inspection, and quality assurance (QA) of the compaction to ensure that the con~ 
tractor has in fact satisfactorily performed the compaction work.·': · 
· · 
· · · 
·· · 
· 
Figure 5.20 illustrates the "system" commonly used today for earthwork and other types of com-
paction projects: D-epending on the design problem, certain laboratory tests are. conducted on samples 
<?f the proposed borrow nmterials to define ·the engineering properties ·required for; design of the 
embankment or other earth structure. After the earth structure is_ designed, the engineer also prepares 
e~rthwa'rk and compaction specific~tions that control the construction processes and procedures. Good 
specifications will assure the engineer (and thus the owner) that ~ satisfact~ry emb~nkment will be con-
structed·. The specifications also includtdield compa~tion control tests, and the results of these tests 
. become. the. standard for controlling. the. proj~ct. Construction c~ntrol inspectors then. conduct these 
-tests to insu~e that the contractor actu~lly adheres to the compaction specifications. The two-way arrows 
· .. between some boxes in Fig. 5.20 indicate that these items are interdependent and that two-way commu-
nication is essential to have a successful project.- · 
· · · 
· 
· _ 
· · 
· · · · . 
. . . •.. As you may know, there is a difference between quality assurance and quality control ( QC). QA 
{~ done by the engineer 'as a representative of the owner to assure that the contractor is doing a good job. 
If the contr~ctor did their ·own tests. to be sure their compaction procedures' were OK, that would be an 
, e'xample of QC. QA only is common for most compaction jobs, but on some large earthwork projects 
. such as levees imd earth dams, both are done. 
· 
. · 
· · 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
~ 
• 
> 
' 
' 
1. Design problem 
2. Desired engineering 
properties_ . . 
· · 
L-~---.------~ 
3. Laboratory tests on 
proposed borrow 
materials 
Examples: earth dams, highway and railroad embankments,· • 
levee.s, str~;~ctural. fills and platforms. 
Strength, compressibility, hydraulic conductivity, 
volume changes due to frost action, swelling 
and shrinking soils, etc. 
Use to determine the desired engineering properties in item 2. 
' i ~ ' ' :: 
6. Compaction control ; I 
Examples: ASTM D 698 and 
tests and laboratory 
D 1557 or other standard 
standards 
compaction tests. 
Use laboratory standards 
to determine the Pdmax 
and the RC. 
FIGURE 5.20 The compaction "system" in civil engineering practice. · 
~1 
l
5.7.1 
• · 5.7. Specifications and Compaction Control 
191 
In this section, we discuss the types of compaction. specifications and the field tests used to 
control compaction. Then ~e give you, if you are a contractor, some suggestions for achieving the 
·most efficient compaction, and we briefly describe the phenomenon of overcompaction and QA/QC 
for rockfills. Finally we briefly tell you about compaction in trenches. 
· · ·. ; •, 
. 
-
' 
. 
. 
. Specifications 
..• There are basically tw~ typ~s of earthwork specifi~ati6I1s~ (1) method or p~ocedure specifications, and 
(2) · end-pr~duet specifications, som~times called performance spe~ificatio~s. With. both types, require-
ments for site'preparation, also known as clearing and grubbing, treatment of tree stumps and roots, 
. other organic materials, boulders, etc., are often the same. A maximum allowable size of material to be 
compacted as well as a maximum thickness of the uncompacted lift niay als~ be specified. Peripheral 
... construction requini:ments-for example, site drainage, and runoff control~ hours of work, and other 
contractual requiremerits7':'"may also be similar. ' . ' 
... 
' .•.. ' .. ·: 
' .• '. 
. ' '.. 
. 
' 
, 
. Method Specitic~tions~ With method specifications, the type and weight of compactor or roller, 
the number of passes of that roller, as well as the lift thicklu:sses are specified by the engineer. A max-
imum allowable size of material may also be specifi~d. With method specifications the responsibility 
for the quality of the earthwork rests with the owner or.owner's engiiieer.lf compaction control tests 
(discussed in Sec. 5.7.2) performed by the engineer fail to meet a certain standard, then the ~on tractor 
is paid extra for the additional compaction. 
· 
" 
· 
· 
Method specifications require prior knowledge of the borrow materials so as to be able to predict 
in advance how many passes of, for example, a certain type of roller will produce adequate compaction 
and fill performance. This means that during design, test fills or test sections must be constructed of the 
proposed borrow materials using different equipment, compactive efforts, lift thicknesses, etc., in order 
. to determine which equipment and procedures will be the most efficient in producing the desired prop-
' erties. Because test programs are expensive, method specifications can be justified only for very large 
compaction projects such as earth and rockfill dams. However, considerable savings in' earthwork con-
struction unit costs result, because a major part of the uncertainty associated with compaction will be 
eliminated for the contractor. The contractor can estimate quite well in advance just how much the con-
structionwill cost, and she knows that if extra rolling is required, she will be adequately compensated. 
See U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1998) and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1999) for a discussion of 
test fills and sections for designing compaction specifications .. ' 
•. ·· 
· 
There are two other situations where a method specification is appropriate:One is where a 
geotechnical engineer has considerable knowledge of the local soils in an area and knows by experi-
ence.that.he will get satisfactory performance after a.certain amountand type of compaction. The 
other situation is for compacting backfills in utility trenches. ·; 
. · • 
End-Product Specifications and Relative Compaction-End-product specifications, sometimes 
called performance specifications, are commonly used for highway and building foundation embank-
ments. With this type of specification, the contractor is required to obtain a certain relative compaction, 
or percent compaction. Relative compaction, RC, is defined as the.ratio of the field dry density, Pd field 
to the laboratory maximum dry density, Pd max, expressed as a percentage, or 
1 . 
--·· 
·. 
(RC) 
Pd tield 
100 ( 01 ) 
re ahve or percent compactiOn 
= -- X 
. 
to 
•· 
· , 
Pdmax 
. 
(5.9) 
The maximum dry density is determined by a specified laboratory standard compaction test, such as 
the standard Proctor or the modified Proctor test. Obviously the specified lab test is conducted on the 
same soilas that to be compacted in the field.JYpical values for relative compaction are 90% or 95% 
of the laboratory maximum; the specifiC value depends on the 'nature of the project; location of the fill 
being compacted, experience, and. tradition. As menti~ned above, the .lift thickness. and maximum 
allowable size of material to be compacted are also included in end-product specifications. 
192 
Chapter 5 ·' • Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
', .. , 
5.7.2 
With this type of specification, as long as the contractor is able to obtain the minimum specified 
relative compaction, it shouldn't matter what equipment or procedures are used. The economics of the 
· project supposedly ensure that the contractor will utilize the most efficient compaction procedures 
(discussed below). 
· 
How the field dry density and relative compaction are obtained in practice is described in Sec. 5.7.2. 
Relative Compaction versus Relative Density-What is the difference between relative com-
paction and relative density? Despite similar names, they are not the same. We defined the relative or 
index density D, and density index I d in Sec. 5.5. You may recall that relative and ind~x density applies 
only to granular soils. If some fines are present, it is sometimes difficult to decide which type of test-
.· index density or the Proctor-is applicable as a standard test. The ASTM (2010) index density tests, D 
4253 and D 4354, are applicable to soils with less than 15% fines (passing the' 75 f1m or No. 200 sieve); 
otherwise a Proctor compaction test should be used. In borderline cases, it is a good idea to perform both 
tests. This will usu~lly indicate which test is most appropriate for your mate'rial. For control of the densi-
fication of granular fills, the use of the relative densityor density inde~ is,of cou'rse, very appropriate. 
A relationship between relative density and relative compaction is shown in Fig. 5.21. A statistical 
study of published data on 47 different' granular soils indicated that the. relative compaction corre-
sponding to zero relative ~ensityis about SOfo. 
· ' · 
· 
· 
Compaction· Control Tests 
As noted in Fig; 5.20, virtually all compaction projects require some type of quality control testing to be 
performed to determine whether the fill has been properly compacted .. The results of these tests give 
the field dry density, Pd field. Then the relative compaction of the fill can be determined by Eq. (5.9). 
The testing procedure is as follows: A test site is selected that is representative or typical of the 
compacted lift and borrow material. Typical specifications call for. a field test to be conducted every 
1000 to 3000 m3 (1500 to 4000 yd3) or so, or when the borrow material changes significantly. It is also 
advisable to perform the test at least one or maybe two compacted. lifts below the already compacted 
ground surface, especially when sheepsfoot rollers are used, or in granular soils. Because the objective 
of compaction is to stabilize soils and to improve their engineering behavior, it is important to keep in 
mind the desired engineering properties of the fill, not just its dry density and water content. This point 
: is often lost in earthwork construction control. Major emphasis is usually placed on achieving the spec-
ified dry density and relative compaction, and little consideration is given to the desired engineering 
properties ofthe compactecP fill. Dry density. and water content correlate well with. the engineering 
·properties, and thus they are convenient construction control parameters. 
. 
Compaction. control· tests can either. be destructive or nondestructive. Destructive. tests involve 
excavation and removal of some of the fill material, whereas nondestructive tests indirectly determine 
the density and water content of the fill. 
· 
,:' 
Dry density 
Pdmin 
. Pd Pdmax 
e = oo 
void ratio 
em ax 
e· 
·emin 
0 
100 
Density index 10 or relative density D, (%) 
0 I 
. Relative compaction (R.C.) (%) 
R.C.1- 80 
100 
I 
FIGURE 5.21 
Relative density and relative compaction concepts {after Lee and Singh,'1971). ' 
5.7. Specifications and Compaction Control 
193 
Destructive Compaction Control Tests-:-_The steps required for the common destructive tests are: 
1. Excavate a hole in the compacted 'till at. the desired s~~pling elevation. The size of the hole will 
depend on the maximum size of material in the fill and the equipment used to nieasure the volume 
of the hole. Determine the mass M 1 of the excavated material. 
. 2. Take a water content sample and determine the water content of the soil in the fill. This value is 
the field water content Wfield. 
. 
.... 
3. Measure the volume V of the excavated material. . , 
, 
4. Compute the total density. Knowing M 1 , the total mass of the material excavated from the hole, 
and the volume V of the hole, we can compute the field total density Ptield. Since we also know the 
field water content Wfield, we can obtain the field dry density of the fill Pa field, from Eq. (2.14). 
5. Compare Pd field with Pd max and calculate the relative compaction using Eq. (5.9). 
"< 
-
-
' 
The required measurements are usually made by a field inspector or materials engineer. On large 
projects, with fully equipped field laboratories at or near the job site, field personnel perform the excava-
tion and volume measurements on the compacted fill. After placing the excavated material in sealed con-
tainers, they return to the lab, weigh the excavated material, and determine its _water content. On smaller 
projects, field inspectors may have a van or other vehicle that serves as a mobile laboratory. In both cases, 
ordinary laboratory balances or scales are used to determine the mass of the excavated material. 
The water content of . the excavated soil 'can ·be determined by· conventional oven drying 
(ASTM D 2216), as described in Chapter 2.Although this procedure is the standard, it is slow-it 
often takes 16 to 24 hr to obtain a constant dry weight of specimen.' Another disadvantage for mobile 
laboratories is that laboratory ovens are usually electrical. For these reasons, sometimes rapid water 
content methods are used in the field (e.g., propane gas heaters; Sec. 5.7.3) instead of oven drying. 
Techniques commonly employed to measure the volume of the hole include the sand cone, the 
balloon method, or pouring water or oil of known density into the hole (Fig: 5.22). In the sand cone 
· method, dry sand of known dry density is allowed to flow through a cone-shaped pouring 'device into 
the hole. The volume of the hole can then easily be determined from the weight of sand in the hole and 
the dry density of the poured sand (requires calibration). In the balloon method, the volume is deter-
mined directly by the expansion of a balloon in the hole [Fig. 5.22(b )]. Other methods for determining 
the volume of the excavated hole are discussed later in this section. 
Example 5.4 
Given: 
A field density t~st is performed by the balloon method [Fig. 5.22(b)]. The following data are 
obtained from the test: 
· 
· 
Mass of soil removed + pan = 1590 g 
Mass of pan 
= 125 g 
Balloon readings: 
Final 
Initial 
Water-content information: 
. = 1288 cm3 
=538cm3 '· 
Mass of wet soil + pan = 404.9 g 
Mass of dry soil + pan = 365.9 g 
Mass of pan 
· .. = 122.0 g 
194 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
(b) 
(c) 
Glass jar with 20-30 Ottawa 
(or similar) sand 
, Balloon (partially pushed into 
excavated hole).· 
FIGURE 5.22 Some in-place destructive methods for determining density in the field: 
(a) sand cone; (b) balloon; (c) oil (or water) method. · 
5.7 
Specifications and Compaction Control 
195 
Required: ·· 
a. 
Co~pute the 'dry de~sity ~nd water content of the soil. 
b. Using curve B of Fig. 5.1 as the laboratory standard, compute the relative compaction. 
Solution: . 
. 
. · 
. 
. 
... 
Mt 
a. Compute the wet density, p = Vt 
. 
1590 - 125 g 
1465 g 
P ":' 
= 
= 1.95 g/cm3 = 1.95 Mg/m3 
1288 :- 538 cm3 
750 cm3 
. 
. 
·Water content determination: 
1: M~ss of wet soil + pan = 404.9 g 
2. Mass of dry soil + pan = 365.9 g 
3. Mass of water Mw (1.-:- 2) = 39.0 g 
4. Mass of pan = 122.0 g 
5. Mass of dry soil Ms (2 - 4) = 243.9 g 
6. Water content (MJMs) X 100 (3 + 5) = 16% 
For calculation of dry density, use Eq. (2.14): 
_ 
p 
_ 1.95 Mg/m3 _ 
3 
Pd -
1 + w -
1 + 0.16 
- 1.68 Mg/m 
b. ·For calculation ·of r~lative compaction, use Eq. ( 5.9): 
R.C. ~ Pdtielct = 1.68 X lOO = 90.3% 
··· 
Pdmax 
1.86 
· 
· · 
: 
Nondestructive Methods-Because of some of the problems with destructive field tests, nonde-
structive density and water-content testing using radioactive isotopes have become quite popular during 
the past 40 years. Nuclear methods have several advantages over the'traditional destructive techniques. 
Nuclear tests can be conducted rapidly and results obtained within minutes. Erratic results can be easily 
and quickly double-checked. Therefore the contractor and engineer know the test results quickly, and 
corrective action can be taken before too much additional fill has been placed. Because nuclear tests can 
be performed so quickly and easily, more tests can be conducted, and better statistical quality control of 
the fill is provided. An average value of the density and water content is obtained over a significant vol-
ume of fill, and therefore the natural variability cif compacted soils can be considered to some degree. 
Disadvantages of nuclear methods include the relatively high initial cost of the equipment, regula-
tory documentation required to own a piece of equipment containing nuclear material, and the potential 
danger to field personnel of exposure to radioactivity. Strict radiation safety standards must be enforced 
when nuclear devices are used, and only properly trained and licensed operators are permitted to use 
nuclear density equipment. On the other hand, in modem nuclear equipment, the radioactive sources are 
well shielded and protected by very strong cases, so nuclear testing is no more dangerous than any other 
construction monitoring activity.·. 
Basically,. two types of sources or emitters are necessary to determine both the density and the 
·water content Gamma radiation, as provided by radium or. a radioactive isotope of cesium; is scattered 
by the soil particles; the amount of scatter is proportional to the total density of the mate 'rial. The spacing 
196 
Chapter 5 · 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
Detectors 
(a) 
Detectors · 
(b) 
Detectors'·· 
. "- Photon paths 
between the source and pickup, usually a scin-
tillation counter or a Geiger counter, is con-
stant. Hydrogen atoms in the pore water scatter 
neutrons, providing a means 'whereby water 
content can be determined. Typical neutron 
sources are americium-beryllium isotopes. 
Nuclear test instruments must be prop-
erly calibrated, both internally (system and 
factory calibration) and against materials of 
known density. Materials can be compacted 
soils or asphalt concrete, or even Portland 
cement concrete. Three nuclear techniques in 
common use are shown in Fig. 5.23. The direct 
transmission method is illustrated schemati-
cally in Fig. 5.23(a) ~nd the backscatter tech-
nique in Fig. 5.23(b ); The less common air-gap 
method [Fig. 5:23(c)] is sometimes used when 
the composition of the near-surface materials 
adversely affects the density measurement. 
However, the presence of an uncontrolled air 
gap on the material surface can significantly 
affect the measurements. Filling the gap with 
dry sand helps reduce but does not eliminate 
this effect. 
The presence of oversize particles may 
adversely influence the results, especially if a 
density test is performed using the backscatter 
technique directly over a large cobble or boul-
der. Structures, buried pipes, and cables closer 
than 3 m from the test point may also give 
false readings if not correctly adjusted for. 
, ~ ! Another factor that can adversely· influence 
· results is the presence of certain water-bearing 
. minerals such as gypsum and. other evapo-
. rates in the soil, a rather common occurrence 
. throughout the drier regions ofwestern North 
F. IGURE 5··23 · N' · 1 · ·d· · . 
· d ·· 
. 
• . . 
America. The measured nuclear water content 
. . 
uc ear ens1ty an water. content 
. 
·. 
determination': (a) d-irect transmission; (b) backscatter; '. 
will be much greater than the ove_n dry water 
. (c) 
and (c) air gap (after Troxler Electronic.Laboratorie's, · 
conten~, a~d unl:ss properly ~ahbrated, ~he 
' ' Inc.,' Research Triangle Park, North Carolina). 
· · 
gage will giVe an mcorrect readmg of relative 
. ·, · 
compaction (R L. Lytton, personal communi-
. ' 
.··. ) 
.· i." 
cation, 2010). · 
Detailed calibration and testprocedures are given in ASTM(2010) D 6938. The corresponding 
· numbers for.AASHTO (2010) are Designation T238 for density. and T 239 for watercontent. The 
.USBR test procedure is 7230:: · 
· 
Because. of health and safety concerns associated with nuclear densometers, as well as the 
administrative overhead required to document their ownership, there has been considerable recent 
development of new, alternative field compaction control devices. Two primary types of devices have 
. been developed. The first is a soil stiffness measurement device that uses geophysical technology to 
5.7 
Specifications and Compaction Control 
197 
determine the modulus of compacted materials. This device had its origins in landmine .detection 
devices used by the military (Sawangsuriya et al., 2003). Stress waves are generated by a device placed 
on the surface of the compacted material. Soil deflections m:id other stress wave responses from the soil 
are used to compute the soil stiffness or modulus. However, dry density of the compacted material can 
be obfained only when an independent moisture content measurement is also obtained, either by using 
a nuclear gauge or by taking soil samples (Edil and Sawimgsuriya, 2006). 
, .. 
The other type of nondestructive device ihathasbeen ?dapteci for field compaction control is 
based on time domainreflectometry (TDR). This is. an electromagnetic technique that measures the 
soil's apparent dielectric constant, which is a measure of how well the soil can polarize an electric field 
(Benson and Bosscher, 1999). Much like the nuclear and geophysical riiethods,TDR involves transmis-
sion of a pulse (in this case, 'an· electromagnetic one) and monitoring the velocity with which reflections 
return to the source. of the transmission. For some applications, this can be done using a coaxial cable, 
so that when the pulse reaches a: diange in the. cable's properties due to bending' (for example, if it's 
being used to detect movement of a rock fa~lt), part of the pulse reflects back to the generator. 
· 
. . 
. . To imitate a cc!axial cable in compacted soils, a three- offour-spike probe is placed in the soil, as 
shown in Fig. 5.24. The center spike is the centr~l cmiductor in the coaxial cable, the soil is .thedielectric 
m~dium surrounding it, and. the two or three outer spikes serve ~s the shield conductor. Correlation 
equations have been developed to provide 'water content and dry density from this measurement. 
However; there ·are still limits on the types of soils for which this methodyields valid results (Yu and 
Drnevich, 2004). This method also requires· ~~king fieidmeasun!ments' of ground temperature and 
performing laboratory compaction tests to obtain calibrati~n constants needed to analyze TDR data. 
To 'use TDR forfield compaction control, see ASTM D 6780. 
' . . . . . 
• . . . 
. . . 
.. 
It is worth mentioning that"smart"vibrcit(;rycompactors have been developedthat may even-
tually replace manual methods of compaction control: These compactors are based on the, principles of 
' stress wave . mechanics,. and they a~tomatically adjust. their vibratory characteristics based on soil 
·;responseand input project specifications. Proponents point to gains in construction productivity, since 
this optimizes equipment performance and reduces repeated compaction of soil that meets cir exceeds 
project specific~tions. 
· · 
· 
· · · 
' 
· 
· . 
· 
· · 
':' 
FIGURE 5.24 Field .test procedures using TDR probes: (a} spikes being driven through template into soil surface; 
(b) multiple rod probe head in contact with spikes for measurement (frorn Yu and Drnevich, 2004). . 
• 
,. 
• 
' 
,.• 
• 
• 
' 
• 
',• 
• 
I. 
198 
Chapter 5 
Compaction·and Stabilization of Soils 
5.7.3 
Problems with Compaction Control Tests 
' Problems associated with field density tests includ~: 
• Statistical quality control of compaction 
• Presence of oversize particles 
. 
. , . , 
, 
• Lack of knowledge of the laboratory standard dry density 
' . 
' 
\ 
' 
' 
. ' 
These next two problems apply to destructive tests only: 
• '"Erne required to obtain the field water c'ontent 
. • Incorrect determination of the volume of the excavated hole 
Sincethe days of R: R:Pioctor, geot~dmiCalengirieers have developed solutions to these problems, 
and these are discussed in the following sections. 
' 
' 
; ' 
StatistiCal Quidity Control of Compaction-First, it is difficult and expensive with destructive testing 
. to conduct a sufficient number of tests for a proper statistical analysis of the compaction test results. Sec-
ond, tlie volume of material involved in each test is an extremely small percentage of the total volume of fill 
being controlled (typically one part in 100 000, or even less). One solution to the problem of too few tests is 
nondestructive testing. With these methods, it is possible to conduct the number of tests necessary for sta-
tistical quality control of the cmnpaction. Even though this is possible, it is not commonly done in practice. 
Presence of Oversize Particles"'-You may recall from Sec. 5.3 that the presence of a significant 
amount of gravel and cobbles in earth fill causes problems with laboratory compaction tests. Conse-
quently, the standard procedures limit tlie amount of oversize particles permitted (Table 5.1). 
· 
Field compaction'control tests have similar problems, as mentioned briefly above in the discussion 
of the nuclear density test. If there is toohigha'percentage of oversize material, the laboratory density 
will be less' than that obtained in the field. One 'possibility is to use a test fill to determine field compaction 
procedures and then use a method 'specification to control compaction, or to use the procedures sug-
gested for.controlling rockfills in Sec. 5.7.6.You canalso correct the compaction test results for up to 
about 50% gravel by using a procedure suggested by the AASHTO (2010) Method T 224. 
Another problem with destructive quality control tests in earth fill containing oversize material is 
the size of the excavated hole and how to determine its volume. One solution is to use test pits between 
0.03 and 2.55 m3 (1 and 90 ft3) in volume, which are excavated by hand or machine. The volume of the 
excavated material is determined either by the sand replacement method, ASTM standard D 4914, or 
the water replacement method, D 5030 (ASTM, 2010). Although these are standard procedures, neither 
is cheap or simple to perform. 
When controlling sandy or fine gravelly fills with less than 5% fines and a maximum particle size 
of 19 mm, the sleeve method, ASTM D 4564, is applicable. Of course, for quality control of granular 
fills, the use of the relative density or density index as the compaction standard is appropriate. 
Lack of Knowledge of the Laboratory Standard Density-Ideally, it is desirable to have the 
complete compaction curve for each field test, but this is time consuming and expensive. Consequently, 
the laboratory maximum density may not be known exactly. It is not uncommon, especially in highway 
construction, for a series of laboratory compaction tests to be conducted on representative samples of 
the borrow materials for the highway. Then, when the field compaction control test is conducted, its 
result is compared with the results of one or more of these project "standard" soils. If the soils at the 
site are highly variable, this is a poor procedure. 
Alternatively, you can use the "family of curves-one-point method" (AASHTO Designation 
T 272), sometimes called the field check point method. This method gives a fairly rapid determination of 
the maximum density and optimum water content of the soil excavated during the field density test. In 
this approach, a family of compaction curves is developed for the project by combining a series of Proc-
tor curves for the various soils found in the project borrow areas. An extra amount of soil sufficient to 
.· 5.7 . Specifications and Compaction Control 
199 
perform a single laboratory compaction test is removed from the compacted fill during the field density 
test. Then a one-point Proctor test is conducted on this material, and the results provide the field "check 
point." The only restrictions necessary to determine the field check point are that: 
· 
1. ·During compaction, the mold.must be placed on a smooth solid mass of at least 100 kg, a require-
ment which may be difficult to achieve in the field. Asphalt pavement or compacted soil should 
not be used. (This is good practice no matter where you do the compaction test.) 
2. The soil to be compacted must be dry cif optimum (AASHTO recommends about 4% dry)for 
the compactive effort used, and knowing when the soil is dry of optimum takes some experience. 
How the. one~point method works. is shoWn in Fig. 5.25 .. Three compaction curves are shown for 
soils A, B, and C from a given construction job borrow area. The soil just tested for field density, as iden-
tified by the field engineer, does notmatch any soils for which project compaction curves exist, so a field 
"check point" compaction test is run. If the soil after excavation is not well dry of optimum, then it will 
need to be dried; thoroughly renuxed, and compacted approp~iately. The field "check point" test result is 
plotted as point X on the graph. By drawing a line parallel to the dry side of optimum of curves A, B, and 
C and reaching a maximum at the "line of optimums," a reasonable approximation of the maximum dry 
density may be obtained. If the soil was too wet when compacted, a point such as Y would be obtained. 
Then it would be difficult to distinguish which laboratory curve the soil belonged to, and an estimate of 
the maximum dry density would be almost impossible. Some experience is required to develop a "feel" 
for when the soil is dried out enough for the field check point water content to be less than the OM C. 
Another method for quickly and. efficiently determining the relative compaction of fine-grained 
soils is the rapid method. Developed in the 1950s by the U.S. Bureau ofReclamation (Hilf, 1961 and 1991 ), 
it is now a standard ASTM (2010) test method, D 5080; the corresponding U.S.Dept. of the Interior (1990) 
number is 7240. The rapid method makes it possible to determine aCCl:irately the relative compaction of a 
fill as well as a very close approximation of the difference between the optimum water"content and the fill 
water content without oven drying. Experience has shown that it is possible to obtain the values required 
for control of construction in about 1 to 2 h from the tim_e_ the fiel~ density test is first performed. 
~ 
A 
·c;; 
·c 
Q) 
'0 
2:- Pdmax 
o· 
Water content(%) 
· FIGURE 5.25 
Principle of the check 
point test. 
200 
Chapter 5 .. 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
'' 
• Add, say, 40 g water 
• Mix and compact as in . 
standard test 
· 
• Measure density of 
compacted sample • 
wet density 
1+z 
Divide into three parts 
/ • Add, say, 80 g water 
1 • Mix and compact as in 
· / · standard test 
1 • Measure density of · 
! compacted sample 
. 
' 
Plot results 
t 
M water added 
z = 
M moist soil 
l' 
I 
/ • Add, say, 120 g water 
1 • Mix and compact as in 
/ standard test · 
' · 
1 • Measure density of 
! : compacted sample 
d 
f 
. 
. 11.
11 
---,---d:-e_n-:si..:.ty_o_f_m:-o-:is-:t_s_o_il-:in:-f_ill __ -:--:-:-
egree o compaction o 1 = 
. 
. 
max1mum dens1ty scaled from above graph, X 
FIGURE 5.26 · Procedure for rapid method of determining degree of compaction 
of fill (after Seed, 1959). 
· 
Briefly, the procedure is as follows: Specimens of the fill material are compacted according to t~e 
desired laboratory standard at the fill water content and, depending on an estimate of how close the fill 
soil is to optimum, water is either added or subtracted from the specimen (see Fig. 5.26). With a little 
experience, it is relatively easy to estimate whether the fill material is about optimum, slightly wet, or 
slightly dry of optimum. From the wet density curve, the exact percent relative compaction based on 
dry density may be obtained. Only one water content, the fill water content, need be determined and 
then only for record purposes. The main advantage of the rapid method is that the contractor has the 
compaction results in a relatively short time. 
lime Required to Determine the Water Content-One major problem with the common destruc-
tive density test procedures is that determining the field water content takes time (several hours or 
overnight according to ASTM D 2216). Time is always of the utmost value on a compaction project, and 
if it takes a day or even several hours before the compaction test results are available, several lifts of 
fill may have been placed and compacted over the "bad"or "failing" test area. Then the engineer has to 
require the contractor to tear out a lot of possibly good fill to ensure that the relative compaction of the 
j 
· 5;7 
Specifications and Compaction Control 
201 
TABLE 5.3 Procedures for Determining Water Content of Excavated Material 
Test Method 
ASTM 
AASHTO 
Oven drying 
D2216 
T265 
Direct heating 
D4959 
Calcium carbide 
D4944' 
T217 
gas-pressure tester 
Microwave oven 
D4643 
After ASTM, AASHTO, and USBR Standards. 
USBR 
5300 
.. 5310 
5315 
Remarks and Limitations 
The standard against which all other methods are judged 
Should not be used for soils containing significant amounts 
·· '· of halloysite; montmorillonite, or gypsum; highly organic 
· .· soils, or marine deposits · 
· 
· ·. 
Should not be used for highly plastic days; organi~ soils, 
gypsum 
·should not be used for soils containing significant amounts of 
halloysite, montmorillonite, or gypsum; highly organic soils, 
·hydrocarbon-contaminated soils; marine soils· 
"bad" lift meets contract specifications~ Contractors understandably are very hesitant to do this, and yet 
how many zones of bad compaction should be allowed in an embankment? None, of course! 
Because determination of the water content takes the most tiine, several methods have been 
proposed to obtain it more rapidly, and these along with the standard oven drying method are listed in 
Table 5.3. In the direct heating metho((thewat~r contenfspeCimen is subjected to asource of heat 
provi~edby,f?r example, portable gas stoves, hair driers, blow torches~.or,heat lamps. Care must be 
taken to apply the heat uniformly and avoid overheating th~ specinien: By applying the heat incre-
mentally, carefully stirring the. specimen, and repeatedly weighing the specimen until a constant dry 
mass is obtained, satisfactory results 'can be obtained. With experience, one could judge when the soil is 
dry by its color and by weighing it several times to a point when the weight does not vary. Table 5.3lists 
some limitations of direct heating. 
, 
· · 
· ' . •. 
· · . . . . 
. 
·, 
. , · · 
· 
. Alternatively, a calcium carbide gas-pressure ineter, the "speedy" ~oisture meter, can be used. The 
water in 'the soil reacts with calcium carbide to produce acetylene gas, and the gas pressure shown on a 
. calibrated gagds proportional to the water. content. Bu;:n_ing with methanol and the special alcohol-
hydrometer method are also sometimes used. For these two methods; the correlation with standard oven 
drying is approximate-generally satisfactory for silts and lean clays but poor for organic soils and fat clays. 
• . ' If electricity is available at the field control laboratory, an ordinary microwave oven can be used 
to rapidly determine the water content. According. to ASTM D 4643, microwave drying is not intended 
. as a replacement for convection oven drying, but it can be used as a supplementary method when rapid 
. results are required. As with direct heating, an incremental approach is taken to avoid overheating the 
. ' specimen. The. method appears to be satisfactory for most soils imless they contain a significant 
amoimt of the minerals and substances listed in Table 5.3. Small, porous pebbles in the soil sample may 
explode'when rapidly heated; therefore, soil containers should be covered with heavy paper towels to 
prevent damage or injuries. 
· · 
· · 
· · 
· 
· 
Incorrect Determination of the Voliune of the ,Excavaflid Hole-The other problems with 
. . destructive field tests are often associated with determining the volume of the excavated material. Stan-
... dard procedures are listed in Table 5.4; three 'of them are shown schematically in Fig. 5.22. Historically, 
the sand cone was often taken as the "standard" volumetric procedure, but this test has its limitations 
and is subject to errors. For example, vibration from nearby working equipment will increase the density 
of the sand in the hole, which gives a larger hole volume than it should; this results in a lower field den-
sity. A higher density will result if the field technician stands too close to the hole and causes soil to 
squeeze into it during excavation. Any kind of unevenness in the walls of the hole causes a significant 
·. 
error in the balloon method. If the soil is coarse sand or gravel, neither of the liquid methods works well, 
unless the hole is very large, which means using one of the two test-pit methods with a polyethylene 
202 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
TABLE 5.4 Procedures for Determining the Volume of the Excavated Hole in Destructive Field Density Tests 
Designations According to: 
Test Method 
ASTM 
AASHTO. USBR 
Limitations 
Sand-cone 
D 1556 
T191 
7205 
For fine-grained soils without appreciable coarse gravel 
For fine-grained soils without sharp angular aggregate 
For fine-grained soils with gravel 
Rubber balloon 
D2167 
T205 
7206 
Drive .cylinder 
D 2937 
T204 
Sleeve 
D4564 
7215 
For granular materials without fines 
Sand replacement in test pit 
D4914 
7220 
. For soils with gravel and cobbles 
For soils with gravel and cobbles 
Water replacement in test pit , D5030 
. 7221 
sheet to contain the water or oil. All of the common volumetric methods are subject to error if the com-
pacted fill contains gravel and cobbles, although the two test pit procedures are attempts to minimize 
this effect (see the previous discussion of "oversize particles"). 
5.7.4 
Most Efficient Compaction 
The most efficient and therefore the mosi economical compaction conditions. are illustrated in 
Fig. 5.27. Three hypothetical field compaction curves of the. same soil but at different compactive 
efforts are shown. Assume that curve <D represents a compactive effort that can easily be obtained by 
existing compaction equipment. Then to achieve, say, 90% relative compaction, the placement water 
content of the compacted fill must be greater than water content a but less than water content c. 
These points are found where the 90% R.C. line intersects compaction curve oo. If the placement 
water content is outside the range a to c; then it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to achieve the 
required percentage relative compaction specified, no matter how much the contractor compacts that 
lift. This is why it may be necessary to wet or dry (rework) the soil prior to rolling in the field. 
. 
Now that we have established the range of placement water contents, the contractor might ask: 
"What is the best placement water content to use?" From a purely economical viewpoint; the most effi-
cient. water conhint would be at b, where the contractor provides the minimum compactive effort to 
at:tain the required 90% relative compaction. To consistently achieve the minimum relative compaction 
for the project, the contractor will usually use a slightly higher compactive effort, for example as shown 
by curve @ of Fig. 5.27. Thus, the most efficient placement watei contents exist between the optimum 
water content and b. '· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
However,' what may be best from the contractor's viewpoint may not result in a' fill with the 
· desired engineering properties. Compacting a soil on the w~t side generally results ina lower strength 
and a higher compressibility, for example, than compacting the soil on the dry side of the· optimum 
· water content. Other characteristics such as permeability and shrink-swell potential will also be dif-
ferent. Thus, a range of placement water contents should also be specified by the designer, in addition 
. to the percent relative compaction. This point illustrates why the desired engineering performance of · 
the fill rather than just the percentage of compaction must be kept in mind when writing compaction 
specifications and designing field control procedures (see Fig.5.19). 
5.7.5 
Overcompa.ction 
Figures 5.27 and 5.1 illustrate that specified densities can be achieved at higher water contents if more 
compactive effort is applied, by using either heavier rollers or more passes of the same roller. But, as 
mentioned above, at higher water contents, e.g:, wet of optimum, a lower strength will be obtained with 
j
~ 
en c 
Q) 
"C 
~ 
o· 
90%R.C. 
I 
CD 
Pdmax 
5.7 c. Specifications and Compaction Control 
203 
100% saturation 
line 
FIGURE 5.27 · • • Dry density versus 
• water content, illustrating the 
· most efficient conditions for field 
c compact:ion (after Seed, ,1964). 
higher compaction energi~s:This'~ffect is known as o~~rcompaction. Overcompaction can occur in the 
field when wet of optimmn soils are proofrolled with a very heavy, smooth-wheeled roller [Fig. 5.10(a)], 
or an excessive number of passes are applied to the lift (Mills and DeSalvo, 1978). Thus, even good 
material can become weaker. You can also detect overcompaction in the field by careful observation of 
, , the soil immediately under the compactor or the wheels of a heavily loaded scraper. If the soil is too 
wet and the energy applied is too great, "pumping'! or weaving of the fill will result as the compactor or 
·wheels shove the wet weaker fill ahead of itself. Also, sheepsfoot rollers won't be able to "walk out" of 
wet or overcompacted soil. This is another reason that observation .of the compaction process should 
.be done by compete~t and experienced field inspect?rs. 
5.7.6 .... R~ck Fill QA/QC ,.·, 
Quality control of compacted rock fills can be accomplished using a field bulk density't~st, which is 
simply a large-scale version of the volume replacement tests used in compacted soil fills (Fig. 5.22 and 
Table 5.4). As shown in Fig. 5.28(a), a plywood ring is placed on the compacted rock fill surface with a 
typical opening diameter of 3 ft (0.9 m). Prior to any excavation of the compacted fill; the volume of 
204 
ChapterS· 
'Compaction and Stabili.zation of Soils 
(a) 
FIGURE 5.28 Water replacement test to determine the in-place density of rock fill: (a) plywood ring for use as hole 
template; (b) plastic-lined hole filled with water for volume determination (photographs by A. Breitenbach from 
www.geoengineer.org/rockfill.htm). 
the ring above the compa~ted rock fill is determined, to be subtract~d latedrom the total volume of 
the ring and excavated hole (this can sometimes be significant due to the irregularity of the rock fill 
surface). This is done by anchoring a plastic liner in the ring and measuring the water volume needed 
to fill it. Material is then hand excavated within the ring diameter down to a depth of about 0.8 to 1 m 
(2.5 to 3ft), so that about 500 to 700 kg (1000 to 1500 lb) of material is obtained. The plastic liner is 
placed in the excavated hole and anchored at the ring, and the lined excavation is filled with a mea-
sured volume of water [Fig. 5.28(b)]. Once the in-place total density is determined, the in-place dry 
density can be computed. For most rock fills, the moisture content of the plus 19 mm ( +Y.-in.) rock is 
insignificant, so that the moisture content can be computed based on the minus 19 mm portion of the 
rock fill [Fig. 5.28(a) shows the field sieve used to separate the fractions]. The, resulting expression is 
Pd = total moist mass of rock fill material 
= 1+(w-314/100)X (%passing3J4 in./100). 
(5.10) 
where W-3t. = water content of the minus 19 mm material. Breitenbach (1993) discusses dry density 
calculations for rock fills in which the plus 19 mm materials have some appreciable moisture content, 
such as weathered rock, shales, claystones, or other absorptive rock types. 
5.7.7 
Compaction in Trenches 
Besides comp~ctingfor fills and for preparing the ground to suppo~t f~u~dations, it is equally impor-
tant to compact backfills used in utility trenches. These backfills cover pipes, cables, or other utilities 
and provide protection from surface loadings and erosion. In addition, the backfill usually serves as a 
road subbase if it is paved over. Unfortunately, backfilling often is done quickly after utility installation 
. or repair to minimize traffic impacts, and may, be done by the contractor without inspection. This can 
.lead to pavement irregularities and other problems with trench backfills.. 
5.7 · SpeCifications and Compaction Control 
205 
What exactly .is a trench?.OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) defines a 
trench as· a narrow underground excavation that is deeper than it is wide, and no wider than 4.5 m. The 
width of a trench is governed by the width· of. what is placed at the bottom and to some .extent by the 
width of theexcavatiori equipment In addition to stability and settlement after backfilling, the main 
. 
geotechnical concern is the stability. of an open excavation. If you do a web search on 29 CFR 1926.652,. ',. ". 
it will bring you to the U.S. Federal regulations regarding excavations that apply to·depths greater than · · 
4 ft or 1.2 m. The 1.2 m figure is a reasonable depth not to be exceeded when 'Yorkers are installing util" 
ities in a trench at least 2 ft or 0.6 m wide. The regulations impose restrictions for deeper trenches and 
are important from a safety and legal point of view: If you' are involved with a trench excavation, you 
. need to be. aware of these safety considerations and strictly follow the law. 
. 
.. ' .. 
For a trench less than about a metre wide; it is recommend that it be filled with material that will 
"flow" as opposed to chunky dayey'chimps. Gravels and sands are the best backfili materials and 
should be compacted in lifts no more than about 15 to 30 em. It is helpful, too, if the water. content is a 
' few percent above optimum. There should be at least 85% rei~tive ccnnpaction based on the modified 
. method (ASTM D 1557), 60cin below the final ground surface, arid atleast 90%:relative compaction 
in the 'upper 60 em ~f the trench. Flooding of the backfill materiai is not recommended as a way to 
"compact" the soil. You will end up with a saturated, compressible layer at about 85% relative com-
paction, which corresponds to a very low relative density and is not adequate (see Fig.5.21). 
For trenches wider than about 1 m, the minimum compaction should be at least 90% relative 
compaction for all depths, exclilsive of the top 15 em ( 6 in.) below the pavement and the base course 
of a pavement, if the trench surface will be paved over. Therefore, the top 15 em should be recom-
pacted to at least 95% relative compaction based on the modified method. If these recommenda-
tions are followed, there should be little if any movement of the former trench area. The layers in the 
trench may be compacted with vibrating plate'. compactors, pneumatic compactors, and the like. 
Compaction recommendatio-ns for trenches when the depth/width ratio is ~2 are shown in Fig. 5.29. 
. 
' 
' 
-
. 
~ 
-, 
., 
. 
,, 
..•. ' . . 
'. 
E 
u 
0 
10 
FIGURE 5.29 
Minimum compaction 
requirements for utility trenches for 
DIW> 2. 
· ; .:· 
206 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
Because of quality control and concerns about pavement settlements, many municipalities now 
require contractors to use "flowable fill," a very low strength concrete, to backfill utility trenches. These 
materials have sufficient compressive strength (about l:-1.5 MPa) to withstand traffic loads, but are 
weak enough to be excavated in the future if the utility line needs to be exposed for other repairs. 
5.8 
ESTIMATING PERFORMANCE OF COMPACTED SOILS 
How will a given soil behave in a fill, supporting a foundation, holding back water, or under a pavement? 
Will frost action be a critical factor? For future reference, we present the experience of the U.S. Army 
Corps of Engineers on compaction characteristics applicable to roads and airfields (Table 5.5) and the 
experience of the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, for several types of earth 
structures. 
In Table 5.5, the terms base, subbase, and subgrade [Columns (7), (8), and (9)) refer to compo-
nents of a pavement system, and they are defined in Fig. 5.30. In Column (16), the term CBR repre-
sents the California bearing ratio. The CBR is used by the Corps of Engineers for the design of flexible 
pavements. They use the modulus of subgrade reaction [Column (17)) for rigid pavement design. The 
8 
0 
0 
0 
.G). ~/k'///k///&Y//&Y/~ 
.. ·7/Trrrr/Trrrr//Trrr/Tr//T//T/7 
~ 
' 
0 
0 ~~~:~:i ~1~~,"z:i~1~?"::it~~~,"[iz~~?o[~o 
Wearing surface: 20-25 em Portland cement or 2-8 em asphaltic concrete. 
Base: 5-10 em asphaltic concrete, 15-30 em sand-gravel base, 20-30 em 
soil-cement, or 15-20 em asphalt stabilized sand. 
Subbase material (this layer may be omitted): 15-30 em sand-gravel. 
Subgrade:The natural soil at the site. The top 0.15-0.5 m is usually 
compacted prior to the placement of the other layers of the pavement. 
FIGURE 5.30 Definitions of terms common to pavement systems, with typical dimensions 
and materials for each component. 
j 
5.8 • Estimating Performance of Compacted Soils 
207 
. upper layers of flexible pavements usually iire constructed ·of asphaltic concrete, whereas rigid pave-
ments are made of Portland cement concrete. A good reference for the design of pavements is the 
book by Papagiannakis imd Masad (2008). 
· 
• 
·The use of these tables in enginee.ring practice is best shown by an example. They are very 
helpfuf for preliminary design purposes, for choosing the most suitable compaction equipment, and 
for rapid checking of field and laboratory test results. 
Example 5.5 ' 
Given: 
A soil, classified as a CL according to the USCS, is proposed for a compacted fill. 
Required: 
Consider the soil to be used as: 
a; Subgrade 
b. Earthdam 
c. Foundation support for a structure 
Use Table 5.5 and comment on: 
1. 
The overall suitability ofthe soil 
2. 
Potential problems of frost 
3. 
Significant engineering properties. 
4. 
Appropriate compaction equipment to use 
Solution: 
1. Suitability 
2. Frost potential 
3. Engineering 
properties 
4. Appropriate 
compaction 
equipment 
a. Subgrade 
Poor to fair 
Medium to high 
Medium compressibility 
fair strength CBR S; 15 
Sheepsfoot and/or rubber-
tired roller 
b. Earth Dam 
Useful as central core 
Low if covered by non-frost-
heaving soil of sufficient depth· 
Low permeability, compact for 
low permeability and high 
strength but also for flexibility 
Sheepsfoot and/or rubber-tired 
roller 
c. Structural Foundation 
Acceptable if compacted dry of 
optimum and if not saturated 
during service life 
. Medium to high if not controlled 
by temperature and water 
availability 
Potential for poor strength and 
therefore poor performance 
Sheepsfoot and/or rubber~tired 
roller 
Note: After you have finished this book and a course in foundation engineering, you can readily expand the information in this table. 
208 
Chapters.~· Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
TABLE 5.5 Characteristics Pertinent to Roads and Airfields · 
.' 
Symbol 
Value as Subgrade Value as Subbase 
Value as Base 
When not Subject When not Subject When not Subject 
· Major Divisions 
Letter Hatching Color 
Name• 
to Frost Action · 
to Frost Action 
to Frost Action 
(1) ' 
(2) 
•; '(3). 
(4) 
: (5) 
(6), 
I• 
(7) 
·; 
: : . ; (8) ': ··:) 
(9) 
~0. ·:··. 
Well-graded gravel~ or gravel-sand 
.Excellent 
.Excellent 
Good 
GW 
·.?" 
:o;'q. 
Red 
mixtures, little or no fines 
GP 
:f. 
Poorly graded gravels or gravel-sand 
Good to excellent Good 
Fair to good 
. , .. rn 
mixtures, little or no fines 
GRAVEL 
••• 
.AND···· 
lct 
Good to excellent Good .. 
Fair to good 
GRAVELLY G~ 
Silty gravels, gravel-sand-silt mixtures 
SOILS 
--------- --------- ---------· 
lu 
Yellow 
Good 
Fair 
Poor to not 
I 
suitable 
GC 
-·~ 
Oayey gravels, gravel-sand-clay 
Good 
Fair 
Poor to not 
COARSE· 
mixtures 
suitable 
GRAINED 
Well-graded sands or gravelly sands, 
SOILS 
sw 
Good 
Fair to good 
Poor 
little or no fines 
:::.:: 
Red 
SP 
Poorly graded sands or gravelly 
Fair to good 
Fair 
Poor to not 
SAND 
:::;·:: 
sands, little or no fines 
suitable 
AND 
lct 
Fair to good 
Fair to good 
Poor 
SANDY 
I 
SOILS 
SMt-
Silty sands, sand-silt mixtures 
--------- --------- ----------
I 
Yellow 
Fair 
Poor to fair 
Not suitable 
I U 
I 
sc 
~ 
Clayey sands, sand-clay mixtures 
Poor to fair , ., 
Poor. 
Not suitable 
Inorganic silts and very fine sands, 
SILTS 
ML 
rock flour, silty or clayey fine sands 
Poor to fair 
Not suitable· 
Not suitable 
AND 
or clayey silts with slight plasticity 
CLAYS 
~ 
Green Inorganic clays of low to medium 
.. 
LLIS 
CL 
. plasticity, gravelly clays, sandy 
Poor to fair 
Not ·suitable 
Not suitable 
LESS 
clays, silty clays, lean clays 
FINE· 
THAN 50 
lllli 
Organic silts and organic silt-clays 
: 
~ ·-· 
GRAINED 
OL 
of low plasticity 
Poor 
Not suitable 
Not suitable 
SOILS 
SILTS 
MH 
Inorganic silts, micaeeoas or diatomaceous Poor 
Not suitable 
Not suitable 
AND 
fine sandy or silty soils, clastic silts 
CLAYS 
CH 
Blue 
Inorganic clays of high plasticity, fat 
Poor to fair 
Not suitable 
Not suitable 
LLIS 
clays 
. GREATER 
;;::;, -
,, 
Organic clays of medium to high · 
Poor to very poor Noisuitabl<! 
Not suitable 
THAN 50 
OH 
'(:f;: 
plasticity, organic silts 
' 
f;. 
' 
,,•' ,., 
. HIGHLY ORGANIC 
' 
' 
,, . 
' . 
' 
' 
' 
'' 
SOILS 
Pt .. 
Orange Peat and other highly organic soils 
Not suitable 
Not suitable 
Not suitable 
After U.S. Army Waterways Experiment Station (1960). 
Notes: .. , 
..... 
" 
. .'•--•' 
__ 
,. . 
, 
, 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
,. 
. 
1. In Column (3), division of GM and SM groups into subdivisions of d and u are for roads and airfields only. Subdivision is on basis of Atterberg limits; 
suffiX d (e.g., GMd) will be used when the liquid limit is 25 or less and the plasticity index is 5 or less; the suffix u will be used otherwise. 
2. In Column (13), the equipment listed will usually produce the required densities with a reasonable number of passes when moisture conditions and 
thickness of lift are properly controlled. In some instances, several types of equipment are listed, because variable soil characteristics within a given soil 
group may require different equipment In some instances, a combination of t~o types may be necessary. , 
a. Processed base materials and other ang~lar materials. Steel-wheeled and rubber-tired rollers are re~mmended for hard, angular materials with lim-
ited fines or screenings. Rubber-tired equipment is recommended for softer materials subject to degradation. 
. , 
b. Finishing. Rubber-tired equipment is recommended for rolling during final shaping operations for most soils and processed materials.· · 
J
· 5.8 
Estimating Performance of Compacted Soils 
209 
Potential 
Compressibility 
Unit Dry Densities 
Typical Design Values 
Frost 
: 
and 
Drainage 
Compaction 
Subgrade Modulus 
Action 
Expapsion 
Characteristics 
. Equipmen 
lbf/ft~ 
Mg/m3 
CBR 
k (1bf/in.3) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
None to very Almost none 
Excellent 
Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired 125-140 2.00-2.24 40-80 
300-500 
slight 
roller,steel-wheeled roller 
None to 
Almost none 
Excellent 
Crawler-type tractor, rubber-tired 110-140 1.76-2.24 30-60 
300-500 
very slight 
roller, steel-wheeled roller ' 
Slight to 
Very slight 
Fair to poor' 
Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot 
125-145 2.00-2.32 4o:-&l 
300-500 
medium 
... !~~~::~~~!9..~~-:?..':!!.?.!.?.~.!!l.<.?!~!~.~~-
1--------···--
N·~---··NWO'WO' ................ ................................................ 
.................... ~ ......................... ........ -.... ................................................... 
Slight to 
Slight 
Poor to practically 
Rubber-tired roller, 
115-135 1.84-2.16 20-30 
200-500 
medium 
impervious 
shccpsfoot roller 
Slight to 
Slight 
Poor to practically 
Rubber-tired roller, 
130-145 2.08-2.32 20-40 
200-500 
medium 
impervious 
sheepsfoot roller 
None to very Almost none 
Excellent 
Crawler-type tractor, 
110-130 1.76-2.08 20-40 
200-400 
slight 
rubber-tired roller 
None to very Almost none 
Excellent ' 
Crawler-type tractor, 
105-135 1.68-2.16 10-40 
150-400 
slight 
rubber-tired roller 
l 
Slight to 
Very slight 
Fair to poor 
Rubber-tired roller, sheepsfoot 
120-135 1.92-2.16 15-40 
150-400 
.... ~E!:...·-·-· .......................................... ______ ,. ____ , __________ ... .•. !.?.~!~~:!~!:.:?..':!!.?.~.?.~!:'.':?!~!~:. .. .................... .. ...................... ............... .. ............. ;. ................................ 
Slight to 
Slight to 
Poor to practically 
Rubber-tired roller, 
100-130 1.60-2.08 10-20 
100-300 
high 
medium 
impervious 
sheepsfoot roller 
Slight to 
Slight to 
Poor to practically 
Rubber-tired roller, 
100-135 1.60-2.16 
5-20 
100-300 
high 
medium 
impervious 
shccpsfoot roller 
Medium to 
Slight to 
Rubber-tired roller, 
very high 
medium 
Fair to poor 
sbeepsfoot roller; close 
90-130 1.44-2.08 
15or 
100-200 
control of moisture 
less 
Medium to 
Rubber-tired roller, 
. 
15 or 
high ' 
Medium 
Practically 
sheepsfoot roller 
90-130 1:44-2.08 
50-150 
impervious 
less 
Medium to 
Medium to 
Rubber-tired roller, 
90-105 1.44-1.68 
5or 
50-100 
high 
high 
.. Poor 
sheepsfoot roller 
less 
Medium to 
High 
Shccpsfoot roller, 
80-105 1.28-1.68 
10or 
50-100 
very high 
Fair to poor 
rubber-tired roller 
less 
Medium 
High, 
Practically. 
Sheepsfoot roller, 
90-115 1.44-1.84 
15 or 
50-150 
impervious 
rubber-tired roller 
less 
Medium 
High 
Practically 
. Shcepsfoot roller, 
80-110 1.28-1.76 
5or 
25-100. 
impervious 
rubber-tired roller 
less 
" 
Slight 
Very high 
Fair to poor 
Compaction not practical 
c. Equipment size. The following sizes of equipment are necessary to assure the high densities required for airfield construction: 
Crawler-type tractor-total weight in excess of 30 000 lb (14 000 kg). 
Rubber-tired equipment-wheelload in excess of 15 000 lb (7000 kg); wheel loads as high as 40 000 lb (18 000 kg) may b~ necessary to obtain 
the required densities for some materials (based on contact pressure of approximately 65 to 150 psi or 450 kPa to 1000 kPa). 
Sheepsfoot roller-unit pressure (on 6 to 12 in.Z or 40 to 80 cm2 foot) to be in excess of 250 psi (1750 kPa); unit pressures as high as 650 psi 
(4500 kPa) may be necessary io obtain the required densities for some materials. The area of the feet should be at least 5% of the total 
peripheral area of the drum, using the diameter measured to the faces of the feet. 
3. In Columns (14) and (15), densities are for compacted soil at optimum water content for modified AASHTO compaction effort. 
4. In Column (16), the maximum value that can b~ used in design of airfields is, in some _cases, limited by gradation and plasticity requirements. 
210 
Chapter 5 
. Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
PROBLEMS 
5.1 For the data in Fig. 5.1: 
(a) Estimate the maximum dry density and optimum water content for both the standard curve and the 
modified Proctor curve. 
(b) What is the placement water content range for 90% relative compaction for the modified Proctor curve 
and 95% relative compaction for the standard Proctor curve? 
· 
. 
(c) For both curves, estimate the maximum placement water content for the minimum compactive effort to 
achieve the percent relative compaction in part (b). 
. · 
· 
. 
·. 
5.2 The natural water content of a borrow material is known to be 8%. Assuming 5500 g of wet soil is used for 
laboratory compaction test points, compute how much water is to be added to other 5500 g samples to bring 
their water contents up to 11%, 15%, 18%,22%, and 26%. . 
, 
5.3 For the soil shown in Fig. 5.1, a field density test provided the fo,llowing information: 
Water content= 13% 
Wet density = 1.84 Mg/m3 (115lbf/ft3) 
Compute the percent relative compaction based on the modlfied Proctor and the standard Proctor curyes. 
5.4 For the data given below (p, = 2.68 Mg/m3): 
· 
(a) Plot the compaction curves. 
(b) Establish the maximum dry density and optimum water content for each test. 
(c) Compute the degree of saturation at the optimum point for data in Column A. 
. 
(d) Plot the 100% saturation (zero air voids) curve. Also plot the 70%, 80%, and 90% saturation curves. 
Plot the line of optimums. 
B (standard) 
. C (low energy) 
.. · Pa (Mg/m3) . 
w(o/o). 
Pa (Mg/m3) 
w(o/o) 
Pa (Mg/m3) 
w(o/o) 
1.873 
. 9:3 
1.691 
9.3 
1.627 
10.9 
'1.910 
12.8 
1.715 
11.8' 
1.639 
. 12.3 
:1.803 
15.5 
1.755' 
14.3 
. 1.740 .. 
16.3 
1.699 
18.7 
1.747 
17.6 
1.707 
20.1 
1.641; 
21.1· 
1.685 
' 20.8 
1.647 
'22.4 
1.619 
23.0 
5.5 The following moisture-density data are results from laboratory compaction tests on a given soil using the 
· same compactive effort: · · 
. 
· 
· 
Water Content(%) 
·, 8' 
11 
14 
17 
20 
· Note: G, ,= 2.70. 
Dry Unit Weight (ib/ft3) 
111 
113 
115 
114 .· 
109 
. ,-, 
~- ' 
(a) On a suitable graph or using a spreadsheet, plot the curve of dry unit weight versus water content and 
indicate the maximum dry unit weight and the optimum water content. 
' 
(b) What range of water contents would be acceptable if the specifications call for 98% relative compaction 
and water content should be dry of optimum? Show how you calculated the relative compaction and 
show on the plot the range of water contents. · 
· 
· 
(c) What is the maximum saturation level achieved during compaction tests that were performed? 
5.6 A Proctor test was performed on a soil' which has a specific gravity of solids of 2.71. For the water content 
and total unit weight (y1) data below: 
(a) Plot the moisture-dry density curve. 
(b) Find the maximum dry density and optimum moisture content. 
Problems 
211 
(c)· Determine the moisture range permitted if a contractor must achieve 90% relative compaction. 
(d) What volume of water, in ft3, must be added to obtain 1 yd3 of soil at the maximum dry density if the soil 
is originally at 10% water content? 
Water Content(%) 
Wet Density (pcf) , 
10 
13 
16 
18 
20 
22 
25 
98 
106 
119 
125 
129 
128 
123 
5.7 1\vo choices for borrow soil are available: 
Borrow A 
115 pcf 
Density in place 
? 
Density in triinsport 
0.92 
Void ratio in transport 
'25% 
· Water content in place 
$0.20/yd3 
Cost to excavate 
$0.30/yd3 
Cost to haul 
2.7 
Gs 
112 pcf 
Maximum Proctor dry density 
BorrowB 
120 pcf 
95 
? 
20% 
$0.10/yd3 
$0.40/yd3 
2.7 
110 
Note: "In plac~" indicates when the soil was in its original, n~turallocation. 
· It will be necessary to fill a 200 000 yd3 depression, and the fill material must be compacted to 95% of the 
standard Proctor (maximum) density. A final10% moisture content is desired in either case. (a) What is the 
minimum volume of borrow from each site needed to fill the depression? (b) What is minimum quantity 
(volume) of material from each site to haul? (c) What soil would be cheaper to use? 
5.8 Refer to the following data: I'd in borrow pit, 87.0 pcf; Win borrow pit, 13.0%; G,, 2.70; Modified Proctor 
Wopto 14.0%; Modified Proctor 'Ydm.,• 116.0 pcf. Assume that 50 000 yd3 of the soil from the borrow pit is to be 
delivered to an embankment at a construction site. By the time it reaches the site, the water content is 9%. It 
will be compacted to a minimum of 90% of modified Proctor maximum dry density. Determine the total vol-
ume of water (in ft3) that must be added to the soil to increase the moisture content to the optimum level. 
5.9 The values of emin and ema"x for a pure silica sand Ps = 2.70 Mg/m3 were found to be 0.42 and 0.71,respectively. 
(a) What is the corresponding range in dry density? (b) If the in situ void ratio is 0.58, what is the relative density? 
5.10 The wet density of a sand in an embankment was found to be 1.85 Mg/m3 and the field water content was 
12%. In the laboratory, the density of the solids was found to be 2.71 Mg/m3, and the maximum and mini-
mum void ratios were 0.65 and 0.38, respectively. Calculate the relative density of the sand in the field. 
5.11 The laboratory test results on a sand are e',ax = 0.91, emin = 0.48, and Gs = 2.67. 
(a) What is the dry unit weight (in lb/ft3) of this sand when its relative density is 67% and its water content is 10%? 
(b) How would you classify the density of this soil? 
· 
5.U Based on field data, you have determined that a sand's relative density is on the borderline between "medium" 
and "dense," and its void ratio is 0.93. For this soil, if the difference between emin and emax is 0.3, what is emin? 
5.13 For a granular soil, given y1 ~ 108 pcf, D, = 82%, w = 8%, and Gs = 2.65. For this soil, if emin = 0.44, what 
would be the dry unit weight in the "loosest" state? 
· 
5.14 The laboratory test results on a sand are as follows: emax = 0.91, emin = 0.48, and Gs = 2.67. What would be 
the dry and moist unit weights of this sand, in lb/ft3, when densified at a moisture content of 10% to a rela-
tive density of 65%? 
5.15 A sample of sand has a relative density of 40% with a specific gravity of solids of 2.65. The minimum void 
ratio is 0.45 and the maximum void ratio is 0.97. 
(a) What is the unit weight (in units of lb/ft3) of this sand in the saturated condition? 
(b) If the sand is compacted to relative density of 65%, what will be the decrease in thickness of a 4ft. thick layer? 
212 
Chapter 5 
Compaction and Stabilization of Soils 
, 5.16 A field compaction control test was conducted on a compacted lift. The mass of the material removed from the 
.hole was 1820g and the volume of the hole was found to be 955 cm3.Asmallsample of the soil lost 17 gin the dry-
ing test and the mass remaining after drying was 94 g. The laboratory control test results are shown in Fig. P5.16. 
(a) If end-product specification requires 100% relative compaction and w = (optimum - 3%) to 
(optimum + 1% ), determine the acceptability of the field compaction and state why this is so. 
(b) If it is not acceptable, what should be done to improve the compaction so that it will meet the specification? 
1.8 
%' 
0>. 
~ 1.7 
~ 
1.6 
5 
FIGURE P5.16 
~· 
.. 
/' .· ·.···'\ 
10 
15 
20 
. w(%) 
25 
5.17 Calculate the compactive effort of the modlfh;dProctor test in b'oth (a) SI and (b) British engineering units. 
5.18 Why does the relative compaction decrease if the're is vibration during the sand-cone test? 
5.19 In a field density test, using the oil method, the wet mass of soil removed from a small hole in the fill was 
1.65 kg. The mass of oil (specific gravity = 0.92) required to fill the hole was 0.75 kg, and the field water content 
was found to be 22%. If the Ps of the soil solids is 2650 kg!m3, what are the dry density arid degree of saturation 
of the fill? 
5.20 You are' an earthwork construction control inspector checking the field compaction of a layer of soil. The 
laboratory compaction curve for the soil is shown in Fig. P5.20. Specifications call for the compacted density 
to be at least 95% of the maximum laboratory value and within ±2% of the optimum water content. When 
you did the sand cone test, the volume of soil excavated was 1165 cm3• It weighed 2230 g wet and 1852 g dry. 
(a) What is the compacted dry density? 
(b) • What is the field water content? 
(c) what is the relative compaction? 
(d) Does the test meet specifications?. 
(e) What is the degree of saturation of the field sample? 
(f) If the sample were saturated at constant density, what would be the water content? 
1.8 
~ 
~ 
18 
20. 
FIGURE P5.20 
w(%) 
5.21 You are checking a field~compacted layer of soil. The laborat~iy contr~l curve has the following values: 
>.. 
' 
. 
\ 
._, 
' 
-' 
• '. 
. 
. 
. 
,,, 
. Pd (lb/ft3) ·. 
w(%) 
104 . 
14 
.105.5 
16 
106 
18 
105 
20 
103.5 
22 
101 
24 
j
Problems 
213 
The specification for compaction states that the field-compacted soil must be at least 95% of the maximum 
control density and within of the optimum moisture for the control curve. You dig a hole of in the compacted 
layer and extract a sample that weighs 3.8 lb wet and 3.1lb dry. 
(a) What is the compacted pd? The compaction w? The percent compaction? Does the sample meet the 
· specifications? 
(b) If the density of solids is 2.68 Mg!m\ what is the compacted degree of saturation? If the sample were 
saturated at constant density, what would be the water content? (After C. W. Lovell.) 
5.22 A mixture contains 28% by dry weight fines and 72% coarse. When the coarse material has a w = 3%, its 
affinity for water is completely satisfied. The fines have a PL = 22 and an LL = 34. This mixture· is 
compacted by rolling to Pd = 128 pcf and Wmix ::: 13%. What is the water content of the fines in the com-
pacted mass? What is the liquidity index of the fines in the compacted mass? (After C. W. Lovell.) 
5.23 A soil proposed for a compacted fill contains 38% fines and 62% coarse material by dry weight. When the 
coarse fraction has w = 2.0%, its affinity for water is completely satisfied (that is, it is saturated but surface 
dry). The Atterberg limits of the fines are LL = 31 and PL = 13. The soil is compacted by rolling to a 
Pd = 1.95 Mg/m3 at w = 15%. Note: This is the water content of the entire soil mixture. 
(a) What is the water content of the fines in the compacted mass? 
(b) What is the likely classification of the soil? (Give both the Unified and the AASHTO classifications.) 
(c) What is the liquidity index of the fines? 
(d) What can you say about the susceptibility of the fill to 
(1) shrinkage-swelling potential? 
(2) · potential for frost action? 
(e) Is there a certain type of compaction equipment you would especially recommend for this job? Why? 
5.24 A fine sand with poor gradation is to be used as a subgrade for a flexible pavement. Give as much informa-
tion as you can about the suitability of this soil as a pavement subgrade. 
5.25 What soils, if properly compacted, would make the best foundation· material for a structure? Give your 
answers in terms of the Unified Soil Classification System symbols. 
5.26 The same as Problem 5.25, for an earth dam. 
5.27 Given: The data shown in Fig. 5.4. Soil types 3 and 4 are mixed in the borrow area to some unknown extent. 
After a representative sample of the combined material is air dded to a uniform water content (hopefully on 
. the dry side of optimum), a compaction test is performed and a value of 1.85 Mg/m3 dry density at 12.5% 
water content is obtained. · 
· 
(a)· Estimate the maximum dry density of th~ corr;bined soils. 
. . ' 
: 
· 
. · 
(b) If a field dry density of 1.54 Mg/m3 is obtained after compaction by a sheepsf~ot roller, compute the rel-
ative compaction. 
· · · 
5.28 The core of an earth dam is to be compacted on the wet side of optimum ~o· as to ensure low permeability 
and flexibility (a nonbrittle stress-strain relationship). You have the choice of using a sheepsfoot roller or a 
smooth-wheel roller to compact the soil. To reduce potential shrinkage of the dam core, which is the best 
piece of equipment to use? If the soil were to be compacted dry of optimum, would it matter? 
5.29 A contractor is placing soil in 10-in.loose lifts, each at about 85 pcf. The moisture content is 8% at the time 
of placement. The optimum water content for this soil is 10%. The contractor has a water truck with a spray 
bar on the back. She will use it to drive over the dry soil, with the spray bar running, to increase the water 
content. How fast should the truck move with the spray running at some flow rate? 
Make a plot of gal/min from the spray bar (ordinate) versus speed of the truck in mph (abscissa) for 
·· the driver to use. The plot must have a family of curves on it, one each for water contents between 5% and 
• 14% for this soil; including 10%:Use a spreadsheet to create the data and corresponding plots. Submit sample 
calculations, the plot, and an explanation of how to use the plot, to be given to the contractor. 
Extra credit: Make a similar plot; for a soil with a 6% initial water content. (After D. Elton.) 
'\ 
C H' -A P T E · R 
6 
fiydrost~ti_cJI\fater in _SoilS:· 
and Rocks-
< 
:, ,' 
6.1- > INTRODUCTION 
214 
' ". 
. 
.. : 
-~- .. 
. ' 
' 
._;· 
, 
: ., 
. 
.· 
. 
From preyious discussions on the_Atterberg limits, classification of soils, geologic processes, and soil and 
rock stiuct~res,ymi should now. realize that the presence of water in soils and rocks is very important. 
\vater very strongly affects the engineefing behavior of most soils; especially fine-grained soils, as well as 
many rock masses. Water is an important factor in most geotechnical engineering design and construction 
.. _,·. . projects. A fewe~amples include·capillarity,sw(!lling,_.and_frost actioii_in.soils, discussed in this chapter, 
.. imd 'seepage ofwater.througli dams andlevees and toward wells, as discussed in Chapter 7.As an indi-
_, cation of the -practical importance or' water in geotechnical engineering,it' has been e-stimated that 
' more people have lost their lives as a result of failures of dams and levees due to seepage and "piping" 
(Chapter 7) than to all the other, failures of civil engineering ,works c~mb.ined.In North America, 
damage from swelling (expansive) soils causes a greater economic loss annually than floods, hurricanes, 
. tornadoes, arid earthquakes combined.· 
. 
In g~ne~al, water in soils can be thought ~fas either static or dynamic. The groundwater table, 
even though it actually fluctuates throughout the year, is considered to be static for most engineering 
purposes. Adsorbed water (Chapter 4) is generally static. Similarly, capillary .water is usually taken to be 
static, although it too can fluctuate, depending on climatic conditions and other factors. In this chapter 
. ·.we shall concentrate on hydrostatic water problems in geotechnical engineering . 
. The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol 
.c 
D 
d 
F 
he 
fc 
· · Dimension: 
1/m 
·.:L. 
L 
'· 
MLr2 
L 
1/m 
,·m,mm .. 
.m;mm-
N 
m 
(%) 
Definition · 
Empirical capillary coefficient- Eq. (6.7) 
Diameter 
Capillary diameter~ Eq. (6.4b) 
Force 
Height of capillary rise- Eqs. (6.4c) and (6.5) 
Collapse potential 
(Continued) 
6.2 
SYJl1bol 
Patm 
rm 
SL 
T 
u 
Uc 
a 
u 
u' 
Uh 
uj, 
Uv , 
Uv 
CAPILLARITY 
Dimension 
MT-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML...:1T-2 
ML-lT-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T--2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML:...1T-2 · 
Unit 
kPa 
m,mm 
(%) 
Nlm 
kPa 
kPa 
degree 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
Definition· . 
Atmospheric pressure · 
Radius of meniscus 
Shrinkage limit-- Eq. (6.9) 
Surface tension 
Pore water pressure 
6.2 Capillarity 
215 
Capillary pressure-- Eq. (6.6b) 
Contact angle 
Total stress 
Effective or intergranular stress-- Eq. (6.8) 
Total horizontal stress- Eq. (6.19) 
Effective horizontal stress- Eq. (6.20) 
· Total vertical stress- Eq. (6.19) · 
EffeCtive vertical stress-- Eq. (6.20) . 
Capillarity arises from a fluid property known as surface tension, which occurs at the interface 
between different materials. For soils and rocks, it occurs between surfaces of water, mineral grains, 
and air. Fundamentally, surface tension results from differences in forces of attraction between the 
molecules of the.materials at the interface. 
The phenomenon of capillarity may be demonstrated in many ways. Placing the end of a dry 
towel in a tub of water will eventually result in a saturated towel. To illustrate the effects of capillarity 
in porous materials such as soils and rocks, we can use the analogy of small-diameter glass tubes to rep-
resent the voids between· the mineral grains. Capillary tubes demonstrate that the adhesion forces 
between the glass walls and water cause the water to rise in the tubes and form a meniscus1 between 
the glass and the tube walls. The height of rise is inversely proportional to the diameter of the tubes; the 
smaller their insid(! diameter, the greater the height of capillary rise. The meniscus formed is concave 
upward with the water "hanging," S? to speak, on the walls of the glass tube [Fig. 6.1(a)]. With some 
Mercury 
Water 
(a) Water 
(b) Mercury 
(c) Beer 
FIGURE 6.1 
Menisci in glass tubes in (a) water, (b) mercury, and (c) beer. 
1After Giacomo Meniscus (1449-1512), a Venetian physician and friend of Leonardo da Vinci. (We are indebted to 
Prof. M. E. Harr, Professor Emeritus, Purdue University, for this little known fact.) (From the Greek; f.l.EVLUKou = · 
"small moon" or "crescent.") 
216 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
materials the internal cohesion forces are greater than the adhesion forces, arid the substance will not 
"wet" the glass tube. Mercury, for example, has a depressed meniscus; its shape is convex [Fig. 6.1(b)]. 
If we look more closely at the meniscus geometry for water in a fine capillary tube (Fig. 6.2), we 
can write equations for the forces acting in the water column. The force acting downward, considered 
positive, is the weight W of the column of water, or 
2 F do~n~ ,W-== ~olume(pw)g = he( *d
2 )pwg 
(6.1) 
The' upward force is the vertical component of the reaction of the meniscus against the tube 
• 
. 
,• 
• 
;, 
I 
circumference, or 
' 2Fup = -rrdT cos a 
(6.2) 
where Tis the surface te~sion of the water-air interface which acts around the circumfe~~nce of the tube. 
The surface tension has dimensions of force/unit length. The other terms are functions of the geometry 
of the system and are defined in Fig: 6.2. · · 
· 
· 
· 
For equilibrium 2 F v = 0, and 
-(hc)*d2pwg - -rrdT COS a = 0 
Solving for the height of capillary rise, h" we obtain 
h ~- -Tcosa 
c 
dpwg 
Patrn 
~++ 
-z 
f~w~ 
Patm 
d 
z 
(Compression) 
Uc= -hcPw9 
(+) 
'uw= ZPw9 
(Hydrostatic) 
· FIGURE 6.2 
Meniscus geometry of capillary rise ofwater in a glass tube. 
(6.3) 
(6.4a) 
. , , , 
• , 6.2 
Capillarity 
217 
where 
(6.4b) 
For clean glass tubes and pure water, a--+ 0 and cos a --+1, 
(6.4c) 
The capillary rise is up~ard, ~b~ve the free water surface, but it has a negative value because of 
thesign convention shown inFig. 6.2. Surface tension Tis a physical property of water. From the 
, Ha~dbook of Chemistry and. Physics (2008), at 20°C, T is. about 73 dynesicm. or 73 mN/m. Since 
Pw = 1000 kg/m3 and g =, 9.81 rn!s2, for. pure water in clean glass tubes Eq. (6.4) reduces to . 
' 
' 
,_, 
., 
< 
' 
where h;· = height of capillary rise, m, and 
d = 
diameter of capillary tube, mm , 
h = -0.03 
c 
d 
' 
. 
(6.5) 
, This formula is easy to remember. For the height of capillary rise in 'metr~s, divide 0.03 by the diameter 
in milliinetres. 
' 
. 
. 
' 
' ' 
. 
All the preceding discussion is for clean glass tubes and pure water under laboratory conditions. 
In reality, the actual height of capillary rise is likely to be somewhat less due to the presence of impuri-
ties and imperfectly clean surfaces. 
Example 6.1 
Given: 
The. diameter of a Clean glass capillary tube is 0.1 mm. 
Required: 
Expected height of capillary rise of water. 
Solution: Use Eq. (6.5). 
., 
0.03 
. 
he= -01 
= 0.3m 
. mm 
Also shown in Fig. 6.2 is the pressure or stress distribution in the water. Below the surface of the 
water reservoir, the pressure increases linearly with depth (hydrostatic pressure), or 
. 
. . 
. . 
where Uw = water pressure at some depth, and 
z = depth below free water surface. 
(6.6a) 
218 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Above the reservoir surface, the water pressure in the capillary tube is negative or less than zero 
gage pressure (referenced to atmospheric pressure). From Eq. (6.4c), the magnitude of the capillary 
pressure uc is . 
4T 
2T 
Uc = - hcPwg = -d = ~ r m 
(6.6b) 
•' 
The shape of the meniscus is actually iipherical (a minimum energy condition) with radius r m 
(Fig. 6.2). The radius is greater than or equal to the radius of the tube, depending on the contact angle a. 
When a is approxini~iely zero, th~~ r m = d/2; 
. ' .. ' . '. 
' ',· 
' ' ' ' ' ··. 
What is the maximum negative' pressure that can be attained? In large tubes, ~he limitation is the 
·'vapor pressure of water. As the pressure becomes increasingly negative (that is, h.iss than atmospheric), 
water will cavitate or "boil" when the ambient' pressure reaches the vapor pressure. This occurs when 
the water column is about 10m in length, which is about the maximum height that a suction pump can 
draw. When the water "boils" at the vapor pressure, or about -1 atm pressure,' then bubbles of water 
vapor form, and the column of water'is broken. In absolute terms, the vapor pressure of water is 
17.54 mm Hg or 2.34 kPa absolute at 20°C [from the Handbookof(hemistry and Physics (2008)]: 
The relationships between absolute, gage, and vapor press11re of water are. shown in Fig. 6.3. The 
equivalent capillary tube diameter at the vapor pressure is' about 3 11rri.' Now,' if the tube is smaller than 
. this diameter, then the water cannot cavitate because the' surface tension is too high and a bubble cannot 
folm. In this case, ihe height of capillary rise in smaller tubes depends only on the tubediiuneter, and thus 
the rise may be much greaterthari 10 in. Similarly, the capillary pressure (pore water tension) in this case 
,maybemuchgreaterthan=-:latmor-lOOkPa. 
·· 
. ··. 
· 
' 
· 
0 atm·abs 
·o kPa·abs 
0 m Hg·abs 
0 psia 
-1 atm·gage 
-'-1 01.325 kPa·gage 
-0.76 Hg·gage 
-14.696 psi·gage (psig) 
.. Vapor pressure of water at 20°C 
2.34 kPa·abs 
0.01754 m Hg·abs 
0.34 psia 
----- Absolute pressure ----~ 
, Gage pressure 
·:·: 
, . Gage pressure of water at 20°C , 
. --:98.99_kPa·gage 
,-.. ' / 
-0.7425 m Hg·gage 
-14.36 psig 
,,,. 
1 atm·abs 
101.325 kPa·abs 
0.76 m Hg·abs 
14.696 psia 
0 atm·gage 
· 0 kPa·gage 
0 Hg·gage 
0 psi·psig 
FIGURE 6.3 · The relationship between atmosphe~iC ~nd vaporpressu·r~s of water in terms 'Ot absolute 
and gage pressures. 
J 
, 6.2 Capillarity 
219 
In summary, remember that for large tubes the maximum allowable tension or suction in water 
depends only on the atmospheric pressure and has nothing to do with the diameter of the tube. Capil-
lary rise in small tubes, on the other hand, is a function of the tube diameter only and has no relation to 
atmospheric pressure (Terzaghi and Peck, 1967; Sowers, 1979). 
· ' 
Example 6.2 
Given: 
The pressure relationships shown in Fig. 6.3. 
Required: 
a. Show that the maximum height of a water column in a large tube is about 10m. 
b. Show that the equivalent pore diameter at the vapor pressure is about 3 ftm. 
Solution: 
a. In large tube's, the maximum height of a water column is ·governed by the vapor pressure or 
the maximum negative pressure in the water. From Fig. 6.3, at the vapor pressure, the pressure 
is -98.99 kPa. Because 1 kPa = 103 kg· m/s2/m2 (Appendix A), and using Eq. (6.6), we have 
h = ~ 
= 
-98.99 kPa 
e 
{Jwg 
(1000 kg/m3)(9.81 rnls2) 
= -10.1m (rise) 
b. Use Eq. (6.5) and solve for de. 
·d = -0.03 = 
-O.Q3. = 3(10-3)mm = 3(10~6 ).:m .. :· 
e 
he 
-10.1 m 
· ' 
' 
6.2.1 
Capillary Rise and Capillary Pressures in Soils 
, Although soils are random assemblages of particles, 'and the resulting voids are similarly random and 
highly irregular, the capillary tube analogy, although imperfect, helps explain capill~ry: phenomena 
observed in real soils. 
· 
· 
In principle, capillary or negati~e press'ures and capillary rise will be.similar in soil~ and in glass 
tubes. Let's look at a series of capillary tubes in Fig. 6.4. Thbe 1 has a diameter de, and thus the corre-
sponding height of capillary rise is he. The fully developed meniscus' has a radius re. In tube 2, h < he; 
· the water will try to rise to he, but it cannot. Consequently, the radius of the ininiscus in tube 2 will be 
greater than re, since it is physically impossible for the corresponding capillary pressure (and therefore 
· .: 
·there) to develop; In tube 3; a large bubble or void exists, and there'is no way for the water to be pulled 
·above a void with diameter greater than de. If, however, as shown in tube 4, water enters from the top, 
then it is possible for the meniscus at the top of the tube to' support the entire column of water of diam-
eter de. The walls of the void support the water in the void outside the column of water. Thbe 5 is filled 
with soil, and the water rises to the surface of the soil, since tlie average or effective pore diameter of 
: •: · .. the soil is much less than de. The capillary menisci hang on the particles, which pull the grains together, 
causing an intergranular stress to act at the contact between the two grains. A magnified picture of two 
sand particles connected by menisci of radius r m is shown in Fig. 6.5. '' 
220 
Chapter.6 
:·. Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
;·" 
CD 
® 
0 
.FIGURE 6.4. Capillaiy rise in tubes of different shapes (after Taylor, 1948) . 
. ' 
FIGURE 6.5 Two soil grains held 
together by a "capillary film: ' 
FIGURE 6.6 Capillarity in a tube of · · 
unequal radii (after A. Casagrande). 
'.;: ... · 
<,,, 
® 
re 
. Another analogy illustrating the development of menisci in soils is shown by the tube in Fig. 6.6 . 
. The tube i~itially is completely filled with water. As evaporation occurs, the menisci begin to form, 
; and, at the beginning, the largest possible radius is that of the larger end, rc. At the smaller· end, the 
radius is also equalto rc,It cannot be any smaller, because then the pressure would have to be lower 
(more negative), and that cannot happen. By hydrostatics, the pressure in the water must be the same 
at both ends, otherwise flow would occur toward the end with the lower (more negative) pressure. As 
evaporation continues, the menisci retreat until the condition indicated by the cross-hatched section of 
. the tube occurs. At this time, the menisci have radii equal to r s ,the radius of the smaller section of the 
, ·capillary tube. The capillary pressure can go no lower (i.e., no more negative); and it corresponds to the 
. pressure which can be supported by the smaller diameter radii. This pressure is given by. Eq. (6.6). If 
. evaporation continues, the tube will eventually become empty. 
. · .. ;_ .. 
, ·· · .. 6.2 
Capillarity 
221 
Although the capillary tube analogy is imperfect, it is still useful, because it recognizes that cap-
illary phenomena depend on the pore sizes or pore volumes and their distribution in soils. There is an 
ASTM standard (D 4404)·for the determination of pore volume and pore volume distribution by 
mercury intrusion porosimetry. However, because this determination requires special equipment and 
procedures, it is not routinely done: It is easier to measure the grain sizes in soils, so we usually use the 
effective grain size D 10and assume.that the effective pore diameter is some'fraction of the D 10 • For 
example, Sowers (1979}' suggests. using about 20% of the effective grain size. Using this assumption 
and Eqs. (6.5) and (6.6), we can estimate a theoretical height of capillary rise and the corresponding 
capillary pressure in a fine-grained soil. 
• ·.,' 
Alternatively, we could use an equation suggested by Terzaghi et al. (1996) for the height of cap-
illary rise he (m) that depends on the D10 (mm) and.void ratio e, or 
h = S___ 
e 
e,Dto 
(6.7) 
Th~ empirical coefficient Cvaries between 0.01 and0.05 and is a function of the grain shape and sur-
'facei~purities (Terzaghi et ~l., l996). 
. 
· 
. 
. · 
. . , 
· 
Example 6.3 
Given: 
. , A sample ,of clay soil with a D 10 of 1 11-m and a voidrati~ of 0.4. 
·Required: 
a. Calculate the theoretical height of capillary rise in the clay. 
b. Estimatdhe capillary pressure in the clay. 
·Solution~· Assume the effective pore diameter is about 20% of Dio: Thus, 
Dpore f':! 0.2(Dw) = 0.2 11-m= 0.2 X 10-3 mm . 
a. Capillary rise [Eq. (6.5)]: 
' 
-0.03 ill' 
' 
' 
' 
' ' 
. . 
he = 
· 
_3 
= -150m (about 500ft) 
0.2 X 10 mm 
· .... ·, 
.. 
)l 
If we use Eq. (6.7), we need to assume a value of C. For this example, let's use the 
mean value or 0.03. 
h = · S___ = · 
0·03 
· = 62 5 m 
c 
eD10 
(0.4)(1 11-m) 
· 
· 
b; .. Capillary pressure [Eq. (6.6b )]: 
'ue = hepwg ~ ~150m (l000kg/m3)(9.81 m/s2) 
f';:; -1500 kPa f';:; '-is atm f';:; -225 psi 
222 
Chapter 6 
.· .. Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Although theoretically possible, rarely in natural soil deposits do the heights of capillary rise 
.. actually. reach those· suggested by Example 6.3. Some of the voids in natural soils are large enough so 
,that the water ~an,vaporize and form bubbles"'This results in the menisci being destroyed and the 
' actual height of capillary rise being reduced.' Still, heights of capillary rise can be significant in espe-
: cially fine-grained soils. Table 6. rlists some typical heights of capillary rise for some soil types. 
·The capillary pressures we estimated in Example 6.3 are very large indeed; but they are definitely 
· possible in the very small pores of soils and rocks. This means, too, that the resulting intergranular stress 
acting between the soil grains is of the same order of magnitude. Recall the magnified picture of the two 
sand grains connected by menisci shown in Fig: 6.5. In this figure, the intergranular contact stress is given 
the symbol u'. This stress, called the effective stress, has special significance in geotechnical engineering, 
and it is discussed in more detail later in the chapter. For now, let us just define the effective stress as the 
total stress u minus the pore water pressure u, 
u' = u- u 
(6.8) 
In Example 6.3, the sample of clay, if it is in the laboratory, is acted on by atmospheric pressure, or in 
· this case, the total stress u = 0 (zero gagepressure). Then, from Eq. (6.8), u' = -( -u0) = uc, or for 
the conditions in Example 6.3, u' ~ + 1500 kPa. Thus the effective stress in materials with small pores 
can be very large, owing to the capillary pressures essentially "pulling': the particles together. 
At the top of a soil-water column~for example, in tube 5 of Fig. 6.4-the capillary menisci pull 
the grains of soil together, as sketched in Fig. 6.5. The smaller the meniscus, the larger .the capillary 
tension, and the larger the intergranular contact stress between the particles. Intergranular contact 
stress causes a frictional resistance to develop between the grains. The effect is similar to what happens 
when some sand is placed in a rubber membrane, sealed, and a vacuum applied to the specimen. The 
pressure difference betw~en the external atmospheric pressure (zero gage pressure)and the applied 
vacuum (some value of negative gage pressure) holds the grains tightly together and thereby increases 
their frictional resistance considerably. In this case, the larger the applied vacuum; the greater the 
frictional resistance. 
· ; · 
.. , . 
Another important consequence of the increase in intergranular or effective stress that occurs 
due to capillarity is illustrated by the racetrack at Daytona Beach, FI(;rida (Fig. 6.7). The sands are very 
fine and have been densified somewhat by wave action. The capillary zone, which is relatively wide due 
to the flat slope of the beach, provides excellent driving conditions due to high capillary p~essures. Just 
as in tube 5 of Fig. 6.4, the confining pressure results from the columns of water hanging on the menisci 
at the surface of the beach. Where the ocean water ·destroys the menisci, the bearing capacity is very 
poor, as anyone knows who has ever tried to escape a rising tide at a beach in a car! 
Similarly, above the zone of capillary rise, the sand is dry and has relatively poor bearing capac-
ity, especiallyfor moving vehicles. The relative density throughout the beach zone is essentially the 
same, yet the bearing 'capacity is significantly different simply due to capillarity. 
TABLE 6.1 
Approximate Height of Capillary Rise in Different Soils 
·Coarse. sand 
Medium sand 
Fine sand 
. Silt 
Clay 
Grain Size Range (mm) 
2-D.6 
0.6-0.2 
0.2-0.06 
0.06-0.002 
< 0.002 
After Beskow (1935) and Hansbo (1975 and 1994). 
. Loose 
0.03-0.12m 
· 0.12-0.50 m 
·o.3~2.0m 
1.5-lOm 
·:::::10m 
Dense 
0.0~.15m 
0.35-l.lOm 
0.40-3.5 m 
2.5-12m 
· . Poor bearing 
capacjty. 
· 6.2 Capillarity 
223 
Poor bearing 
capacity. 
~Ihi~~~~illaryzone 
, . • . 
, ... ·.· ·. 
. . 
. 
. .· 
. 
--:-----7-:--:,---.----------~------~--'=--4-.~~~ 
Groundwater table • 
'·,1,·' 
FIGURE 6.7 
Cross section of racetrack a~ D~yto~a,Beach, Florida.•· 
Keep in mind that we have simplified our discussion by assuming that the capillary rise represents 
a boundary between completely saturated soil and completely dry soil. In fact; if the soil is originally dry, 
and then is exposed to a phreatic surface (for example, by placing a tube full of dry soil in a water bath), 
· the degree of saturation may not be 100% at any point in the capillary zone; since soil voids are typically 
discontinuous, impeding the path of water migrating from the phreatic surface up through the soil. For 
• example, in speciai capillary tests on .fine sand that was originally dry, Lambe (1950) found that the 
degree of saturation was ab6'ut 75% in the capillary zone except near the capillary boundary, where it . 
dropped to about 65%. On the other hand, if the soil is originally saturated or wettedfrom above (as 
from rainfall), these values will be completely different and generally higher (Terzaghi 1943; Lambe and 
Whitman 1969). 
· 
:. 
6.2.2 
Measurement of Capillarity; Soil-Water CharacteristiC Curve 
In a number of applications; it is important. to measure various aspects of capillarity in soils, si~ce it can 
play an important role in their susceptibility to swelling and shrinkage, frost action, and flow through 
embankments and earth dams, among other phenomena. The earliest measures of capillary rise in soils 
were made using a device called a capillarimeter, which measures the ability of the soil to take in air 
under tension (Fredlund and R~hardjo, 1993). Lane and Washburn (1946) used both capillarimeters 
arid soil in tubes to measure capillarity in soils. 
· 
ASTM standards D 2325 (formedium- to coarse-grained soils) and D 3152 (for fine-grained 
soils) are test methods for measuring the relationship between water content in a soil and the nega-
tive or d1pillary pressure.(referred to as matric suction) applied to the pore water system. While the 
equipment for the test methods is different, the concepts are fundamentally the same. A saturated soil 
specimen and adjacent porous element are placed in a sealed chamber. The side of the porous element 
opposite to that in contact with the soil is exposed to atmospheric pressure and a positive pressure 
applied to the top of the soil. Water is allowed to drain out of the specimen until equilibrium is estab-
lished between this applied gradient and tiie internal soil suction. At this point, the moisture content of 
the soil is 'measured: USBR procedure 5735 is similar, except that it specifies measurement of pore 
pressure.at the end bearing plate, which will be negative until enough positive pressure is applied to the 
soil. Results of the ASTM tests plot tension as height above water tablein metres versus volumetric 
water. content. The.volumetricwater content can berelated to the mass water content if the Gs and the 
degree of saturation are known. 
224 
Chapter 6 
.Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993) provide details on two other methods for measuring matric suction. 
A tensiometer is a field device that uses an applied vacuum to draw water from the soil to determine the 
matric suction. In this way, the mechanics are similar to those in the two ASTM standards (D 2325 and 
D 3152) and the USBR 5735 standard. An indirect method for measuring matric suction is known as the 
axis translation technique. This involves the use of a porous block made from a material which has a 
known water content-suction relationship. The porous block is brought into contact with the soil, and 
equilibrium is achieved between the matric suction of the block and the soil. By measuring the water 
content of the block, one.can infer the matric suction based on the block's calibration curve. 
The matric suction is equal to the quantity (ua - u), where ua is the pore air pressure and u is the 
pore water pressure. The matric suction is of course negative or less than zero gage pressure (Fig. 6.3), 
except when the soil is saturated. One way to visualize matric suction is the soil-water characteristic 
curve, shown schematically in Fig. 6.8(a). According to Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993), the matric suc-
tion tends to a limiting value of about 590 MPa at zero water content for many soils. At the other end of 
the curve when the matric suction is zero, the soil is saturated. Because especially fine-grained soils con-
tain a large number of very different pore sizes and pore volumes, the water content changes in a very 
nonlinear fashion as the suction increases. Also as a dry soil saturates or a saturated soil drains, it does 
Water content 
(a) 
-(? 
!l. c. 
-J 
I 
:J' 
.g-
n 
::J 
U) 
u 
·;:: 
00 
::2: 
1 Dune sand 
2 Loamy sand 
3 Calcareous fine sandy loam _ 
4 Calcareous loam 
5 Silt loam derived from loess 
6 Young oligotrophous peat soil 
7 Marine clay · 
Volumetric water content, Ow 
Gravimetric water content(%) 
G8 = 2.70 and S =100%. 
·: ...• (b) 
FIGURE 6.8 Soil-water ~haracteristic curve-m~tric suction versus water content: (a} schematic for a plastic clay 
showing hysteresis due to wetting and drying (after Blight, 1980}; (b) curves for different soils (after Koorevaar et al., 
1983, as cited by Mitchell and Soga, 2005) .. 
;, .. 
' 
~ \. 
: : 6.2 Capillarity 
225 
not follow. the same curve as shown in Fig. 6.8(a). Mitchell and Soga (1995) give a detailed explanation 
for this hysteretic behavior. . ., , · 
As shown in Fig. 6.8(b ), the actual shape of the soil-water characteristic curve depends on the 
. soil type. The grain size distribution, soil fabric, and contact angle (Fig. 6.2) also influence the shape . 
. Note that.the abscissa of Fig. 6.8(b) is the volumetric water content, Ow, which is defined as the V w!V. 
Obviously Ow is not the same as the water content used in geotechnical engineering (soil scientists call 
·::;our water content the gravimetric water content.) From phase relations and Eq. (2.28b) (Se = wG5 ), 
· the relationship between the two water contents is . : •. 
· 
· 
. ' : ' 
; . ' 
~ ' . 
(6.9) 
An approximatdy equivalent graviin.eiric water content for the soils iri Fig. 6.8(b) is shown below the 
. vohunetric water content scale: It was•calculated for a: as• = 2.70 arid s ='100%. .. 
.. 
':. 
' 
: 
,' 
'· 
' 
" 
' 
' 
' 
, 
'" 
·.. 
'' 
6:2.3 ~·. Other Capiliiuy Phenomena 
'. . 
. ' .. :·· ... 
' . 
' . 
' 
' 
' 
' ' 
'~ 
·,;; 
Another phenomenon caused by capillarity is bulking. Wherimoist sand is loosely dumped, it forms a 
very loose honeycombed structure [similar to Fig. 4.29(c), as shown in Fig. 6.9]. The grains are all held 
. together by capillary films, and the moisture film surrounding the individual-grains causes an "appar-
.. :. ent cohesion." It is not true· cohesion in a physical sense. The resulting structure, although it has a very 
. low relative density, is fairly stable as long as the capillary menisci are present. If they are destroyed-: 
• .: for example, by flooding or evaporation-then the honeycomb structure collapses and the volume of 
r: the sand decreases significantly. As long as there is some moisture present, however; the sand will bulk 
and occupy a larger volume thim itwould if dry. Bulking canoccur with water conteritsof only a few 
. percent up to aboutl5 or. 20 percent, depending on the grain size distribution and silt contimt of the 
:sand. Figure 6.8 also shows why it is nota good idea to purchase moist sand by the volume-one may 
·end up buying a lot of air! · · · 
·. 
. · 
·· · 
• · 
. 
' . · · 
' .: 
· . · ... 
Because bulked sands have a loose honeycombed structure, they are very compressible and may 
even be susceptible to collapse (discussed in Sec. 6.7). If they are used for backfill, for example, they 
have to be densified to avoid unwanted postconstruction settlements. You may recall from Sec. 5.5 that 
sands are most effectively densified by vibration. Bulked moist sands will require niore energy to den-
sify than dry sands, because it takes additional energy to' destroy the capillary films surrounding the 
sand grains: Sometimes contractors will try to use flooding to destroy the menisci, but flooding is not a 
very good way to increase the density of a sand fill. The relative density of flooded fills' will still be only 
40% or 50% and thus they will still be susceptible to significant settlements if loaded or vibrated. 
You can demonstrate bulking of sands in a simple laboratory experiment. Fill an ordinary Proctor 
compaction mold with dry sand, vibrate it by tapping the side of the mold; arid then strik:e it off level at 
.. FIGURE 6.9 
Bulking structure 
.:jn sand.· 
· · d 
.: .·, 
226 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
'I 
the top. Dump the sand into a large pan and, with a spray bottle, add a small amount ofwater to the sand , 
and mix it thoroughly. Then try to put the moist sand back into the mold. You will firid that its volume 
has expanded significantly. Even if you compact the sand in layers in the mold, it will be very difficult to 
achieve the original density. Capillarity also allows excavations to be constructed at very steep slopes in 
silts and very fine sands-materials that,· if. dry, would readily fall to their natural angle 'of repose· 
(Sec.12.2), which is much flatter. 
If you have ever played at the beach, you probably took advantage of capillarity to construct, for 
example, sand castles or other similar features from moist sand. Excavations made below the water 
table will collapse, because the menisci obviously do not exist there! Above the groundwater table and 
within the zone of capillarity, capillary menisci at the surface of the excavation provide the stability for 
the cut. However; such excavations are very unstable. At the beach, it is not so serious if an excavation 
. collapses, but excavations of utility trenches, for example, are another matter. Unsupported excava-
tions in silts and sa'uds have been known to collapse due to very slight vibrations, such as from trucks 
on adjacent streets or nearby construction operations such as pile driving. This is why it is necessary to 
externally support all vertical excavations more than a meter or so deep, especially if people are work~ 
ing in the excavation. Lateral support or laying back the slope to a flatter angle is necessary even if the 
soils appear to be stable when first excavated. 
· Another phenomenon that depends on capillarity is slaking, which occurs when a lump of dry 
. soil is immersed in a beaker of water. The lump immediately starts to disintegrate, and.with some soils 
. the disintegration is so rapid that the soil appears to almost explode. Slaking is a very simple way to dis-
tinguish between hard piece of soil and a small rock; rocks don't slake, whereas soils do. The soil lump 
has to be dry, so that the soil-water surface tension tends to pull water into the pores. Air bubbles 
trapped in the voids are compressed by the menisci, and if the internal air pressure is high enough to 
· exceed the tensile strength of the soil, the soilluinp collapses. In a rock fragment, the internal cohesion 
is sufficiently strong to resist these resulting entrapp-ed air pressures, and slaking cannot occur. 
·.. 
. 
-Terzaghi (1943) used the.capillary tube analogy to illustrate slaking .. The capillary tubes are 
'initially dry and then submerged; the capillary menisci now try to pull water into the voids, as shown in 
Fig. 6.10. By drawing a free-body diagram of the tube walls, you can see that the walls are in tension, 
rand if the tensile strength is less than the tension applied by the menisci, the walls-will fracture, 
which is exactly what occurs when a soil slakes.· 
Capillarity also plays an important role in the formation of ice lenses in fine-grained soils. The 
·:-result can be significant volume changes that can damage infrastructure (particularly roads that are 
susceptible to so-called '~frost heaving''), even in areas where the groundwater table. is well below the 
ground surface. Frost action is discussed later in this chapter.·· 
>· 
-=-
AI 
A'~ 
Air in voids under pressure 
FIGURE 6.10 Capillary tube analogy for slaking (after Terzaghi, 1943). 
oil
6.3 ,-. GroundwaterTable and the Vadose Zone 
227 
6;3 .. " GROUNDWATER TABLE AND THE VADOSE.ZONE : 
6.3.1" 
Defi~iti~n ', 
' '". 
~ , ' 
From a geotechnical perspective, thegroundw'ater table can be' defined as the st~ady state or equilibrium 
elevation -of free standing water in ari exca-yated or drilled exploration hole. More specifically, it is the 
steady state elevation at which the pore water pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure. Recognize 
that it is not really a table; b~t a surface of a'tmospheric'}Ji~ssuie (zero gage pressure); but that is what it 
... ' · is commonly called. Below the groundwatertable the degree of saturation is assumed to be (and usually 
is) 100%.Depending on the grain size of the soil above the groundwater table, the sciil may be saturated 
because of capillarity, or it may become unsaturated nearer the ground surface. Above the zone of 
capillarity, the soil is unsaturated. The degree of saturation maY, range from 100% down to nearly zero 
if the soil is almost dry near the ground surface. The soil above the groundwater table is called the 
vadose zone (pronounced vay-dose), so it includes the capillary zone or capillaiy fringe (ifany exists) 
and soils with other moisture conditions above that. These definitions are illustrated in Fig. 6.11. Note 
that the capillary zone is s~ill considered part of the vadose zone. 
· 
.. 
· ·· 
6.3.2 
Field Determination 
There are several methods to measure the level of the groundwater table' and hence the thickness of 
the vadose zone. The first and simplest way is just to establish an open exploration pit or borehole from 
· which the level of the free water surface is measured relative to the ground surface or some other 
datum. This is often referred to as an observation well. A test or exploration pit is, of course, useful only 
if the groundwater· table is near the ground surface. More commonly, a borehole anywhere from 50 to 
100 rrim in diameter is drilled deep enough to intercept the groundwater level (the depth can be esti-
; mated based on experience or by researching local geological maps). Usually a small perforated pipe 
i or casing is installed in the borehole,because otherwise it may collapse with time. This type of obser-
, vation well is an open-tube standpipe, and the depth to the water table is determined by a simple tape 
' 
' 
• 
< 
d 
• ~ 0 
r 
j 
'• 
l 
Depth below 
groundwater 
.. table c 
; FIGURE 6.11 
Illustration of vadose zone located above the groundwater 
table and the pore pressure distribution with depth .. 
228 
Chapter 6 . · · Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
measurement. Another method is to install a piezometer in the borehole that measures the water 
pressure at the depth of the piezometer point. Note that the piezometer point must be sealed from 
other water pressure sources in order to determine the water pressure at the point' of installation. 
A piezometer can be a hydraulic or open standpipe (e.g., a Casagrande-type piezometer, which is a 
. porous tipped tube) that allows water to rise to a certain levef in an open pipe from a sealed tip, from 
· which water pressure at the tip.location can .be deduced. Today, most piezometers are electro-
mechanical de~ices that produce electrical signals proportional to the water pressure at the point of 
measurement. Dunnicliff X1993) provides an extensive survey of pore pressure measurement 
devices. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
,,, . Example 6.4 
Given: 
The groundwater elevation in a loess deposit is determined by a standpipe piezometer to be at a 
depthor'4.5 in. Laboratory tests on samples of the loess show typical grain size distribution curves similar 
to CurVe A in Fig. Ex. 6:4a (after U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1990). 
· 
c 
ell -sen 
.... Cil 
:!?ell 
sE 
e>o 
c: ~ 
'U5 E 
CJ)Cl 
ell·-
c_Q) 
_;: 
c:>-
e.c 
Q) 
c.. 
-
. 
L 
' 
Sieve analysis · · · · 
(U.S. Standard sieve) 
3 . 
. 3 . 
. 
10 . 4 a 1n. 4'"· . 3 in. 
No. 200 .1 00 
AO 
100 
80 • 
'•i. 
60 --
40 
20 
0 0.001 
I 
I 
I 
vr ...-~ 
~r-
. ' 
/ ;: 
;" 
; 
,'l 
/_I 
,' . 
i 
Curve1A 
., 
I 
~·: 
! 
-t--
1-
---
!;:- t---1 
--
0 
II 
I 
---- ---, 
Iii_ • rrY-- f------ f------- --] 
/ 
§II 
;;o 
1\itl..L.. 
0 
I I 
~ 
c>; l 
I 
<?-
tf 
~ li-/ J 
•' 
/t::: 
I 
· .. 
*' 
r:J! ;I 
I 
... 
I I 1-lj ii --i I I 
I 1:11 
I I 
1111 
0.01 
0.1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. I 
I . 
I 
·I 
I 
I 
'i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I f---
-~-
I 
----· --r ---
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'. 
I 
! 
I. 
I 
I 
I 
I I : I Ill 
I I I: 
10 
100 
0 
c 
20 
ell = 
.... ~ 
Q)Cil 
CJ)C/l 
.... ell 
40 :gE 
o .... 
~o 
"0 ~ 
Q)-
c:.r: 
60 ·a; .!21 
-Q) 
~ ;: 
->-
c:.c 
Q) 
80 !:! 
Q) 
c.. 
100 
~ 
Fines 
I Grain diameter (mm) 
.,. · 
• • 
Sands 
• • 
Gravels ---+-- Cobbles 
FIGURE Ex. 6.4a 
Required: 
a. Estimate the capillary rise in metres. 
b. Plot the static water pressure distribution from the ground surface to a depth of 8 m. 
. 6.3 . • Groundwater Table and the Vadose Zone 
229 
: 
Solution: 
a. . .Recall from Sec. 6:2.2 that the effectivd pore size is commonly assumed to be 20% of the 
Dio· From Fig. Ex. 6.4a, D10 is estimated to be about 0.008 mm: Therefore, 0.2 X 0.008 ::, 
1.6 X 10-3 mm. Using Eq: (6.5), the height of capillary fise is ~pproximately 
. 
he = :.__0.03/d (in mm) ='-0.03/(1.6 x w-3 Il1m) ·~ 1B.i5 m · 
. . 
Since the ·groundwater t~ble is only 4.5 mbelow the g~oundsurface, theloess above 
the groundwater table must be saturated or nearly so. However, near the ground surface, the 
. soils may be unsaturated because of evaporation. 
\ 
. . 
. 
... · 
. ·. 
. 
•. 
; 
. 
. 
;. 
. 
'-.. 
. . 
. . 
b •. Use Eq. (6.6a) to determine the distribution of water pressure with depth below the ground-
. water table. Remember that the depth of the groundwater table' is at :--c-4.5 m. So at a depth of 
Bm,z = zw =3.5m,and 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
· · 
Uw = ZwPwg = 3.5 m X 1 Mg/m X 9.8 rnls2 = 34 kPa 
At z = ..:..4.5 m, uw is, of course, equal to zero, and the pressure distribution is linear. 
· Is there a water pressure above the groundwater table?. Yes, but it is negative due to 
capillarity. We may calculate it using Eq. (6.6b). With the height of capillary rise he = 4.5 m, 
the maximum capillary pressure is 
·. 
u,; ~ hePwg = -4.5; m X 1 Mg/m3 X 9.8 rnls2 = :--c-44 kPa 
. · ... 'J?t?. complete pressure diagram is shown in Fig. Ex. 6.4b .. 
'·.: 
.· 
' 
' .. ' 
. 
' 
. Water pressure (kPa) •. ; 
-50 
0. 
50 
100 
4.5 -::::,.-------~ 
-
34 
FIGURE Ex. 6.4b 
230 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
For more detailed information on groundwater and the vadose zone, consult Freeze· and Cherry 
(1979), Todd (1980), Cedergren (1989), and U.S. Department of the Interior (1995). As mentioned, 
Dunnicliff (1993) is a good reference on piezometric inst~umentation and measurements. 
6.4 
SHRINKAGE PHENOMENA IN SOILS 
Shrinkage of fine-grained soils can be of considerable practical significance. Cracks and fissures caused 
. by soil shrinkage are zones of weakness that can greatly reduce the stability of clay slopes and the bear-
ing capacity of foundations. The volume changes cause'd by evaporation and desiccation can damage 
small buildings and highway pavements. Shrinking soils can also increase in volume or expand if they 
have access to water, possibly causing more damage. Swelling soils are discussed in the next section of 
this chapter. Shrinking and swelling cause billions of dollars of damage annually in North America. 
6.4.1 
Capillary Tube Analogy 
We can get an idea of how capillary stresses cause shrinkage in clay soils by studying the analogy of a 
· horizontal tube with compressible elastic walls (Terzaghi, 1927); In Fig. 6.12(a) the tube at the begirming 
is completely filled with water and the radii of the menisci; which haven't reached their final shape yet, 
are very large. As evaporation occurs, pressure in the water decreases and the menisci start to form 
[Fig. 6.12(b)]. As evaporation continues, the radii become smaller and smaller, compression in the 
compressible walls of the tube increases, and the tube shrinks in length and diameter. The limiting case, 
shown in Fig. 6.12( c), is when the radii of the menisci are at the minimum (equal to one-half the diameter 
of the tube) and are fully developed. The negative pressure in the capillary tube is then equal to the value 
computed from Eq. ( 6.6b ), and the walls ofthetube have shrunk to an equilibrium condition between the 
stiffness of the walls and the capillary forces. If the tube is immersed in water, the menisci are destroyed, 
and the tube can expand because the capillary forces are no longer acting on the tube walls. 
FIGURE 6.12 Compressible elastic 
capillary tube shrinking due to 
evaporation and surface tension 
(after Terzag hi, 1927). 
(c) 
(a) 
(b) ' 
a=<O 
·· 6.4 Shrinkage Phenomena in Soils 
231 
Unless the walls of the tube are perfectly elastic, the tube will not return completely to its original 
length and diameter. 
· · • 
Another simple analogy was used byTerzaghi to illustrate the effects of capillary pressures in a 
porous material (Casagrande, 1938). A loose ball of absorbent cotton is submerged in a beaker. and 
allowed to completely saturate. If the ball is compressed and then released, the fibers will quickly swell 
again. However, if the compressed ball is removed from the water and released, it will essentially retain 
its compressed shape because of the capillary menisci that form around the fibers. In fact; the ball will 
be rather firm as long as it doesn't dry out too much; If the cotton ball is again immersed in.water, the 
menisci are destroyed and the fibers again become extremely loose and soft. Similar behavior results 
when dry cotton is compressed; it is quite elastic and becomes loose once the compressive forces are 
released. . 
. 
Take another look at the tube shown in Fig. 6.6. If it is assumed to have compressible walls, then 
the analogy with shrinking soils is very useful. A soil sample slowly drying (that is, undergoing desic-
cation) will form capillary menisci between the individual soil grains. As a result, the stresses between 
the grains (intergranular or effective stresses) will increase, and the soil .will decrease in volume. As 
shrinkage continues, the menisci become smaller, the capillary stresses increase, and the volume 
further decreases. A poirit is reached where no further volume decrease occurs, but the degree of 
saturation is still essentially ·100%. The water content at which this occurs is defined as the 
shrinkage limit (SL or ws), and it is one of the Atterberg limits mentioned in Sec. 2.7. At this point, 
the capillary menisci just begin to retreat below the soil surface, and the color of the surface 
changes from a shiny to a dun· appearance. (The same. effect is observed when a dilatant soil is 
stressed-the menisci retreat below the surface, which becomes dull in appearance because the 
reflectivity of the surface changes. See Sec. 2.9.1.) 
6.4.2 
Shrinkage Limit Test 
How is the shrinkage limit determined? Atterberg's (191l) origi~~l work was with small bars or prisms 
of clay that he allowed to dry slowly. He observed the point at which the color changed, and at the same 
time he noted that the length was essentially a minimum at that point. Terzaghi figured out that one 
could just as well measure the dry volume and dry mass and back calculate the water content at the 
point of minimum volume. Figure 6.13 illustrates this procedure. A small amount of soil of total mass 
M; is placed in a small dish of known volume V;and allowed to dry slowly. After the oven dry mass Ms 
is obtained, the volume of the dry soil V dry is d~termined, and the shrinkage limit SL is calculated from 
(a) 
(6.10) 
(b) 
(6.11) 
'I 
';-
The two equations correspond to the two parts of Fig. 6.13. Both may be readily derived from the figure 
and the phase relationships of Chapter 2. 
Although the shrinkage liniit was a popular classification test during the 1920s, it is subject to 
· . considerable uncertainty and thus is no longer commonly con~ticted,.In·the discontinued standard 
.. ASTM test D 427, the volume of the. dry soil specimen is determined by .weighing the amount of 
mercury the dry specimen displaces. Because mercury is a hazardous substance, special laboratory 
232 
Chapter 6 , · Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
.Volume (cm3) 
V; 
:.," " 
.-" 
Change in 
color 
· 
" 
" 
/· 
Change in 
color 
-----' 
2;1 
~~·~·[~--~--~st---===~~~----~-.. 
_u 
'11!1 
Water content (%) 
(b) 
FIGURE 6.13 
Determination of the shrinkage limit based on (a) total mass; 
and (b) water content. 
· 
. •: l'' 
handling and disposal procedures are required. Consequently, a wax-displacement procedure was 
developed and standardized in 1989 (ASTM D 4943). To prevent water absorption 1y the dry soil 
specimen, it is first coated with wax before being submerged in water to determi e its dry volume. 
The British Geological Survey has developed an automated apparatus called a Shrinkit" that uses 
a laser, a 3D moving platform, and a digital balance to measure the 3D s 
nkage of a specimen 
100 mm high and 100 mm in diameter (Hobbs and Jones, 2006). 
, ·,, 
One of the biggest problems with both shrinkage limit tests is that tlie amount of shrinkage and 
therefore the SL depends on the initial fabric of the soil. The standard p{ocedures start with the water 
content above the)iJWid Jlmit. However, especially with sandy and silty clays, this often results in a 
shrinkage limit greatertflantlie plastic limit, which is meaningless, since the SL should be less than the 
PL (Fig. 2.8). Casagrande suggested that the initial water content be slightly greater than the PL, if 
~· 
' .  
6.4 Shrinkage Phenomena in Soils 
233 
possible, but admittedly it is difficult to avoid entrapping air bubbles in soils at lower water contents. 
Besides air bubbles entrapped in the dry soil specimen, other problems with the SL test include errors 
, ', · 
· resulting from specimen cracking during drying as well as weighing and other measurement errors. 
· If one follows~rnnd~dvice and begins the test slightly above the plastic limit, then the 
Atterberg limits for the soil plot nearthe A-lirie on the plasticity chart (Fig. 2.13) and the shrinkage 
limit is very c~O. 
~s_pl.Qt__a v the A-line, then 'the SL is less than 20 by an amount 
ap_p~ual-t~a~ 
d~stance (llp;) above the A~line. Similarly, f?r ML an MH (and 
OLandOH) smls, the shrmkage hmrt'"'iSgreatert~unt approximately equal to llp; 
below the A-line where the limits plot. Therefore, the 
~· 
(6.12) 
This procedure and equation have been found to be about as accurate as the shrinkage limit test itself 
because of all the problems with the test. 
An even simpler procedure was suggested by Pro£ A. Casagrande in his lectures at Harvard Uni-
versity. If the U-line and A-lineofthe plasticity chart (Fig. 2.13) are extended, they converge at a point 
with coordinates ( :._43.5, -46A), as shown in Fig. 6.14. Then if a line is extended from that point to the 
coordinates of the liquid limit and plasticity index plotted on, the plasticity. chart, where _that line 
crosses the hqmd hmit axis iS approximately the shrinkage limit. Although not an exact procedure, it is 
close e 
nsidering the other maccuracies we typically. deal with as geotechnical engineers as 
well as the approximate nature of the shrinkage .limit test. If you can obtain a reasonable estimate of 
the shrinkage limit from the plasticity chart, then the shrinkage limit test need not be performed, since 
it provides no additional information of value. · 
· 
':'"' 
'---7P-7J-~'---7,LL,.:--L-----'----,--,-J--:-:-'-:-:--'---'----l...:....:.,~; ;'' ' . 
Example: 
50 
LL 
.Soil (1): SL = 14 
S<;>il (2): SL ~ 28.; 
FIGURE 6.14 Casagrande's procedure for estimating the· shrinkage limit .. , 
'. '; 
234 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Note that when their water contents are near the SL; very fine-grained clay soils with highly 
active clay minerals (those that plot near. the U-line) experience very large capillary pressures. These 
soils will have shrinkage limits around 8, according to the Casagrande procedure. In fact, Prof . 
. Casagrande observed shrinkage limits as low as 6 for montmorillonitic clays. Soils at the shrinkage 
limit will have a very low void ratio because the capillary pressures are so large; these pressures are, for 
example, much greater than can be achieved by compaction .. 
Example 6.5 
·r 
Given: 
A clay soil with a shrinkage limit of eight. 
Required: 
Assuming Ps ,; 2.70 Mg/m3 and S = 100%, calculate the void ritio and dry densityof the/soil. 
' 
. 
" 
'i\· 
Solution: Use Eqs; (2.12) 'and (2.15)---· 
. WPs . · O.OS(2.70 Mg/m3) • ~- · 
e = -. = 
. = 0.22 
p~ 
• · 
1 Mg/m3 
· · 
••· 
Ps , · · 2.70 Mg/m3 ' 
. 
: : 
: • 
. . 
p = -- = 
'= 2 21 Mg/m3 = 137 91bf/ft3 
d 
1 + e 
1.22 
· 
· 
The density of concrete is about 2.4 Mg/m3. Thus you can see that the capillary pressures must be very 
large to cause soil to become so dense at the SL. It should not be surprising, then, that some clay soils 
have very high dry strengths, and that dry strength is a good indicator of the presence of active clay 
minerals. In fact, in Sec. 2.9.1 on visual-manual soil classification, we said that high dry strength is char-
acteristic of a CH clay. 
· 
' 
One way to show that high capillary pressures can exist in soils is to allow a fat (CH) clay soil at 
a high water content to dry slowly on your skin. The high shrinkage pressures will actually cause some 
pain; in fact, this process was used during ancient times as a torture system. A human body covered 
with clay drying slowly in the sun has ultimately very little resistance to pressures that can reach sev-
eral atmospheres! (See Example 6.~.) 
6.4.3 
Shrinkage Properties of Compacted Clays 
As shown in Fig. 6.15, soil specimens compacted wet of optimum have greater shrinkage than those 
compacted dry of optimum. As illustrated in the upper part of the figure, different methods of com-
paction influence the magnitude of shrinkage, because they produce different soil fabrics. Go back and 
reread Sec. 5.4 on the structure of compacted clays. 
Results of shrinkage tests performed on a compacted silt and a glacial till are shown in Fig. 6.16 
(Ho and Fredlund, 1989). By plotting void ratio e versus the product of water content and specific gravity 
wG s, this figure shows that shrinkage is occurring as the water content and degree of saturation decrease. 
Note too that the amount of shrinkage depends on the soil type and on theinitial water content. The 
higher PI glacial till shrinks more than the silt, and both soils have more shrinkage when compacted at 
optimum water content than when compacted dry of optimum. For additional information on shrinkage 
and shrinkage test procedures, see Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993). 
6:4· Shrinkage Phenomena in Soils 
235 
6.-~--~~--.----.-~.-----.---~.-----. 
Optimum 
. Wet of optimum 
water 
content 
012 
22 
24 
112.-----.-----.---~-,~----~---,-----, 
;;--
.t:: 
;;::: 108 
.:.C 
;;--
::::;. 
.€ 
~ 
C)'; 
"Cii 
·5· 
c:. 
Ql 
1.70 
·.~ 
"0 106 
~ 
(/) 
c: 
Cl 
Ql 
• 
> 
"0 
~. 
Cl 
104 
16 
18 
20 
Molding ":"~ter content(%) 
· · FIGURE 6.15 • Shrinkage as a function of water content and type of compaction 
.(after Seed and Chan, 1959). 
·, ••· 
. . 
. 
·'; 
236 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Till (dry of optimum) 
W 0 = 15.2%, e0 =.0.642 
0.8.----.---.----.----.~~ .. 
~_,---,,-~ 
FIGURE 6.16 
Shrinkage charac-
teristics of a compacted silt and 
glacial till (Hoand Fredlund, · 
·. 1989). 
Q) 
o· e, 
'0 
'5 
> 
6.5 
EXPANSIVE SOILS AND ROCKS 
Till (at optimum) 
W 0 = 18.5%, e0 = 0.567 
0.8 
~Gs. 
Any soil or rock material that has the potential for significant volume change because of an increase in 
water content is called an expansive soil (Nelson and Miller, 1992). Sometimes these materials are 
called swelling soils or rocks. As mentioned above, in areas·where they are locally abundant, expansive 
soils cause literally billions of dollars of damage each year to light structures and pavements. Expansive 
rocks also cause serious problems during construction of excavations and tunnels. 
, · · 
Expansive soils are found throughout the world. They are very common in large areas of the North 
American continent, southern as well as sub-Saharan Africa, large parts of Australia, western India, and 
. the Mideast. In the United States, expansive soils are important in areas ofdesiccated and highly over-
consolidated fine~ grained soils and weathered shales. This includes the Dakotas, Montana, eastern 
Wyoming and Colorado, the four-comers area of the Southwest, parts of California, and East Texas. In 
the western provinces of Canada between the Rocky Mountains and the Great Lakes are huge areas of 
Cretaceous clay-shales and clays that contain significant amounts of active clay minerals, particularly 
smectite. These deposit~ are often highly expansive, as are the lacustrine clay deposits found in the large 
Pleistocene glacial lakes, such as Glacial Lakes Agazziz and Regina in Saskatchewan and Manitoba. 
. Because the climate in most of the'central North American continent is arid or semi-arid, the 
natural water content n;gime is often changed by human development and construction, irrigation, arid· 
vegetation, and this leads to problems with light structures and pavements.· 
. 
Figure 6.17 shows the extent of potentially expansive soils in the United States. Because of their 
small scale, these maps can give only a very general idea of potential problem areas, but at least you 
N w 
-..I 
• 
High: Highly expansive arid/or 
high frequency of occurrence .. 
~ Medium: Moderately. expansive and/or 
modera.te frequency of occurren~e 
~Low: Generally of low e~pansivectiaracier 
and/or low frequency of. occurrence· 
0 Nonexpansive: The occurrence of expansive 
materials extremely limited . 
· 
.........:. Southern limit of continental glaciation 
OCCURRENCE AND DISTRIBUTION 
c· 
:·OF 
.POTENTIALLY EXPANSIVE MATERIALS 
IN THE UNITED STATES .. 
1977 
100 
0 
100 · 200 miles 
FIGUR,E G.17 
Occurrence and distribution ~f potentially e~pansive soils in the United States (after U.S. Army Engineer Wate~ays Experiment 
Station as presented by Nelson and Miller, 1992). 
238. 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
can see that for many localities, swelling soils can be a serious problem. Thus it is important that you 
' understand some of the characteristics of swelling soils, how to identify them, and what to do about 
·them if you are unfortunate enough to find them on one of your projects. · 
6.5.1 
·Physical-Chemical Aspects 
Although fundamentally related to shrinkage, swelling soils are usually tre~ted as a separate subject, 
largely because swelling is a somewhat more complex process than shrinkage (Yong and Warkentin, 
1975). Remember that for a soil to shrink, it has to lose water through desiccation. It is just the opposite 
for a swelling soil-it has to have access to water and contain minerals that will imbibe water. 
Swelling soils usually contain clay minerals of the smectite group such as montmorillonite and 
vermiculite (Chapter 4), although other active minerals such as mixed layer minerals may also con-
tribute to swelling. These soils exhibit a very high dry strength and high plasticity, are often shiny in 
. appearance when cut by a knife blade, have relatively deep shrinkage cracks; and when wet have a very 
low shear strength (Chapter 12). All of these conditions are indicative of a potentially swelling soil. 
. -
The amount of swelling and the magnitude of the resulting swelling pressure depend on the clay 
minerals present in the soil, the soil structure and fabric, and several physical-chemical aspects of the 
· soil that were 'discussed in Chapter 4. These include factors such as the cation exchange capacity, cation 
· valence, salt concentration, cementation, and presence of organic matter. Everything else being equal, 
montmorillonites swell more than illites, which swell more than kaolinites. Soils with random fabrics 
. · tend to swell more than soils with oriented fabrics. Disturbance of or remolding of old natural clays 
may increase the amount of swelling. Monovalent cations in a clay (for example, sodium montmoril-
, lonite) will swell more than divalent cations (for example, calcium montmorillonite). Cementation and 
· · organic substances tend to reduce swelling. 
. 
. 
Practically speaking, the three ingredients necessary for potentially damaging swelling to occur 
are (1) presence of expansive clay minerals, especially montmorillonite, in the soil, (2) the natural 
. water content at approximately the PL, and (3) a source of water for the potentially swelling clay 
(Gromko, 1974). Nelson and Miller (1992) also point out that swelling potential is enhanced by the 
presence of salt cations (e.g., sodium, calcium, magnesium, and potassium) in the pore water, because 
the hydration of these cations can lead to large amounts of water between clay particles. For additional 
information on the physical-chemical aspects of expansive,clays, see Mitchell and Soga (2005) and 
Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993). 
6.5.2 
Identification and Prediction 
How do engineers know if the soils and rocks at a site are expansive? Many metP,ods and procedures 
have been developed over the years to identify expansive geo-materials and to predict their potential for 
swelling. These methods include chemical and mineralogical analyses, correlations with the classification 
and index properties, and laboratory tests that measure swelling pressure and volume changes . 
. We mentioned above that the smectite minerals (e.g., montmorillonite, vermiculite) are the 
most highly expansive, and as described in Sec. 4.4, these minerals can be identified by X-ray diffrac-
tion, differential thermal analyses, electron microscopy, and cation exchange capacity. Soils that 
contain these minerals usually plot high above the A-line and just below the U-line on the plasticity 
chart (Fig. 4.14). 
Once identified, it is important to assess their swelling potential, and probably the most com-
mon way to do this is to use classification and index tests. Table 6.2 summarizes the experience of the 
U.S. Dept. of the Interior based on their research on swelling clays and expansive soils (Holtz, 1959). 
Figure 6.18 shows four other expansion prediction procedures based. on index and other properties: 
For example, Kay (1990) showed that the percent expansion correlated quite well with the liquid limit 
(range: 20 < LL < 100) for _expansive soils in southeastern ~ustralia. Gromko (1974) and Nelson 
TABLE 6.2 Expansion Potential from Classification Test Data 
Degree of 
Expansion 
Probable Expansion as a Percent of Total Volume 
Change (Dry to S~turated Condition)t 
Very high 
High 
Medium 
Low 
1Under a s~rch!lrge of 6.9 kPa (1 psi). 
>30 
20--30 
10--20 
<10 
After Dept. of the Interior (1998) a~d Holtz (1959). 
70 .·. 
.
1 
. 
Q) 
• 6o 
· 
· .. ·I 
0. 
. 
I 
I . 
~ ::~ ~~c--tt~ 
o 
',ery hi~h 
J 
/ 
j 30~-4-~~~=F==H~(g~h=.=J~~==~,~~ 
·~ 20 1----+-t--+.-.--.·· _j__l./ I 
' 
; ·~ 
· • · 
..,..,., 
LJw 
. . 
Medi~m/ 
. ! 
1· 
a: 1 0 -'----- ----- ------ --------------r-----r------
OL---~--~--~--~--~--~--~ 
0 
1 0 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70' 
Clay fraction of whole samples (% < 2 f.Lm) 
. . . 
.. 
(a) 
106 .-----------------------------, 
10 
I 
Special case 
II 
High 
. 
Ill Moderate 
IV Low 
V 
Nonexpansive 
20 
30 
40 
Water content(%) 
(c) 
50 
60 
2.0 
1.8 
M' 
E .. 
--
Cl 
~ 1.6 
~ 
'(ii 
c 1.4 
Q) 
"0 
~ 
"0 
. ::J. 1.2 
':!:::: ,. 
(/) 
.= 1.0 
0.8 
0 
200 
180 
100 
. 50 
40 
a: 
30 
20 
10 
5 
... 
10 
6.5 · Expansive Soils and Rocks 
239 
Colloidal Content 
(% --;1~-Lm) 
>28 
20--31 
13-23 
<15 
I 
I 
Plasticity 
Index, PI· 
: >35 
25-41 
15-28 
<18 
·I 
.~~ed;:. High.:. Very high 
I. 
I 
I 
I 
.I 
I'-
I 
'I 
I 
I 
.I 
I 
I, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
.I 
IE 
. 
1 xpans1on 
I 
. . 
. 
_.,;:) 
20 
30 
40 
60 
70 
80 
· Very high expansive 
Expansive 
· 
~Low/None 
\ .. 
1.5 .. 
2 
3 
LUPI 
(d) 
4 
5 
6 
Shrinkage 
Limit,SL 
<11 
7-12 
10--16 
>15 
90 
100 
10 
FIGURE 6.18 Soil expansion prediction based on: (a) activity (van der Merwe, 1964); (b) in situ dry density 
and liquid limit (adapted from Mitchell and Gardner, 1975, and Gibbs, 1969); (c) suction versus water 
content (McKeen, 1992); (d) log PI versus log LUPI (Marin-Nieto, 1997 and 2007). 
240 
Chapter 6 .. < Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
· ··and Miller (1992) provide additional correlations with soil classification properties that have been 
successfully used to predict swelling potential.' 
' 
" 
· 
. · . 
. ··· 
Several laboratory tests have beendeveloped io measure soil expansion inbothcompacted soils 
' . as well as in specimens of undisturbed or natural soils: we will describe only a few of the more common 
. 
tests; for details about other laboratory tests, see :Nelson ~md Miller (1992). 
One fairly simple swelling identification test is the free-swell test developed by the U.S. Bureau of 
:; · · Reclamation (Holtz and Gibbs, 1956). The test is performed by slowly pouring 10 cm3 of dry soil; which 
has passed the 425 mm (No: 40) sieve, into a 100 cm3 graduated cylinder filled with water, and observing 
the equilibrium swelled volume. Free swell, expressed as a percentage; is defined as 
. 
(final volume) - (initial volume) 
• 
freeswell = 
... 1 1 
.. XlOO(%) 
Imtla vo ume 
· 
(6.13) 
For comparison, highly swelling bentonites-(mostly Na~montmorillonite) will have free~swell values of 
greater than 1200%. Even soils with free swells of 100% may cause damage to light structures when they 
become wet; soils with free swells less than 50% have been found to exhibit only small volume chiing~s. 
··· ·· 
Although the free swell test seems to be very simple, it has some problems, and it is no longer a 
·. standard USBR test; Sridharan and Prakash (2000) point out that obtaining exactly 10 cm3 of soil is not 
easy, andthey suggest using 10 g of dry soil in carbon tetrachloride or kerosene as well as distilled 
water for comparison; 
. 
· 
. 
. • 
. 
. 
. · · 
The expansion index (EI) test was developed for compacted soils in southern California, and it is 
the basis for ASTM (2010) standard D 4829. The soil is passed through the No.4 sieve and moistened 
to a water content close to its optimum. It is compacted in a very stiff steel ring about 25 mm high by 
100 mm in diameter, and a vertical confining pressure of 6.9 kPa (1 psi) is applied to it; then the soil 
specimen is inundated with distilled water. The deformation (expansion) of the· specinien is recorded 
for 24 hr, or until the rate of deformation reaches a minimum value. The expansion index, EI, is defined 
as 1000 times the change in height of the specimen divided by the initial height. Table 6.3 gives the 
·.··'expansion potential for various expansion index (EI) ranges. 
· 
· 
ASTM (2010) standard D 4546 is another test for determining the swell potential {)f compacted 
soil specimens as well as undisturbed soil samples. This test permits eithe~ constant or varying applied 
vertical pressures arid different inundation times. The apparatus used is the one-dimensional con-
solidometer described in C::hapter 8. A specimen of soil is confined in a stiff brass or stainless steel ring, 
usually about20 to25 mm high and 50 to 100mm in diameter. For the free-swell test, the specimen is 
loaded with a small seating load of 1 kP<i, inundated, and the change in height is observed. The results 
are reported as "free-swell" strain for a given vertical pressu~e. 
·· · 
A variation of the free-swell test is to keep loading the specimen after it is inundated so ihat the 
height of the specimen remains constarii and measure the pressure required to maintain a constant 
' 
' 
' 
) .' 
' 
' 
TABLE 6.3 Expansion Potential for Giv~n Expansion Index Rariges' 
EI 
. 0-20 
21-50 
51-90 
91-130 
>130 
Expansion Potential 
Very low 
Low'. 
Medium 
. High 
··very high 
•. ·After ASTM (2010), Nelson and Miller(1992). 
: 6.5'/ Expansive Soils and Rocks 
241 
volume. Still another variation is to apply an initial stress equal to the estimated in situ vertical pressure 
and then, after inundation; apply increments of load required to prevent any change in specimen height. 
The vertical stress necessary to maintain zero volume change is reported as the swelling pressure. USBR 
tests 5705 and 5715 are similar in concept to ASTM D 4546, but they differ in some details such as 
loading and unloading procedures. 
Another method for quantifying the expansion potential of soils is· through the use of the 
coefficient of linear extensibility (COLE) test, described by Nelson and Miller (1992) and used by the 
U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. This test basically determines the linear strain (shrinkage 
or expansion) of a natural clay specimen dried in unconfined conditions from 33 kPa (5 psi) suction to 
oven-dry suction ( ""1000 MPa). The COLE value, expressed as a percentage, is used to predict expan-
sion potential of soils with active ciay minerals. ' 
6.5.3 
Expansive Properties of Compacted Clays 
The swelling behavior of compacted fine-grained soils is n~t so: simple. As with natural soil deposits, the 
tendency of compacted soils to expand depends on their fabric, and their fabric depends on whether they 
are compacted wet or dry of the optimum water content. You will recall from Chapter 5 that the optimum 
water content is a function of the mechanical energy applied ("compactive effort") during compaction. 
Generally, a soil compacted dry of optimum will have a more random (or flocculated) fabric than those 
compacted wet of optimum. However, the fahric also' depends ori the method of compaction. If the soil is 
repeatedly sheared during compaction-e.g.; in im'pact (Proctor) compaction, rather than simply com-
pressed statically, then the fabric tends to be more oriented than random, and this happens more when 
the soil is wet of optimum than dry. 
. 
. 
, 
·. 
·. 
. 
. 
. · 
So how does all this affect swelling? Fine-grainedsoils compacted dry of optimum expand more 
than if they are compacted wet. This is because they have a relatively greater water deficiency, and 
thus they have a greater tendency to adsorb water and swell more. Greater capillary pressures in the 
macropores of a random fabric of a soil dry of optimum also play a role. If the soil is compacted wet 
of optimum, expansion will be about the same (i.e., a random fabric will behave similarly to an ori-
ented fabric), because the affinity for water is already satisfied. Therefore, there is generally less 
swelling on the wet than on the dry (flocculated) side, and this is shown in Fig. 6.19 for a high plastic-
ity soil compacted at standard Proctor compaction. Soils compacted dry of optimum are)n general 
more sensitive to environmental changes, such as changes in water content. The amount of expansion 
also depends on whether the. clay is surcharged and on the magnitude of the load relative to the 
swelling pressure. This is shown in test results on compacted specimens of a highly expansive clay 
from the central valley of California (Fig. 6.20). 
· 
. 
. 
, • 
Seed, Woodward, and Lundgren (1962) developed the relationships shown in Fig. 6.21 for artifi-
cial mixtures of sands and clays compacted to maximum density by standard Proctor compaction and 
allowed to swell against a 6.9 kPa (1 psi) surcharge. These relationships between activity and percent 
clay sizes have also been shown to be fairly good for many natural soils. The purpose of Fig. 6.21 is to 
identify a compacted soil that is potentially s:wetling and that may require further investigation and . 
laboratory testing. Figure 6.21 should not be used for design. 
· · 
, 
" 
, 
•I; 
i 
6.5.4 
Swelling Rocks 
According to Goodman (1989), only a few minerals are responsible for swelling in rocks and associated 
. engineering problems. As you might expect, the clay minerals montmorillonite and vermiculite are 
.problems when they are found in rock joints. Another problem mineral is anhydrite (or, more accu-
rately, anhydrous calcium sulfate, CaS04). In addition, some basalts (fine-grained volcanic rock) and 
salts found .in evaporite deposits can swell sufficiently to create problems for overlying or adjacent 
structures. We are already familiar with montmorillonite (Chapter·4) and its·ability to, adsorb water 
242 
Chapter 6 ; · .. Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
,.$:\_ 
~ ,1 " 
~ 
"rc c 
.l!! 
c: 8 
.... 
.l!! 
~-
:28~~-+--~-r----+-----~--~~---r----~---, 
26~--~--~~~~~-+----~~-+~~+---~ 
·12J. 
n 
•n 
"""'7'n 
). 
. .??"· 
•n 
nn 
n'n 
· · Molding water content(%) 
< 
< 
'· 
' 
FIGURE 6.19 Influence of molding wate'r ~o~tent and soil structure on the 
swelling chartacteristics of a sandy clay (Seed and Chan, 1959). 
; ~ . 
. , ' ~ 
• ' ! ~ ; 
,, .. -
' .. ·. 
;!· 
~ ~ ... '·; 
many times its OWn particle thickness (seeFig.4.16). Whenmontmorillonite is the principal clay mineral 
in claystone and shale, and it has access to an adequate supply of water, it cim overcome cementation 
' forces and expand considerably. Anhydrite is contained in deposits of galena and pyrite, among other 
rock·types,and converts to gypsum when exposed to water.Vermiculite results from hydration of cer-
.. ' ' 
tain basalts and has a variety of coinnlercilil applications.·' ' 
' ' 
j
1.9 
1.8 
1.7f 
--
Cl 
1.6 5 
1.5 
.2:-
"iii 
c:· 
Q) 
1.4 "0 
2:-
Cl 
1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
60L-------~--------~------~ 1.0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Water content(%) 
" 
(a). 
__ Pressure developed at 
zlero volume chfnge, kPa 
. 
120 
··-------~----·· ···--·--·-··-·· ·--·--·------·-··-·--·--··-!·--·----·--·-·-·-·--·--·· 
. 
I 
100% Saturation curve 
(G8 = 2.75) 
· 
· 
1.8 
1.9 
&>' 
Standa'rd compaction 
~-
curve I 
1·7 f 
! 
0, 
:E 1 oo f'--coo......-c--IJ""Y--.:-"'...---+-----1 1.6 5 
Cl 
.2:-
l 
1.5 -~ 
~ 
Q) 
~ 
1.4 ~ 
2:-
Cl 
Cl 
80 !-:;-;----/---::;;;----+----=] 1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
60L-------~--------~------~ 1.0. 
10. 
20 
.30 
40· 
Water content(%) 
(b) 
6.5 · Expansive Soils and Rocks 
243 
. 
. 
FIGURE 6.20 
Effects of placement 
water content and dry density on . 
the expansion characteristics of a · 
CH clay from the Delta-Mendota 
Canal, California: (a) percent 
expansion for various placement 
conditions u·nder7 kPa;(b) total 
uplift pressure at zero volume 
change caused by wetting for-
various placement conditions 
(U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1998). 
Rock can be tested for its swelling potential in a manner similar to that for clays, as described in 
the preceding section. Goodman (1989)suggests placing a dry rock specimen in a stiff consolidometer 
ring with some initial vertical stress applied to it, and then exposing it to water; during which the verti-
cal stress and deformation are monitored: Figure 6.22 shows the results from swelling tests on two rock 
types, the well-known Bearpaw shale from Montana and Wyoming and a Norwegian "fault gouge" (the 
pulverized rock produced when two sides of a fault move past each other). 
244 
Chapter 6 ': Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
FIGURE 6.21 
Classification 
chart for swelling potential 
of compacted clays (after Seed 
et al., 1962). 
.z. 
·:;: 
~ 
5.--.r-.-.---.---.---.---.---.---.---.---, 
/
. Swelling potential = 25% 
'-
/Swelling potential = 5% 
Swelling potential = 1.5% 
0~--~--~--~--~~~~~--L---L---L-~ 
0 
100 
Percent clay sizes (finer than o.oo2 mm) · 
6.6 
ENGINEERING SIGNIFICANCE OF SHRINKAGE AND SWELLING 
Several time~ in this chapter we have mentioned the enormou~ c~sts of damage caused by shrinking 
and swelling soils to pavements, light structures such as houses, and other infrastructure. The damage is 
rarely life threatening, but nonetheless it is important because of compromised serviceability, aesthet-
ics, and the costs of repair and maintenance. Estimates of the damage costs caused by shrinking and 
swelling soils range from about $10 to as inuch as $13 billion annually in the United States alone. To put 
this in perspective, this cost is more than twice the annual cost of damage from floods, hurricanes, tor-
. ,nadoes, and earthquakes"combined! . 
... 
. 
· 
The volume changes resulting from both shrinkage and swelling of fine-grained soils are often 
. ·large enough to seriously damage small buildings and highway pavements. A common occurrence is that 
a pavement oi: building is constructed when the top soil layer is relatively dry. The structure covering the 
. soil prevents further evaporation, and the soil increases in water content due to capillarity. If the soil is 
. expansive, it may swell, and. if the vertical stress exerted by the pavement or building is less than the 
swelling pressure; heave will result. Heave is usually uneven and diffenintial, and often cosmetic or even 
structural damage results., · 
The effects of shrinkage of fine-grained soils can be significant from an engineering point of 
view. Shrinkage cracks can occur locally when the capillary pressures exceed the tensile strength of 
the soil..These cracks, part of the clay macrostructure (Chapter 4); are zones of weakness that can 
~ 
reduce the overall strength of a soil mass and affect, for example, the. stability of clay slopes and the 
l bearing capacity of foundations. The desiccated and cracked dry crust usually found over deposits of 
soft clay affects the stability of highway and railroad embankments constructed on these deposits. 
·Shrinkage and shrinkage cracks are caused by evaporation from the surface in dry climates, lowering 
2.5. 
5 .. 
6.6 
Engineering Significance of Shrinkage and Swelling 
245 
7.5 
%swell 
10 
12.5 
FIGURE 6.22 Swelling test 
results for Bearpaw shale 
15 . and fault gouge from 
N()rway (Goodman, 1989). 
of the groundwater. table, and even desiccation of soil by trees and shrubs dming tempo~ary dry spells 
in otherwise humid climates. When the climate changes and the soils have access to water again, they 
tend to increase in volume or swell. Bozozuk (1962) describes several examples of the type of damage 
to structures on clay foundations caused by soil shrinkage, including that caused by trees and vegeta-
tion. Because of transpiration, water is drawn from the surrounding soils by' the plants'root systems, 
and this causes soil shrinkage and differential settlements. For case histories of successful treatment 
of ~ettlement problems caused by vegetation; see Wallace and Otto (1964) arid several papers in 
Vipulanandan eta!. (2001). 
· · . · 
·. 
, • .. 
.· 
· . . . : . . · 
, 
Swelling, like shrinkage, is generally confined to· the upper portions of a· soil deposit. Thus, 
swelling damages light structures such as small buildings, highway pavements, and canal linings . 
. . Swelling pressures as high as 1000 kPa have been measured,which is equivalent to an embankment 
, .. thickness of 40 to 50 m. Ordinarily, such high pressures do not occur, but even with more modest 
. swelling pressures of 100 or 200 kPa, for example, im embankment of 5 or 6 mwould be required to 
prevent all swelling of the subgrade. (For comparison, an ordinary building imposes a stress something 
on the order of 10 kPa perstoi"y.) 
. . . 
. 
The process of shrinking and swelling is not completely reversible~the soil always has a memory 
of its stress history and will show the effects of previous shrinkage and drying cycles. Thus soft clays 
become what is called overconsolidated and less compressible because of the increase in effective stress 
caused by capillary' action. Overconsolidation is discussed in Chapter 8. · 
. , . 
· 
Since the potential damage. to light structures and pavements due to shrinkage and swelling of 
soils is so great; the engineer must pay special attention to this problem, if it is suspected that such soils 
exist at a site. ·. ' . 
· 
· 
· ·. 
· .· 
. '' . · 
What can engineers do to prevent damage to structures from shrinking and swelling soils? If it is 
impractical to simply avoid' swelling soils'or to excavate and replace them with a suitable nonswelling 
· fill, then your alternatives are (1) structural or (2) some type of soil treatment. The structural alternative 
is either a foundation design that isolates the superstructure from soil deformations, or a foundation 
' 
-
1 
l 
246 
Chapter 6 · 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
6.7 
;<.;, 
that is stiff enough to resist differential settlements that might damage the superstructure. For example, 
the structure can be' placed on driven or bored piles that extend through the expansive soil to a stable, 
underlying stratum.' Sometimes the bored piles are "belled" or widened at the bottom to serve as 
anchors to prevent the foundation frmn~ lifting up during expansion of the overlying soil. To reduce 
uplift shear stresses on the upper part of the piles, they may be isolated from the swelling zone. Also a 
gap is sometimes built between this type of foundation and the structure to allow the ground surface to 
move without taking the superstructure with it. 
· 
As for soil treatment, there are three ways to modify the behavior of expansive soils: (1) mois-
ture control, (2) prewetting, and (3) .chemical stabilization. If expansive soils deform· due to seasonal 
moisture fluctuations, then one way to minimize this movement is to use a system 'of drains around the 
foundation to channel surface and groundwater away from the area. Horizontaland/or vertical barri-
ers can also be installed to minimize water movement into the problem soi{ Prewetting suspected 
problem soils will allow potentially damaging swelling to take place prior to construction. Moisture 
barriers and waterproof membranes have be.en used to prevent water from reaching the swelling soil. 
Chemical stabilization, most commonly with lime (CaO), has also been successfully employed to 
reduce swelling, especially of sodium montmorillonitic clays. The reason why it works is discussed in 
Chapter 4. Other stabilizing agents such as Portland cement are sometimes used. You should be aware, 
however, that not all lime and cement stabilization is successful, especially if sulfates are also present in 
the expansive soils.:A crystalline subst~nce called ettrtngite is produced, and this causes subsequent 
undesirable heaving in floor slabs· and other light structures (Puppala et 'al., 2005): The heaving can 
occur moriths or even years after an apparently successful stabilization of the foundation. 
· 
· · · For additional practical information about all types of construction on expansive soils, see Chen 
(1988), Nelson and Miller (1992), U.S. Department of the Army (1983), and Noe et al. (2007). 
COLLAPSIBLE SOILS AND SUBSIDENCE . 
~ : } 
Some soiis. e~ist th~t a~e ~tableandable t~ ~uppO'rtsig~if~c~I1t ~tru~turalloads when dry. But if their 
. water content increases significantly, they undergo a .very large decrease in volume, even without a 
. change in the surfaceload. These 'soils are called collapsible soils: As you might imagine, sudden 
: unexpected settlements can be very detrimental to structures founded on collapsible soils. Thus, it is 
important in advance ofconstruction to identify sites that are likely have collapsible soils so that 
appropriate treatment measures can be ii1stituted: 
·.· . ' 
. . . . : . . . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. .. Examples of collapsible soils include loess (windblown silts and sands, Sec. 3.3.6), weakly .cemented 
sands and silts, and certain residual soils. Other collapsible soils are found in alluvial flood plains and fans 
as the remains of mudflows and slope ~ash and _collu\'ial si~pe~: Many but not all collapsible'soil deposits 
: ·,are associated with arid or semi-arid regi'on~ (su~h as the southwest United States and California). Some 
dredged materials are collapsible, 'as are those deposited :under water' in which the sedimeht forms at 
very slow rates of_ deposition (Rogers, 1994). As a consequence of their deposition, these deposits have 
unusually high_yoid ratios and low densities. All soil deposits with collapse potential have one thing in 
. common. They possess a loose, open, honeycomb structure. [Fig: 4.29( c)] in which the larger bulky grains 
.. are held together by c'apillary films, montmorillonite or other clay minerals, or soluble salts such as halite, 
gypsum, or carbonates: ':. 
. ' 
• 
· · · 
. · · 
· 
... · .:· 
' ' ·. · 
· 
An example of collapsing ~oil behavior is ~hown in Fig. 6.23. Two specimens of loess, one at a low 
dry density and one at a higher dry density, arb g~adually loaded to about 700 kPa. Then ~ater is added, 
and as shown in the figure, collapse occurs. This results ina large decrease in void ratio arid a concurrent 
increase in dry density. As expected, the lower-densityspecimen experiences larger settlements than the 
denser specimen. 
· . 
. .. · . 
. . . 
· 
· 
. 
· 
One wayto ass~ss the collaps'e potential of various soils, based on USBR experience, is shown in 
Fig. 6.24. Soils with an in situ dry density Pd and a liquid limit LL to the left of the two lines should be 
...
6.7 ,. Collapsible Soils.and Subsidence 
247 
' ' ',· 
' ............... 
... 
' ..... .... 
Low unit weight loess 
natural moisture 
High unit weight loess: 
natural moisture 
......... 
. 
.... 
' 
........ 
' 
........ 
" 
j("-........ 
. 
.... .... 
High unit weight loess .--/ . 
'........ 
' .... .. 
prewetted ·. · 
· 
· · ....... ':"' ........................ .... 
............ ::::~ ........ -. 
........ .:-.:-.:. 
Pressure (lbf/in.2) 
'800 
14.0 r!)' 
~ 
6 
1:: 
Ol 
·~ -
'2 
:::1 
2::' 
15.0 0 
FIGURE 6.23 ·Effect of loading and wetting high and low unit weight loess soil foundations 
(U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1998). 
Med. 
High 
Very high 
Collapse 
.Expansion 
0"8o 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
LL 
FIGURE 6.24 Collapsibility based on in situ dry density and liquid limit 
(adapted from Mitchell and Gardner, 1975, and Gibbs, 1969). 
\ ' 
248 
Chapter 6 · 
·.· Hydrostatic Water in Soils .and Rocks 
investigated further for their collapse potential. The lower curve is for soils with a specific gravity G s of 
2.60 and the upper curve is for Gs =. 2.70. 
Collapse potential of a natural soil can be determined by aASTM (2010) sta!Jdard D 5333, which 
is fundamentally the same as the one-dimensional swell test D4829 described in Sec .. 6.5.2. However, in 
the case of the collapse potential test, an undisturbed soil sample at its natural water content is placed in 
the consolidometer ring (Chapter 8), and vertical stress increments are applied' each hour until the . 
design stress is achieved. Then the specimen is flooded with water, and the reduction in specimen height 
is measured (versus the increase in height that occurs in the swelling test). The collapse potential, Ic(%), 
is simply the percent strain at the stress level tested, or sometimes the collapse index is used, which is 
defined. as the relative magnitude of strain at 200 kPa. The collapse index can be ·correlated to the 
· · degree of specimen collapse, as given in Table 6.4. Another way to identify collapsible soils is by the fall 
cone test (Ayadat and Hanna, 2007). 
· 
An extensive review of the identification and treatment of collapsible·soils is given by Dudley 
(1970) and by Houston and Houston (1989). El-Ehwany and Houston (1990) provide recommendations 
. • for site investigations for collapsible soil deposits. Bara (1978) also summarizes some of the methods for 
predicting the decrease in void ratio upon wetting, as do Clemence an·d Finbarr (1981) and Houston 
et aL (1988). A useful case history involving the prediction of a collapsible compacted fill is given by 
Kropp et al. (1994) and by Noorany and Stanley (1994). 
··. 
· ·, · • 
. 
·• 
If a site is id~ntified that has significant collapse potential, what can engineers do to improve the 
soils at the site and reduce the impact of potential collapse? Choice of method depends on depth of 
treatment required and the nature of the cementation or bonding between soils grains. For modest 
depths, compacting·with rollers, inundation, or overexcavation and recompaction, sometimes with 
chemical stabilization, are often used; Dynamic compaction (Sec. 5.5.2) would also be feasible. For 
deeper deposits, ponding or flooding is effective arid often the most economical treatment method 
(Bara, 1978). Depending on the nature of the bonding between soil grains, inundation can result in a 
compression of up to 8% or 10% of the thickness of the collapsible soil layer. Dynamic compaction, 
blasting, vibro compaction~replacement, and grouting are potentially feasible improvement tech-
niques. Much of this work is summarized by Holtz (1989) and Holtz et al. (2001); · · 
! · 
Another geohazard is subsidence, which can result in major damage to structures and other infra-
structure at or near the ground surface. One important type of subsidence occurs on karst terrain, and 
·you may recall from Sec. 3.3.2 that karstic features are associated with limestone bedrock. Underground 
solution cavities can collapse and cause large sinkholes in built-up areas that can be very destructive to 
surface structures. Karst terrain presents complex and challenging problems in site exploration, founda-
tion design and construction, and for the remediation of damaged existing 'structures (Sitar, 1988; Sowers, 
· 1996). Another source of subsidence is the collapse of abandoned underground mines. 
Regional subsidence due to compaction of unconsolidated sediments caused by withdrawal of 
underground fluids (water, oil, and gas) can be very detrimental to structures and other infrastructure 
at the surface. Mexico City is the classic case in geotechnical engineering because large areas of the city 
have settled more than 10 m due to pumping of groundwater from an aquifer found conveniently 
TABLE 6.4 Classification of Collap.se Index (ASTM, 2010) 
· Collapse Index 
0 
· 0.1 to2.0 · 
2.1 to 6.0 
6.1 to 10.0 
'' '>10 
Degree of Specimen Collapse 
None 
Slight 
·Moderate 
Moderately severe 
Severe 
6.8 
,'> .,' 
' 6.8 Frost Action 
249 
about 30 m below .the city. The reasons for such large settlements are explained in Chapter 8. Less 
dramatic but nonetheless locally important subsidence has occurred in Bangkok, ·Thailand, and Las 
Vegas, Nevada, but due to groundwater pumping. Regional subsidence due to pumping of oil and gas 
caused significant subsidence to Long Beach, California, in the 1920s. For additional information on 
regional land subsidence, see Holzer (1991) and Borchers (1998). 
FROST ACTION 
Whenever the air temperature falls below freezing, especially for more than a few days, it is possible 
for the pore water in soils to freeze~ Frost action in soils can have several important engineering conse-
quences. First, the volume of the soil can immediately increase. about 10% just due to the volumetric 
expansion of water upon freezing. A second but significantly more important factor is the formation of 
·. ice crystals and lenses in the soil. These lenses can even grow to several centimetres in thickness and 
cause heaving and damage to light surface structures such as small buildings and highway pavements. 
· If soils simply froze and expanded uniformly, structures would be evenly displaced, since the frozen soil 
·is quite strong and easily able to support light structures. However, just as with swelling and shrinking 
soils, the volume change is usually uneven, and this is what causes structural and other damage. 
'., · 
· · 
The problems do not end here. During the spring, the ice lenses 'inelt and greatly increase the 
· .water content and decrease the strength of the soiL Highway pavements especially can suffer serious 
structural damage during the spring thaw (called, for obvious reasons, the "spring breakup'~). 
Our understanding of the mechanism of ice lens formation as well as the conditions necessary 
:for'detrimental frost action occurred relatively recently. Prior to the 1920s and the rapid development 
of automobile traffic, roads were left snow covered for sleds during the winter. Since snow is a good 
insulator, depths of frost penetration were limited and rarely was frost heave a problem. Because the 
. . 
traffic loads were light, there were' also few problems duririg the spring thaw. The problems began 
·when it became necessary to remove snow for cars: At first, frost heave was attributed solely to the 
10% volumetric expansion of water upon freezing. But some enterprising young engineers made some 
measurements, both of the magnitude of heave and of the water content of highway subgrades. Profes-
sor Casagrande relates that, on one stretch of badly frost-heaving road in New Hampshire, measure-
ments during the winter o£.1928-29 showed that the depth of frost penetration was about 45 em, and 
the total surface heave was about 13. em. The water content, normally between.8% and 12%, had 
increased significantly 'and ranged between 60% and 110%. When a test pit was excavated, the sub-
grade was full of ice lenses with a total thickness of (you guessed it!) 13 em! The miter table had been 
located at some 2 m depth in the autumn, yet during the spring it was right below the pavement. When 
the soil began to thaw in the spring, the upper layers became water saturated and yery soft_:_ the water 
was trapped in the subgrade between the thawed surface layer and the top of the still frozen soil below. 
Nowthe question was: how did the water get there? It wasn't there before the winter season. Also, 
the observation was made that there was very little ice in clean sands and gravels. But with silty soils, ice 
lenses wen! plentiful, and this fact suggested that capillarity was somehow involved. Further investiga-
tions showed that the formation of ice lenses also depended on the rate of freezing of the soil. If the soil 
froze rapidly, as might occur during a cold snap early in the winter before there was significant snow, then 
fewer ice lenses tended to form. With a slower rate of freezing, there were more ice lenses, and thicker 
lenses tended to form nearer the bottom of the frozen layer. So, one condition for ice lens formation must 
be that there is a source of water nearby. All these factors are discussed in the following sections. 
Research during the past 80 years has explained many of the observed phenomena associated 
with soil freezing and frost action. As might be expected, the process, especially with fine-grained soils, 
is a rather complicated heat-diffusion (thermodynamic)and pore water-chemistry problem and is 
related to the soil-water potential and water movement in frozen soils (Yong and .Warkentin, 1975; 
Mitchell and Soga, 2005). 
. 
· 
· . , · 
' 
' 
250 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
6.8.1 
The early history of research on frost action and frost heave is now in a U.S. Army Cold Regions 
Research & Engineering Laboratory (CRREL) special report (Black and Hardenberg,-1991). This 
report has reprints of the early work by Beskow in Sweden and Taber in the United States. 
-,;;,:·." 
.. 
Terminology, Conditions, and Mechanisms of Frost Action 
Common terminology for frozen ground is defined in ASTM (2010) D 4083, and some of these terms 
~~ 
'\ 
~ 
are shown in Fig. 6.25. 
~ 
. 
, 
· 
Basically, three conditions must exist for frost action and the formation o'f ice lens~s in soils: 
~ . 1 . .Temperatures below freezing. i 
2. Source of water close enough to supply capillary water to the frost line. 
}· Frost-~usceptible soil type a11dgrain(pore).siz~ distribution. : 
. Freezing temperatures depend, of course, on the climatic conditions in the area. If the maximum depth 
. · of frost penetration during the coldest part of the winter is less than about 300 mm, it does not affect 
infrastructure sufficiently to be of concern: However, much of the North American continent has suffi-
ciently cold winters that frost penetration occurs to depths great enough to be of interest to engineers. 
Figure 6.26 shows typical depths of frost penetration in the continent-al United States. , 
Although our discussion has focused on the effects of frost action on roads and highways, other 
, infrastructure such as water mains and footings for small structures can also be adversely affected-if 
they are not located well below the depth of frost penetration. For both these situations; it is a good 
)dea to conservatively follow local experience and building codes . 
.. Even if the winter. air temperatures are above freezing during the day, the subsoil can remain 
frozen during much of the winter because of the low thermal conductivity of the soilcwater system. The 
common measure of severity of the winter temperatures is the freezing index, which is defined as the 
·number of degree-days below freezing. In addition to the freezing index, ground cover, topography, 
presence of snow, and other factors locally affect the rate and depth of frost penetration. The maximum 
·frost depths in Fig. 6.26 are for extremely cold winters without much snow cover. If there is some snow, 
. , , ·especially early in the winter, then thefrost depth will be much less ... 
F~ozen~groun'd t~rminology{ASTM, 201 0). 
N 
U1 
.... 
·FIGURE 6.26 
Maximum depths in metres of frost penetration in the continental United States(from Floyd, 19l9). 
252 
Chapter 6 · 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
The maximum frost depths in Fig. 6.26 are obviously much greater north of the U.S. border and 
in most of Alaska. Higher elevations of the Rockies, the Sierras; and the Cascades alsohilVelocal areas 
of deep frost penetration. If you are working in Canada, you can estimate maximum frost depth from 
the freezing index, as explained in Burn (1976). 
. · · 
As indicated on Fig. 3.31, a large part of the Northern Hemisphere including Canada and Alaska 
contains areas of permanently frozen ·ground called permafrost. Permafrost can be continuous or 
discontinuous and is shown in Figs. 6.25 and 3.31. Construction in permafrost areas is particularly 
challenging and requires special design and construction procedures. For' further information, see 
U.S. Department of. the Army (1987), Davis (2001), andAndersland and Ladanyi (2004). 
Besides freezing temperatures,' a source of groundwater within the height of capillary rise pro-
vides the water necessary to feed growing ice lenses. The soil must be fine enough for relatively high 
. capillary pressures to develop and yet not so fine that the flow of water in the soil pores is restricted. 
As discussedin the nextchapter, the hydraulic conductivity or permeability of clay soils is very low. 
Even though the 'capillary pressures are very high,' unless the clay is relatively sandy or silty, the 
amount of water that can flow during a freezing spell is so, small that ice lenses have little chance to 
form. However, practically speaking, 'cli:ty soils riear the surface are. often cracked and fissured, as 
described previously, which may allow some water movement to the frost line .. 
As with other capillary phenomena, it is the pore sizes and not the grain sizes that really control 
. .frost action. Reed et aL (1979) have shown that an intrinsically frost-susceptibh! soil, as predicted by 
, ·texture and/or gradation, can actually have many levels of susceptibility that depend on the fabric of 
, the soil resulting from compaction; 
· 
. 
. 
· 
· 
Figure 6.27 shows a sample offissured clay that froze down froin the tbp. Note how the water 
content increased within the frozen zone and how this compared with the value before freezing. Since 
·; 
-' 
,· 
-
_1 
•· 
' 
·;. 
Q) 
0 
Ice lenses -2::: I ~-~'~(- I : . .{g 
FIGURE 6.27 
Diagram show-
ing the relation between 
different ice layers iri frozen 
soil (a) and the water content 
distribution curVe (b). The soil 
is assumed to be a medium 
' .. clay with permanent cracks: 
a = frozen part; b ~ dried-out 
zone below the frost line 
(after Beskow, 1935). 
Ice lenses --=---r· ~ 
(a).· 
::l 
<n 
::: 
0 
Qi 
..a 
.r:: c. 
Q) 
0 
Cl 
c: 
.~: ( 
"j;j 
Q) 
~I 
~ 
<I> I 
~ 
~I 
.t:: 
~I 
111 
~ 
..a 
"E 
Q) 
"E 
0 0 .... 
Q) 
-ro 3 
(b) 
Freezing --~--------...--·-:<_
0_o_c_~:. 
front . 
. .:' . · · 
· :T 
.. > ooc · 
GWT 
(a) 
(c) 
·6.8 Frost Action 
253 
·,;: 
,,,:' 
FIGURE 6.28 Schematic dia-
gram of the formation of ice 
lenses and frost heaving in the 
(a) fall; (b) winter; and (c) spring. 
the clay contains permanent cracks,the groundwater surface is real-that is, the level where the cracks 
. contain free water_;and is therefore noticed as a kink in the water distribution curve. Note, too, how 
. the ice lenses developed. in the frozen zone. They were continually supplied from the water table 
: through the fissures and cracks in the clay. 
What is the process that allows ice lenses to form and frost heaving to occur in the field? Assume 
: we have a site with frost~susceptible soils. Figure 6.28(a) shows conditions during the fall season after 
some nights with temperatures below freezing. (Also shown is the groundwater table GWT and the · 
. height of capillary rise he.) The upper layers of soil are frozen, but below the freezing front, the tem-
perature is still above freezing and soil is unfrozen. During this period, the water content and other soil 
properties of the upper soil layers are unchanged. This is not the situation, however, as winter weather 
: continues [Fig. 6.28(b )]. The freezing front is now below the height of capillary rise, h"' and water is 
: continually drawn by capillarity up to the freezing front. This is why the water content in the upper 
: layers increases so dramatically and frost heaving continues to occur throughout the winter. In the 
• spring, the weather warms and the top layer starts to thaw [Fig. 6.28(c)]. Because.the water content of 
the upper soils is now so high~ its strength is significantly less. This is the cause of the "spring breakup" 
that occurs in pavements and is the reason why load restrictions are often imposed. Also, lightweight 
structures may not be able to tolerate the differential heaving and settlement caused by frost action. 
254 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
6.8.2 
Prediction and ldentificatioll ofFros~-Sus~eptible Soil~ .. 
·. 
What are frost-susceptible soils? As s~ggested above, ice lenses will simply not form in coarse-
grained soils, because the height of capillary rise in these soils is too small. Casagrande (1932a) and 
other researchers like Beskow (1935) in Sweden found that ice lens formation in fine-grained soils 
depended on both a critical grain size and the grain size distribution of the soil. ~eskow found 
0.1 mm to be the maximum size that would permit ice lens formation under ariy conditions. 
Casagrande found 0.02 mni to be a criti~al grain size; even gravels with only 5% to 10% of 0.02 mm 
silt were frost-susceptible. Casagrande also found that with well-graded soils, only 3% of the material 
finer than 0.02 inm was required to produce frost heaving, whereas fairly uniform soils must have at 
least 10% of that size to be problematic. It seems that soils with less than 1% smaller than 0.02 mill 
also rarely frost heaved. · 
· These criteria apparently do work. For example, after Rhode Island DOT started limiting the 
amount of 0,02 mm permitted to 1% or less, they have had no further frost-heave problems(Chamberlain 
et al., 1982). 
· 
. . 
· • · 
. 
Beskow's (1935) limiting grain size curves are shown in Fig. 6.29 for Swedish glacial tills and 
similar soils: Soils between the curves were found to be frost heaving; those below the bottom curve 
never heaved; 
. 
. 
Table 6.5 presents the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers frost. design classification system based 
uponwork by Casagrande (1932a). This is why the criterion of the percent finer than 0.02 mm is 
used, Based upon typical percentages of this grain size, a good estimate of the soil type and hence the 
Unified Soil Classification System symbol is given. The classification system was developed by the 
Corps for pavement design, and it is in order· of increasing frost susceptibility and loss of subgrade 
strength upon thawing. There is some overlapping of frost susceptibility between groups in Table 6.5. 
For example, soils in Groups F1 and F2 a{e similar, but F2 soils are. more likely to have a lower strength 
FIGURE 6.29 ·Limits between 
frost~susceptible and non~frost~ 
susceptible mixtures of glacial 
···tills or similar mixtures (after·· 
· · Beskow, 1935). 
0.10 0.15 0.2 0.30.4 
0.75 .. 1.5 
• .• Diameter (mm) 
4 
3:. :5 
6.8 Frost Action 
255 
TABLE 6.5 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Frost Design Soil Classification 
Frost 
Frost 
·, Percent Finer 
JYpical uses 
Group 
Susceptibility 
Soil Type 
than O.D2 mni · 
, Classification 
NFS• 
Negligible to low· 
a. Gravels; crushed 
()..:.1.5 
GW,GP 
stone, crushed rock 
'· 'SW,SP 
b. Sands 
0-3. 
PFSb 
Possibly 
a. Gravels, crushed 
'1.5-3. 
- ;, 
GW,GP· 
stone, crushed rock 
.b:Sands 
3-10 
SW,SP 
S1 
Very low to 
Gravelly soils 
3-6 
GW, GP, GW-GM, GP-GM 
·medium 
S2 
· Verylow to 
Sandy soils 
3-6 
. SW, SP, SW-SM, SP-SM 
·medium 
F1 
Very low to high 
. Gravelly soils 
6-10 
GM, GW-GM, GP-GM 
F2 
Medium to high 
a. Gravelly soils 
10-20 
GM, GM-GC, GW-GM, GP-GM 
Medium to high . 
b. Sands 
6-15 
SM, SW-SM, SP-SM 
Medium to very 
,., '"' 
GM,GC' 
F3 
a. Gravelly soils 
>20 
high . 
Medh.im to very 
. b. Sands except very 
>15 
SM,SC 
high 
fine silty sands 
Low 
c. Clays, PI > 12 
CL,CH 
F4 
Low to very high 
a. All silts 
ML,MH. 
Low to very high 
b. Very fine silty sands 
>15 
SM 
Low to high 
c. Clays, PI < 12 
CL,CL-ML 
Very low to very 
d. Varved clays and 
CL and ML; CL, ML and SM; 
high 
other fine-grained 
CL, CHand ML; CL, CH, 
banded sediments 
MLandSM 
•Not frost-susceptible. 
. . 
bPossibly frost-susceptible, but requires a laboratory test to determine design frost soil classification. 
After. J~h~~on eta!. (1986), U.S. D~part;n~nt of the Army (1987); a~dAnderslanda~d-Lada~yl (2004). 
during thaw. Soils in group F4 are especially highly frost susceptibile. Potentially frost-susceptible soils 
in Table 6.5 are likely to develop significant ice segregation if frozen at rates that are commonly 
observed in pavement syste~~-(2.5 to 25 min/day) and iffr"ee.~atei is·available (less_than 1.5 to 3m 
bel~w the freezing front). 
· · · . . 
· 
· .· 
· · . . · · . 
·.· 
·. • · .. · • 
.. · · 
. . 
Figure 6.30 shows rates of frost heave versus percent finer than 0.02 mm for the soil types and 
frost groups in Table6.5. Figure 6.30 i~based on laboratory tests on remolded samples, and there is con-
.· siderable overlap among the various soil types and groups. Because labbratory tests are quite rigorous, 
.. the predicted rates of heave shown in Fig. 6.30 are generally greater than expected under normal field 
conditions: Soils tha_t heave in standard laboratory tests at average rates of up to 1 rnin/dayare probably 
. acceptable foruse under pavements in frost areas, miless unusually severe conditions are anticipated. 
Even the soils that approach heave rates of 1 min/day in laboratory tests' are, p~obably going to show 
some measurable frost heave under averagdieldconditioris. Keep these facts iri mind if youare faced 
with out-of-the~ordinary pavement practice, arid remember that good pavement drainage is essential for 
· good performance: · 
' 
:. · 
· 
' 
· 
· 
· · · · · 
. . . · 
' .•. 
256 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
6.8.3 
Frost 
susceptibility 
classifications 30_0 rr-rr-rTT--:--,--.-----r-r-'rr-.ro----.--....-..:...---,,-,--,-,-,ro 
Very high 
; 
High 
Medium 
Low I 
Very low 
I 
Negligible 
f 
.§. 
~ 
Ql 
.s::: 
0 
"*· 
:i; 1.0 
Cl 
e: 
Ql 
~ 
@ Gravelly SAND,_SW · 
@ Clayey GRAVEL, GW-GC 
@ GRAVEL, GM-GC 
@ Lean CLAY, CL 
Sandy 
GRAVEL 
GP 
0.1~~-L~~----~--~~~~~~----~--~~~~~~ 
-oA 
. Percentage by weight finer than 0.02 mm 
FIGURE 6.30 Rates of heave in laboratory freezing tests on remolded soils (U.S. Department 
of the Army, 1984). ' · 
· · 
, 
· 
· 
· Engineering Significance of Frozen Ground 
• Just' as with s~ellingandshrinking soils, fr~st action can seriously affect structures such as small build-
·ings 'and highway pavements that are founded directly on the ground surface. Differential heave during 
the winter can result in undesirable deformations arid distortion of the structure. Theri when the spring 
thaw occurs, strength loss can be a serious problem, especiillly in highway pavements. 
. 
Damage to highways in the United States and Canada because of frost action is· estimated to 
amount to millions of dollars annmilly. But because ofthe fundament<il understanding of the factors 
involved iri frost·action imd heave; engineers have'developed relatively successful methods for dealing 
.with these problems. Load restrictions on secondary roads during the spring "bre~kup" are common in 
'the northeni United States arid in Canada. Probably the mostcommonwayto deal ~ith the. potential 
damage due to frost-susceptible .subgrade soils is to excavate arid replace them with ~on-frost-susceptible 
materials. Although probably not very economical for highways, it might be possible to lower the 
groundwater table. Impervious membranes, capillary breaks of coarse gravel or geo-coniposites, chem-
ical additives, and even foamed insulation (expanded polystyrene, EPS) have been ~uccessfully used iri 
_ . 6.9 • ·lntergranular or Effective Stress 
257 
special cases. EPS, however, has been blamed for traffic accidents,.because water on the pavement 
surface may freeze unexpectedly, similar to what happens at certain times of the year to bridge decks. 
Frost penetration can seriously affect building foundations and water lines. Footings and base-
. ments, as well as water mains, must be founded well below the maximum depth of frost penetration for 
··the .locality. Special construction· techniques ·must be used, in, arctic· climates. For • details, see the 
U.S. Department of the Army (1987), Andersland and Ladanyi (2004), and Canadian Geotechnical 
· Society (2006). As ·mentioned, adequate performance of any type of infrastructure in permafrost 
.regions requires veryspecial design, construction, and maintenance procedures. For good sources of 
information see the above references and Davis (2001). . . _ 
6.9 · · · INTERGRANULAR OR EFFECTIVE STRESS 
The con~ept of intergranular or effective stress was introduced in Sec. 6.2.1. By-definition; 
< 
• 
• 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
• • 
" 
~ 
' 
, 
. ' 
. :·;.where u. =_total normal stress, . 
. u' =·inter granular or effective normal stress, and • 
. it = 'pore ~ater or neutral pres~ure. 
. 
. 
. 
(6.14) 
When the densitiesand thicknesses of thesoillayersand location of the groundwater table are 
known; both the total stress and pore water pressure may readily be estimated or calculated. The effec-
tive stress cannot be measured; it can only be calculated! . : .. 
. The total veitical stress is called the bodystress, because it is generated by the mass (acted upon 
by gravity) in the body. To calculate the total vei:tical stress u vat a point in a soil mass, you simply sum 
up the densities of all the material (soil solids +water) above that point multiplied by the gravita-
tional constant g, or . 
· 
uv.= 1hpgdz 
If pg is a constant throughout the d~pth, the~ · 
Uv = pgh 
(6.15a) 
(6.15b) 
Typically, we divide the soil mass into n layers and evaluate the total stress incrementally for each layer, or 
n 
Uv = 2:_p;gZ; 
i=l 
(6.15c) 
As an example, if a soil could have zero voids, then the total stress exerted on a particular plane would 
be the depth to the given point times the density of the material-or, in this case, Ps times the gravita- · 
tional constant g. If the soil were dry, then you would use Pd instead of Ps· 
. 
.· .. 
.. 
The neutral stress or pore ~aterpressure' is similarly calculated for static waterconditions. It is 
si1Dplfthe depth below the groundwater table to t~e point in question, zw, tim~s, the product of the 
.d~.nsity of water p;, and g, or 
· 
· 
·· 
· 
· · 
! .• ' 
U '= PwgZw ' 
' 
.i' ' . f • " • ; 
~ ' 
~ ~ 
(6.16) 
. 
. In solid mechanics, the pore water pressure ~ is referred to as the neutral stress because it has no 
shear component. Recall from fluid mechanics that by definition a liquid cannot support 'static shear 
. stress. It has only normal stresses, which act equaily in all directions. On the other hand, total and 
258 
Chapter 6 · 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
effective stresses can have both normal and shear components. By Eq. (6.8), the effective stress a' is 
simply the difference between the total and neutral stresses. 
What is the physical meaning of effective stress? First, lettuce discuss the concept of stress itself. 
You may recall from basic mechanics that stress is really a fictitious quantity. It is defined as a differential 
force divided by a differential area, as the area shrinks to a point in the limit. This concept is useful, even 
: though in reality, on the micro scale, it has no meaning physically. For example, what would happen in a 
sand or gravel when the particular differential area you chose ended up in a void? Of course, the stress 
would have to be zero. Yet right next door, where two gravel particles might be in point-to-point contact, 
the contact stress might be extremely high; it could even exceed the crushing strength of the mineral 
grains. Stress then really calls for a continuous material, whereas depending on the scale, real materials 
are not really continuous. Soils, especially, are not continuous, as we have seen in Chapter 4. Even fine-
grained clay soils are collections of discrete mineral particles held together by gravitational, chemical, 
ionic, van der Waals, and many other kinds of forces. Still, the concept of stress on a macroscale is useful 
in engineering practice, arid that is why we use it. . 
So, what does effective stress mean physically? In a granular material such as a sand or gravel, it 
is sometimes called the intergranular stress. However, it is not really the same as the grain-to-grain con-
tact stress, since the contact area between granular particles can be very small. In fact, with rounded or 
spherical grains the contact area can approach a point. Therefore, the actual contact stress can be very 
' large. Rather, the intergranular stress is the sum of the contact.forces divided by the total or gross 
(engineering) area, as shown in Fig. 6.31. If we look at forces, the total vertical force or load p can be 
considered to be the sum of the intergranular contact forces P' plus the hydrostatic force (A - Ac)u 
in the pore water. Since the neutralstress can obviously act only over the void or pore area, to get force 
· the neutnil stress u must be multiplied by the area ofthe voids A - An or 
P ~ P'+ (A~ Ac)u' 
• 
:• •• 
< 
I 
l ... 
(6.17a) 
. where A= total or gross (engineering) area, and· ' 
Ac = contact area between grains. 
Dividing by the gross area A to obtain stresses, we have 
P = P' (A- Ac) 
A 
A 
A 
u 
(6.17b) 
or 
a = a' + (1 - Ac) u 
,. 
A 
(6.17c) 
or 
a =.a' +(1- a)u 
(6.17d) 
where a = contact area between particles per unit gross area of the soil (Skempton, 1960) .. · 
In granular materials, since the contact areas approach point areas, a approaches zero. Thus 
Eq. (6.17d) reduces toEq. (6.8), or a = a' + u. This equation, which defines effective stress, was first 
proposed in the 1920s byTerzaghi, who is considered to be the father of soil mechanics. Equation (6.8) 
is extremely useful and important. It is generally accepted that the effective stresses in a soil mass actu-
ally control or govern the e~gineering behavior of that mass. The response of a soil mass to changes in 
' applied' stresses (compressibility and shearing resistance) depend almost exclusively on the effective 
·stresses in that soil mass. The principle of effective stress is probably the single most important concept 
ingeotechnical engineering. 
· 
· 
· 
::. 6.9' lntergranular or Effective Stress 
259 
;; ,' 
FIGURE 6.31 
Particles in solid 
. contact (after Skempton, 1960). 
We have discussed effective stresses for granular particulate materials. What does. the concept 
mean for fine-grained cohesive soils? From the discussion in Chapter 4; it is doubtful that the mineral 
crystals are in actual physical contact, since they are surrounded by a tightly bound water film. On. the 
micro scale, the interparticle force fields that would contribute to effective stress are extremely difficult 
to interpret a~d philosophically impossibl~ to' measure:'Any inference 'aboll't these force fields comes 
from a study of the fabric of the soil. So, in view of this complexity, what place does so simple an equation 
as6.8 have'in engineering practice? Experimental evidence' as well as a careful analysis by.Skempton 
(1960) has shown that for saturated sands and clays the principle of effective: stress is an excellent 
approximation to reality. It is not so good, however, for unsaturated soils or saturated rocks and concrete. 
Whatever it is physically, effective stress is defined as the difference between an engineering total stress 
and a measurable neutral stress (pore water pressure). The concept of effective stress, as we shall see in 
later chapters, is extremely useful for understanding soil behavior, interpreting laboratory test results, and 
making engineering design calculations. The concept works, and that is why we use it. 
Now we shall work through some examples to show you how to calculate the total stress, pore 
pressure, and effective stress in soil masses. 
' 
' · · 
Example 6.6 
Given: 
The co~tainer of soil shown ~n Fig: Ex. 6.6. The _saturated density is 2.0 Mg/m3• 
Elev.B~ 
,,, 
':·, 
FIGURE Ex. 6.6 
(a) Saturated 
(b) Submerged 
260 
Chapter 6 
! : Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
,:,: 
.. 
Required: 
Calculate the t~tal stress, pore pressure, and ~ffective stress at elevation A when (a) the water 
table is at elevation A and (b) the water table rises to elevation B ... 
Solutio~: 
a. Assume the soil in the container is initially saturated (but not submerged). The water table is 
located at elevation A. Use Eqs. (6.15b), (6.16), and (6.8) to calculate the stresses at elevation A. 
Total stress [Eq. (6.15b)]: 
a = Psa1gh ~ 2.0 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 5 m 
= 98 100 N/m2 = 98.1 kPa 
P~re pressure [Eq: (6.16)]: 
u = PwgZw = 1 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 0 = 0 
.. From Eq. (6.8): · 
a' = u = 98.1 kPa ·. · 
Recall th~t l N : 1 kg· m/s.2 and that 1 N/m2 = 1 Pa (Appendix A) .. 
. 
' 
. 
' 
b. If we raise the water table to elevation B, a change in effective stresses at elevation A occurs, 
·since the saturated soil becomes submerged or buoyant. The stresses at elevation A due to the' 
soil and water above are as follows: · 
Total stress: . 
. L" 
Pore pressure! 
a = Psatgh + PwgZw 
.. ,;' (2.0X 9.8~ X 5) -f"(t x' 9'.81 X .2) 
· = 117.7 kPa 
U = Pwg(zw +h) 
= 1 X 9.81 X (2·+ 5) 
= 68.7kPa 
. ., 
Effective stress at elevation A: 
a; = a -
U = (Psatgh ,+ PwgZw) -. Pwg(zw +h) 
= 117.7 - 68.7 = 49.0 kPa 
There are several things that you should know about this example. First, the example may not be 
very realistic, because it is unlikely that the entire 5 m of sand above the water table would be com-
pletely saturated. But assuming so makes the calculations easier. Second, the significant figures used 
are probably unrealistic. After all, 1 kPa is a very small stress, and in geotechnical practice, we rarely 
know the soil properties and depths very accurately. In fact, it is often assumed in practice that 
g ~ 10 m/s2, so in this example, the total stress in part a would be 100 kPa. Similarly, the total stress in 
part b would be 120 kPa. And so on. 
Note also that raising the elevation of the groundwater table decreases the intergranular pressure 
or effective stress in Example 6.6 from 98 kPa to 49 kPa, or a reduction of 50%! When the groundwater 
table is lowered, the reverse occurs and the soil is subjected to an increase in effective stress. This overall 
,, 
·-
·, 
·6.9 lntergranular or Effective Stress 
261 
increase in vertical stress may lead to substantial areal subsidence, as is occurring, for .. example, in 
Mexico City and Las Vegas. As was discussed in Sec. 6.8, in these rapidly growing cities, groundwater 
is being pumped for municipal water' supply, arid the [~suiting settlements ha~e caused substantial 
damage to streets, buildings, and underground_utilities.. 
. . , 
. 
. . 
. Another'way to calculate the effective stress in part b of Example6.6 is to use' the submerged or 
buoyant density [Eq. (2.11)]. Note that 
Given: 
a' = (Psatgh + Pw8Zw) - Pw8(Zw + h) 
= (Psat - Pw)gh 
= p'gh 
The data of Example 6.6. · 
Required: 
(6.18) 
Use Eq. (6.18) to compute the effective stress at elevation A when the water table is at elevation B. 
Solution: 
. p' = Psat _: Pw :: 2.0 :_ l.o = LO Mwni3 
" 
• 
~ 
' 
' 
> 
a' = p'gh = LOX 9.81 X 5 = 49.0 kPa 
Assuming g -~ ,10rn/s2: th~n a'.= 50 kPa. 
Example 6.8 
Given:',. 
The soil profile as shown in Fig. EJ(. 6.8 
T 
A,. 
Clay I 
FIGURE Ex. 6.8 
Psat = 2.0 Mg/m3 ) q t U 
262 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Required: 
What are the totai and effective stresses at pointA? 
\. 
; 
' 
Solution: First find Pd and Psat of the sand. This willbe a review of phase relations. Let V1 = 1m3; 
therefore n = Vv,and 
. 
Vs = 1- Vv = 1- n 
From Eq. (2.7), 
Ms = Ps(1 - n) 
Ms = 2.70 Mg/m3 (1 - 0.5)m3 = 1.35 Mg (or 1350 kg) 
· ··· 
M s 
1.35 Mg 
· · 
-
.. 
. 
Pd = -V = 
1 
= 1.35 Mg/m3 (or 1350 kg!m3) 
t 
1m 
Ms + Mw- Ms + PwVu 
Psat = 
V 
-
Vt 
t 
3 
1.35 Mg + 1 Mg/m
3 (O.S m) = 1.85 Mg/m3 
Psat = 
1m3 
The total stress at A is ~p;gh;: 
1.35 Mg!m3 X 9.81 rn!s2 X 2m = 26.49 kN/m2 
+ 1.85 Mg/m3 ~ 9.81 m/s2 X 2m = 36.30 kN/m2 
+ 2.0 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 4 m = 78.48 kN/m2 
141.27 kN/m2, or 141.3 kPa 
The effective stress at A is 
a'= a- Pwgh 
= 141.3 - (1 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 6 m) = 82.4 kPa 
The effective stress may also be computed by the "2:pgh above the water table and the "2:P' gh 
below the water table, or 
1.35 Mg/m3 X 9.81 rn!s2 X 2m = 26.49 kPa 
+(1.85 -:- 1.0) X 9.81 X 2m = 16.68 kPa 
+(2.0 - 1.0) X 9.81 X 4 m = 39.24 kPa 
82.41 kPa (checks) 
It is important to note that, although we carry this many decimal places in example and home-
work problems, computations would probably be carried out in practice only to the nearest whole kPa 
(in this case, the effective stress would be reported as 82 kPa). 
6.10 · VERTICAl STRESS PROFILES 
In foundation engineering, it is often useful to have a plot of the total stress, pore pressure, and effec-
tive stress with depth at a site. Such plots are used for evaluation of bearing capacity and settlement of 
shallow ~nd deep foundations, as well as the stability of excavations. Because these profiles are indeed 
, 6.10 · Vertical Stress Profiles 
263 
. important in geotechnicalpractice, you'shotild become proficient in computing them. The following 
examples illustrate how these profiles are established and some of the very useful information that can 
be obtained from them. 
Example 6.9 
, ·Given:. 
'~ '- .• 
The soil profile of Example 6.8. 
Required: 
. Plot the total stress, pore pressure, and effective stress with depth for the entire soil profile. 
Solution: See Fig. Ex. 6.9. You should verify that the nu'nierical values shown on the figure are 
correct. As in the previous example, computations to the nearest whole kPa are generally accurate 
enough. 
· 
··u (kPa) 
40 
: 80 
120 
FIGURE Ex. 6.9 
u(kPa) 
40 
+ 
u' (kPa) 
40 
80 
Note how the slopes of the stress profiles change as the density changes. In geotechnical practice, the 
basic soils information comes from site investigations and borings, which determine the. thicknesses 
of the significant soil layers, the depth to the water table, and the water contents and densities of.the 
. various materials. Stress profiles are also useful for illustrating and understanding what happens to 
the stresses in the ground when conditions change-for example, when the groundwater table is 
raised or lowered as a result of some construction operation, pumping, or flooding. Some of these 
effects are illustrated in the following examples. 
264 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Example 6.10 
Given: 
The soil profile of Example "6.8. 
Required: 
Plot the total stress, pore pressure, and effective stress with depth if the groundwater table rises 
to the ground surface. 
" 
Solution: See Fig. Ex. 6.10. 
.. E' 
~4 
g. 
Cl 
40 
FIGURE Ex. 6.10 
u (kPa) 
80 
120 
~ 
~ 
u(kPa) 
+ 
u' (kPa) 
80 
Note that the effective stress at point A: (at z = 8 m) js reduced! Had the groundwater table 
dropped below its original elevation, the effective stress at point A would have increased. , 
f 
' 
; 
Example 6.11 
Given: 
The soil profile of Example 6.8. 
Required: 
Plot the total stress, pore press~re, and effective stress with depth for the cas~ where the ground: 
water table is 2 m above the ground surface. 
Solution: See Fig. Ex. 6.11. 
I 
· · 6.10 ··Vertical Stress Profiles 
265 
u (kPa) 
u(kPa) 
+ 
u' (kPa) 
Consider carefully how the stress profiles· change as the water table elevation changes. Note 
especially how the effective stresses 'decrease as the water table rises (Example 6.9 versus 6.10) and 
then how the effective stress is not chimged even when the groundwater table is above the ground 
·:surface (Example 6.11). Of course, in that case both the total stress and pore pressure increase as the 
water table rises above the ground surface, but the effective· stresses reniairi unchimged. The reason 
: '"why the effective siressesremain unchanged i:fa very.importantconcept, and you'should be sure you 
·: · · understand why it happens: 
· •' 
• · · ' 
· ' 
' 
. · Similar but opposite changes in effective stresses occur when the groundwater table is lowered .. 
This might occur because of a 'drought, the pumping 'of water from the sand layer, or everi an excava-
tion nearby that could drain the sand. We discuss some of these conditions in. Chapter 7; The point here 
is that if the groundwater table is lowered, you might expect the effective stresses in tlie clay layer to 
actually increase. If the clay is compressible, an increase in effective stresss causes surface settlements. 
This process doesn't happen overnight; in fact it may take several decades for the compression'and 
settle~ent to occur. These processes are ,discussed in detail in Chapters 8 and 9: 
; 
'· 
Given: 
The soil profile of Example 6.8. 
, . . 
Required:.. 
, .. 
,\ '· 
a. Find the total stress, pore pressure,'and 1 effective stress at point A when the groundwater 
table is lowered 2 m to the. top of the clay layer. Assume for simplicity that the· entire sand 
layer is now dry. 
· ' 
· · 
I b. Compare the 'effective stress at point A with the result in Example' 6.8 and comment on the 
results. ' ·: ·,,, ' 
'· 
' ·.·.: ' 
' ' ., ' ' ' 
.. · .. ', ', 
\: 
'•· ·, 
' 
266 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
Solution: 
a. As in the previous examples, to get the total stress u at point A, we simply sum up the total 
stress for the soil layers above the point, or 
· 
Sand: u = 1.35 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 4 m = 53 kPa 
Clay: u = 2.0 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 4 m = 78 kPa 
Total stress at point A: u = 53 + 78 = 131 kPa · 
·With the groundwater table at the. top of the clay layer, th~ pore pressur~ u at that point is 
39 kPa. Therefore the effective stress u' at point A is 131 - 39 = 92 kPa. 
As in Example 6.8, the effective stress at point A may also be computed by the·~ pgh 
above the water table and the ~ p'gh below the water table, or 
· 
Sand: u = u' = 53 kPa 
Clay: u' = 131 -
(1 X 9.81 X 4 m) = 92 kPa (checks) 
b. Comparing the· numerical values with those of Ex. 6.8, we find that the effective stress at 
point A increases from 82 kPa to 92 kPa, or an increase of 10 kPa. Comment: lowering the 
groundwater table will cause an increase in effective stress. 
Other stress profiles of geotechnical interest arise during steady-state pumping from a pervious 
layer or aquifer below the clay layer. An aquifer is simply a source of groundwater that may be taken 
by pumping from wells (Chapter 7). Sometimes the~water pressurein the aquifer is greater than the 
head caused by the local groundwatertable; this is called an artesian condition. To know the actual 
groundwater conditions at a site, we would need to use a piezometer to measure the value of the pore 
water pressure at a given elevation. 
, , , , ·. 
We have already mentioned the. potential detrimental effect of the lowering of the groundwater 
level due to pumping because of the increase in the effective stress. In the case of an artesian condition, 
. , the initial pore water pressure is above the static water table. Because of the increased pore water pres-
sure, a corresponding decrease in effective stress occurs, and this can result in a loss of stability of a 
slope or foundition. . . · 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
6.11 . 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL STRESSES .'. · 
You may recall fromhydrostatiCs that the pressure in 'a liquid is the samein any direction-up, down, 
. sideways, or at any inclination. However, this is not true in soils. Rarely in natural soil deposits is the 
horizontal stress in the ground exactly equal to the vertical stress. In other words, the stresses in situ are 
not necessarily hydrostatic. We can express the ratio of the horizontal to vertical stress in the ground as 
uh = Kuv 
(6.19) 
where K is an earth pressure coefficient. 
. 
Since the groundwater table can fluctuate and the total stresses can change, the coefficient K is 
not a constant for a particular soil deposit. However, if we express this ratio in terms of effective 
stresses, we take care of the problem of a .variable water table, or · 
I 
(6.20) 
u}; ,;,· K0U~ 
The parameter.K0 is a .very impoi:tant coefficient i~ geotechnical engineering. It is called the 
. coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest. It expresses the stre~s conditions in' the gro~nd in terms of 
effective stresses,· and it is independent of the location of the groundwater table. Even if the depth 
J 
Problems 
267 
changes, K 0 will be a constant as long as we are in the same soil layer and the density remains the same. 
However, this coefficient is very sensitive to the geologic and engineering stress history, as well as to 
the densities of the overlying soil layers (see, for example, Massarsch et al., 1975). The value of Ko is 
important in stress analyses, in assessing the shearing resistance of particular soil layers, and in such 
geotechnical problems as the design of earth-retaining structures, earth dams and slopes, and many 
foundation engineering problems. 
The K 0 in natural soil deposits can be as low as 0.4 or 0.5 for sedimentary soils that have never 
been preloaded or up to 3.0 or greater for some very heavily preloaded deposits. Typical values of K 0 
for different geologic conditions are given in Chapter 11. 
· 
...• Example 6.13 
Given: 
y, 
.-
' 
' 
'The stress.conditions of Example 6.8.AssumeK0 for this soil deposit is 0.6 .. 
; 
' 
. 
;,,': 
'• 
;, 
I, 
. 
·, 
Required: 
', 
~ . . 
. ,·: 
Calculate both the horizontal total and effective stresses at depths of 4 m and 8 m in the deposit. 
Also, determine the value of K at these depths. 
Solution: From Fig. Ex. 6.9, at 4 m, u~ is 43 kPa. From Eq. (6.19), uJ. = 0.6 X 43 kPa = 26 kPa. At 8 m; 
uJ. = 0.6 X 82 = 49 kpa. For the total horizontal stresses, we cannot use Eq. (6.18) directly, because 
we do not know K. So we use Eq. (6.8) to get uh, or uh = uJ. +. u. At 4 m, uh = 26 + 20 = 46 kPa. 
At 8 m, uh = 49 +59= Hl8 kPa .. Using Eq. (6.18), we can determine the value of.the total stress 
coefficient K. 
At4m, 
lTh 
46 . 
K = -
= -
=: 0.73 
. 
lTv 
63 · . 
At8m, · 
' 
lTh 
108 
. ,K = lTv= 141 = 0~77 
Note that K is not necessarily equal to K 0 • To get K, we have to go through Ko and add the pore 
water pressure to the effective stress for the depth in question. 
PROBLEMS· 
6.1 The end of a clean glass tube is hiserted in pure watei. what is the height of capillary rise if the tube is 
·'(a) 0.15 mm, (b) 0.015 mm;lind (c) 0.0015 mm in diameter?. 
6.2 . Calculate the maximum capillary pressure for the tubes in Problem 6:1: ·. . 
.·... • ·:' 
6.3 Calc~late the theoreticili height of capilla~y 'rise mid the. capiihiiy te~sion of the three soiis whose grain size 
distribution is shown in Fig. 2.6. 
· 
· · 
· 
· 
· 
' 
' 
' 
I 
', l; 
6.4 A tube, similar to that shown in Fig. 6.12, has a 0.0025-mm inside diameter and is open at both ends. The tube 
is held vertically imd water is added to the top end. What is the maximum height h of the column of water 
that will be supported? (Hint: A meniscus will form at the top and at the bottom of the column of water, as 
shown in Fig. P6.4.) (After Casagrande, 1938.) •: 
. . 
"' · 
' 
· 
268 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
FIGURE P6.4 
{After 
Casagrande, ·1938.} 
Water 
1 
~Meniscus 
~Meniscus 
'I; 
' ' 
~ 
6.5 The tube shown in Fig. 6.6 is filled with water. When evaporation takes place, the meniscus will first form at 
the larger end, as explained in the text. Assuming this meniscus to be fully formed, derive an expression for 
the contact angle at the other end of the tube in terms of the two radii, r1 and r5 • 
6.6 Figure P6.6 shows an angled, glass capillary tube with diameter 110 11m. Other dimensions are shown. 
(a) Whe~e will the, t~p of the ca.pillary rise be?. 
. 
. . . 
(b) .What is the water pressure in the horizontal section of the tube, in kPa? . 
(c) What air pressure should be applied to thetop opening in the tube to cause the water level to be at 10 em 
above the free water surface? 
Glass tube with 
) ' 
diameter=. 110 11m~ 
20cm 
15 em 
FIGURE P6.6 
6.7 A glass tube with inside diameter 150 11m is placed in a water bath. 
(a) How high will the water rise inside the tube? Give your answer in em. 
(b) What will the water pressure be halfway between the free water surface and the water level in the tube 
(i.e., at hc/2)? Give your answer in kN/m2• 
(c) If the tube is intended to model soil void size, what would the effective grain size of the soil be? 
(d) What air pressure (+or-) would have to be applied to the tube to get the water in the tube to rise 
25 em above the free water surface? Give your answer in kN/m2• 
. 
. 
6.8 Figure P6~8 shows a tube ~ith'two sections,ea~hwith a different diameter,dt and d2. The tube is placed in 
·the water bath as shown. 
' 
· 
· · 
· 
· 
· . .· 
· 
(a) How high above the phreatic surfa~e will the ~ater rise in the tube due to capillarity? What is the pore 
pressure at the surface of the capillary rise? 
· 
.. 
· 
" 
· 
(b) If the capillary rise you found in part (a) occurred in a soil, what would you estimate as the soil's Dto? 
· 6.9 Figure P6.9 shows a long, thin tube which was filled with a clay and placed in a water bath. The Dto for the 
clay is shown. 
(a) How high, h0 will the water rise in the tube? 
(b) What is the capllary pressure at he, in kN/m2? 
( 
Different horizontal and ' 
vertical scales :' 
FIGURE P6.8 
~ l I ' 
i' 
·, 
FIGURE P6.9 
Problems 
269 
Tube filled with 
clay, 0 10 = 230 11m 
6.10 (a) Would the shrinkage limit of a clay be different if the water in the voids were replaced by some other 
liquid with a smaller surface tension? Why? 
(b) Would there be more or less shrinkage? Why? 
6.11 Assume that equations developed for height of capillary ristin consta~t-diameter tubes can be applied. 
Calculate the net compressive stress on a soil pat at the shrinkage limit where the average diameter of the 
surface pores is 0.0012 mm. 
· 
6.U Estimate the shrinkage limits of the soils A-Fin Problem 2.58. 
6.13 During a shrinkage limit test on a silty clay, the volume of the dry soil pat ~as found to be 11.02 cm3 and its 
dry mass was 22.78 g. If the shrinkage limit was 10.9, what is the density of the soil solids? 
6.14 Estimate the volume change of an organic silty clay with LL ·= 65 and PL.= 38, when its water content 
reduced from 48% to 18%. 
· 
· 
6.15 Comment on the validity of Casagrande's procedure (Fig. 6.14) for estim~tl~g the shrinkage limit for undis-
turbed soils. Does it matter whether the soils are sensitive or not? Why? 
6.16 A saturated sample of clay with an SL of 20 has a natural water content of 32%:What would its dry volume 
be as a percentage of its original volume if Psis 2.67? 
· 
. 
6.17 A sample of clayey silt is mixed at about its LL of 43. It is placed carefully in a small porcelain dish with a 
volume of 18.9 cm3 and weighs 33.89 g. After oven drying, the soil pat displaces 212.4 g of mercury. 
(a) Determine the SL of the soil sample. (b) Estimate the Ps of the soil. 
6.18 The LL of a bentonitic clay is 442 and the PL is 69. The SL was determined to be about 9. Calculate the 
expected volumetric decrease when a sample of this bentonite is dried, if its natural water content was 91%: 
6.19 The shrinkage limit of a 0.12 m3 sample of a clay is 13 and its natural water content is 29%.Assume the den-
sity of the soil solids is 2.70 Mg/m3, and estimate the volume of the sample when thewater content is 11.8%. 
6.20 During the determination of the shrinkage limit of a sandy clay, the following laboratory data was obtained: 
Wet wt. of soil + dish = 91.04 g 
Diy wt.of soil + dish = 78.22 g 
. Wt.of dish = 51.55 g 
Volumetric determination of soil pat: 
Wt. of dish + mercury = 430.80 g 
Wt. of dish = 244.62 g 
Calculate the shrinkage limit of the soil, assu~ing Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3• 
•: 
I 
' 
270 
Chapter 6 
Hydrostatic Water in Soils and Rocks 
6.21 The LL of a medium sensitive Swedish postglacial clay is 61 and the PI is 32. At its natural water content, the 
void ratio is 0.99, while after shrinkage the minimum void ratio is 0.69. Assuming the density of the soil solids 
is 2.69, calculate the shrinkage limit of the clay. 
, 
· 
6.22 Derive Eqs. (6.9) and (6.10) for the shrinkage limit, ~sing ph~se refationspips. Show that they are identical. 
6.23 Estimate the swelling potential of soils A-F, Problems 2.56 and 2.58. Use both Table 6.2 and Fig. 6.21. 
6.24 Estimate the frost susceptibility of soils A-F, Problems 2.56 and 2.58, according to Beskow (Fig. 6.29) and 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers frost design classification system (Table 6.5). , 
· 6.25 Obtain two lemon-sized chunks of soil from the field. Put one in the lab oven to dry out. Place it and the field 
water-content sample in small jars and cover them both with water. Observe the behavior and record your 
observations. 
' 
6.26 What is the estimated 'frost penetration for your home town? 
6.27 A soil has the following profile with depth: 
0-10 ft 
10-25 ft 
25-50 ft 
'Yt = 110 pcf 
'Yt = 95 pcf 
'Yt = 113 pcf 
The water table is at a depth of 10 ft. Plot the total stress, effective stresses, and pore pressure versus depth. 
Show all of your calculations. Assume that there is no capillarity .. · 
6.28 Figure P6.28 shows the soil profile at the site of an existing warehouse (i.e., covers a large area) that causes a 
surface loading of 2000 psf. Draw the u v• u~ and u profiles with depth. Show values at 0, 12, 25,38 and 48ft. 
depth. 
Depth (ft) 
0 , .. L.J .. I 
.. } ... .J .. , 
12. I·;S'J'?'>f·,.;•,·;---M··n 
25 
38 
~/(<<<;<<(//(((, 
~
1
~~~r~~~11 
48 
FIGURE P6.28 
'j; 
; I 
Problems 
271 
6.29. (a) For the conditions shown, compute the u v·, u, and u~ values at the ground surface, water table, and at all 
soil layer interfaces. Refer to the soil profile shown in Fig. P6.29. 
. 
(b) During the spring, the water rises to 4ft above the ground surface. Determine the uv, u, and u~ values at 
depth 25 ft for this condition. You do not need to compute values at other depths. 
Depth (ft) 
0 
FIGURE P6.29 
Sand 
y 1= 118pcf 
Sand 
'Yd=110pcf 
'Yt=116pcf 
Clay· 
y1=119pcf 
6.30 For the soil profile of Example 6.8 plot the total, neutral, and effective stresses with depth if the groundwater 
table is lowered 4 m below the ground surface. 
6.31 Soil borings made at a site near Chicago indicate that the top 6 m is a loose sand and miscellaneous fill, with 
·the groundwater table at 3 m below the ground surface. Below this is a fairly soft blue-gray silty clay with an 
average water content of 30%. The boring was terminated at 16 m below the ground surface when a fairly 
stiff silty clay was encountered. Make reasonable assumptions as to soil properties and calculate the total, 
neutral, and effective stresses at 3, 7, 12, and 16m below the ground surface. 
6.32 Plot the solt profit~ of Proble~ 6.3·1 and th~total, neutral, arid effective stresses with depth. 
6.33 A soil profile consists of 5 m of compacted sandy clay followed by 5 m of medium dense sand. Below the 
. sand is a layer of compressible silty clay 20m thick. The initial groundwater table is located at th~ bottom of 
·.the first layer (at 5 m below the ground surface). The densities are 2.05 Mg/m3 (p), 1.94 Mg/m3 (p,.1), and 
1.22 Mg/m3 (p') for the three layers, respectively. Compute the effective stress at a point at middepth in the 
compressible clay layer. Then, assuming that the medium dense sand remains saturated, compute the effec-
tive stress in the clay layer at midpoint again, when the groundwater table drops 5 m to the top of the silty 
clay layer. Comment on the difference in effective stress. 
· 
6.34 Specify the conditions under which it is p<;>ssibl~ for K 0 to equal K. 
6.35. For the soil profile of Problem 6.31, calculate the horizontal, total, and effective stresses at depths of 3, 7, 12, 
and 16m, assuming (a) K 0 is 0.45 imd (b) K~ is 1.6. 
6.36 The value of K 0 for the compressible silty clay layer of Problem 6.33 is 0.68. What are the total and effective 
horizon.tal stresses atmiddepth of the layer? 
· 
>;.' 
''; 
C H A p. T E R 
7 
Fluid ~Fiow.in Soils and. Rock 
I,' '. 
7.1 
INTRODUCTION 
.. 
272 
The importance in civil engineering of water in soils is mention~d atthe beginning of Chapter 6. Most 
geotechnical engineering problems somehow have water associated with them, due to either water flow-
ing through the voids and pores in the soil mass or to the state of stress or pressure in the water in the 
pores. In Chapter 6 we described the effects of static water on soil and rock properties (hence the name 
hydrostatic), and in this chapter we describe the effects of water flow through soils and rock on their 
properties and engineering behavior. Note that we don't use the corresponding term hydrodynamic, 
since in most situations involving geomaterials, water moves relatively slowly. 
The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol. 
A 
h' 
. hp_·. 
ic 
iE 
J 
k 
·. kequivalent 
K; 
L 
I 
Na 
Nt 
p 
q, 
.Dimension 
Unit;:· 
Lz 
L 
mz. 
m 
i .
.. Art!a ..... ·. 
. . 
. . 
. . . 
. 
· · Energy or head, head loss (also wtth subscripts f, L, m ), 
L. 
ML-2T-2 
LT-1 
Lr1 
L2 
L 
L 
ML-1T-2 
L3T-1 
m 
. -;--,! 
kN/m3 
m/s. 
niis 
m2 
m 
-m 
. kPa. 
. m3/s. 
layer thickness ' . 
' : 
· · .. · .·. . . · · 
· 
. Pressure' head~ Eq. (7A) .. . 
· 
. 
· . Hydraulic gradient- Eq. (7.1) . . 
. 
. , Criticalhydraulicgradient- Eq. (7.15) 
. . Exit gradient . . . 
· . : 
· . 
. 
. Seepage forceper unit volume- Eq; (7.17) 
Darcy coefficient of permeability, Eqs. (7.2), (7.5) 
Equiv~h~nt Darcy coefficient of permeabiiity 
founultipl~ soil layers~ Eqs. (7.22), (7.23) 
. Intrinsic permeability 7 Eq. (7.6) 
·Length of sample 
. , Unit or characteristic length: . , .. . . 
. · · .. 
Number of equipotential "drops',' in a flow net- Eq. (7.21) 
Number of flow channels ina flow net -.E_q. (7.21) 
. Pressure- Eq. (7A) 
. . .. . 
. \ 
Flow rate (sometimes per unit width)~ Eqs. (7.3), (7.5) 
(Continued) 
· 7.2 
Funda~eritals of Fluid Flow 
273 
Symbol 
Dimension 
Unit 
Q. 
L3 
m3 
r 
L 
m 
T 
L 
m 
u 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
v 
LT-1 
m/s 
v. 
LT-1 
m/s 
z 
L 
m 
J.L 
ML-1T-1 
Pa-s 
v 
L~-1 
m/s 
7.2 
FUNDAMENTALS OF FLUID FLOW 
-'Definition 
Volume of flow- Eq. (7.8) 
Radial distance from well centerline- Eq. (7.24) 
Thickness of layer 
Pore water pressure' 
Velocity- Eq. (7.2) 
Seepage velocity- Eq. (7.8) 
i 
l 
· Potential head; depth 
, . · 
Absolute or dynamic viscosity- Eq. (7,6)'' 
Kinematic viscosity, J.Lip- Eq. (7.6) :. 
Fluid flow, as you may recall from your basic fluid mechanics courses, can_be described or classified in 
several different ways. Flow can be steady or unsteady, corresponding to conditions that are constant or 
vary with time. Flow can also be classified as one-, two-, or three-dimensional. In one~dimensional flow, 
all the fluid parameters-pressure, velocity, temperature, etc.-are constant in any cross section perpen-
dicular to the direction of flow .. Of course, these parameters can vary from section to section along the 
direction of flow, as in the vertical percolation of rain water down through a soil. In' two:dimensional 
flow (for example, flow UJlder a dam), the fluid parameters are the sameinparallel planes; so that a 
"slice" through any part of the soil profile gives the same flow pattern. In three-dimensional flow, the 
fluid parameters vary in the three coordinate directions. For example, when a contaminant plume 
spreads out from a concentrate~ source, such as a leaking underground storage tank, there is typically 
both areal and vertical expansion of the plume. However, for purposes of analysis, most flow problems 
in geotechnical engineering are usually assumed to be either one- or two7dimensional,:which is usually 
adequate for practical cases. 
. · 
· 
· 
Because density changes can be neglected at ordinary stress levels for most geotechnical engi-
neering applications, flow of water in soils can be considered incompressible. 
· · 
Flow can also be described as laminar, where the fluid flows in parallel layers without mixing, or 
turbulent, where random velocity fluctuations result in mixing of the fluid and internal energy dissipation. 
There can also be intermediate or transition states between laminar and turbulent flow. These states are 
illustrated in Fig. 7.1, which shows how the hydraulic gradient changes with increasing velocity of flow. 
Hydraulic gradient i, a very important concept, is' defined as the energy or head lossh' per unit length l, or 
··,··, 
h ' 
i'=-: 
l 
(7.1) 
The energy or head loss increases linearly with increasing velocity as long as the flow is laminar. 
Once the transition zone is passed, because of internal eddy currents and mixing, energy is lost at a 
much greater rate (zone III, Fig; 7.1) and the relationship is nonlinear. Once in the turbulent zone, if 
the velocity is decreased, the flow remains turbulent well into transition zone II until the flow again 
becomes laminar. 
· 
Flow in most soils is so slow that it can be considered laminar. Thus, from Fig. 7.1, we could write 
that v is proportional to i, or 
' .· 
· 
· 
v = ki 
(7.2) 
Equation (7.2) is an expression for Darcy's law,which is discussed later in this chapter. 
274 
Chapter.7 .• ; Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
'E 
Q) 
'5 
~ 
Ol 
. 2 s 
~ 
"'0 
>-
I 
I. Laminar 
·, . 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I· 
I 
I 
-:I. 
•I 
I 
I 
I· 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II. Transition 
VeloCity, v 
.. FIGURE 7.1 ·'zones _of laminar and turbulent flow (after Taylor, 194S) .. · ... 
t, < 
Another important concept from fluid mechanics is the law. of conservation of mass. For in com-
. pressible steady flow, this law reduces to the equation of continuity, or, when one considers the flow rate 
at any two points or sections in the flow path, 
' .. 
q = ViAl = v2Az ~· constant 
. 
' 
., .. ,, 
' 
' 
.where q =:',rateof di~charge (~nits:volum~itime, m3/s), 
vi, v2 · = velocities at 'sections {and 2, and . 
A;~A2 =.the cr~ss-sectiori~lareas'~t ~ections 1 a~d2. 
'·.! 
l 
,, -
,, 
.,·' •• 
' 
' 
' 
• 
(7.3) 
,; . 
The other well-known equation from fluid mechaniCs that we shall use is the one-dimensional 
energy equation (sometimes incorrectly 'called the Bernoulli equation) for incompressible steady flow 
of a fluid: 
· 
' 
2 
. 
' 
' 
'2' . •, 
. 
. 
· Vt 
Pt · 
· ' 
v2 · 
P2 
-~ +--:-: +.gz1 = 2.+- +gz2 =constant energy 
Pw 
· 
Pw 
.... :;:: 
where v1, v2 ,;, velocities at sections 1 and 2, 
'g '= acceleration of gravity,. 
Pw = density of the fluid (water), 
p1, p2 = pressures at sections 1 and 2, and 
. 
' 
z1; z2 = distance above some arbitrary datum plane at seCtions 1 and 2; 
(7.4a) 
7.3 
Darcy's Law for-Flow through Porous Media 
275 
This equation is the steady-flow energy equation in terms of energy per unit of mass of fluid 
(units: J/kg). In hydraulics, however, it is more commori to express Eq. (7.4a) in terms of energy per 
unit weight by dividing each term in the equation by g, the ac~eleration of gravity, or 
2 
2 
' 
' 
V1 
· P1 
V2 
P2 
· 
2 +--. + Zt = 2 + --· + Z2 = constant total head 
g 
Pwg 
g 
Pwg 
i 
(7.4b) 
Equation (7.4b) states that the total energy or head in the system is the sum of the velocity head, 
v2/2g, the pressure head plpwg ( = Plyw), and the potential (position) head z. Whether the flow is in 
pipes, open channels, or through porous media, energy or head losses occur. Usually a loss term ht is 
added to the second part of Eq. (7.4b); thus 
' 
: 
. 
2 
2 
' 
V1 
P1 
·· 
• V2 
P2 
-
+ -
+ ·Zl = -
+ -
+ Z2 + ht 
2g 
Pwg · 
2g 
Pwg : 
(7.4c) 
Why do we say head for each term in the one-dimensional energy equation? Because' each term 
has units of length, and each is called the velocity head, pressure' head, or potential head, as the case 
may be. For most soil flow problems, the velocity head is comparatively small and is usually neglected. 
,, 
7.3 
DARCY'S LAW FOR FLOW THROUGH POROUS MEDIA 
We have already mentioned that in most cas~s the flow of wat~~ through the pores or voids in a soil mass 
cait be. considered laminar. We also stated that for laminar flow the velocity is proportional to the 
hydraulic gradient, or v .= ki [Eq. (7.2)]. A French waterworks engineer named Darcy1 (1856) showed 
experimtmtally that the rate of flow in clean sands w~s proportional to the hydraulic gradient [Eq. (7.2)]. 
Equation (7.2) is usually combined with, the continuity equatiori [Eq. (7.3)] and the definition of 
: hydraulic gradient [Eq. (7.1)J: Using the notation as defined in Fig. 7.2, Darc'y's law is usually written as 
I 
. 
fL \. I 
. 
· 
. 
' 
)._ 
· 
. 
' 
t1h .. 
.. 
·. '·. L 
, 
_. 
. 
~. _,. <-
. 
.. 
q = vA =. kiA = k-L A 
.. 
(J': --=. ~ 
(7.5) 
, 
. 
A 
~~ 
. 
where q is th~ total rate of flow through the cross-sectional area A, and th~)m'rtionality constant k 
i is called the Darcy coefficient of permeability. Commonly, in civil engineering, it is called simply the 
coefficient of permeability or, even more simply, the permeability . . : · · 
In the fields of geology, geohydrology, and hydrogeology our (geotechnical engineering) permea-
bility is referred to as the hydraulic conductivity. The term "permeability" in these other fields refers to 
the intrinsic permeability, K;, which has units of length squared (m2) and is given by 
, kf.L 
. kf.L 
kv 
K;= pg =-:y=g 
where g = gravitational constant, 9.8 m/s2, 
k = permeability or hydraulic conductivity, ~s, 
y = unit weight per volume, N!m\ 
f.L = absolute or dynamic viscosity, Pa-s, 
v = kinematic viscosity, f.Lip, m2/s, 
p ~ density, kg/m3., 
· · 
' ' 
(7.6) 
' 
) 
' 
•1 
· 1Henry Darcy (1803-1858) was responsible for the water supply for the city of Dijon in southern France in the 1830s 
and 40s. Today, Dijon is better known for Grey Poupon mustard. See Philip (1995) for an inte~esting history of 
Darcy and his many important contributions. 
· 
276 
Chapter 7 :. 
Fluid.Fiowin Soils and Rock.: 
' 
'' 
"Jj 
;,.'\ 
;,i· 
FIGURE 7.2 
Superficial and . 
• 'seepage velocities in uniform 
flow (after Taylor/ 1948); 
,',: 
,,,. I 
' fl.h 
·1 
:.:.· 
.. 
·' 
v. = v il~~~~!~~:jf~~~~J~~. v, = v 
I· ... , 
. , ,. 
, . ,: :; .,·· 
, i· 
L 
j· 
In recent years, as geotechnical engineers have become involved in the cleanup of contaminated 
soils and groundwater, design·of waste. containment facilities, and other geoenvironmental problems, 
the term hydraulic conductivity has become almost synonymous with permeability in geotechnical 
practice. Using hydraulic conductivity instead of permeability also avoids misunderstanding by people 
. ; . . . . who are not civil engineers.' 
. 
. . 
.· • 
. ' 
; . 
. 
. The coefficientof permeability, k; of soil and rock is a function of the soil properties. (density and 
. void ratio) and of the density and viscosity of the pore fluid (water, oil; a 'chemical c'oritaminant ), which 
:are temperature dependent Other factors that influence kart!' discussed below. · 
'· 
·:• ' 
. 
Why do we use the total cross~se.ctional area in Eq:(7.5)? Obviously, the w~tei:caimot flow 
·through the solid particles but only through the voids' or pores between the grains. So why don't we 
use that area and compute the velocity based on the area of the voids? It would be relatively easy to 
compute the area of the voids from the void ratio e (Eq. (2.1)], even thmigh e is a volumetric ratio. 
For a unit width of sample in Fig. 7.2, we can write e = 
:Vv!Vi =::AJA~.Nowthe approach velocityva 
., and the discharge velocity vd in Fig. 7.2 both equal v = q!A, the discharge q divided by• the total 
cross-sectional area A. Thus the v in this relationship is really a superficial or macroscale velocity, a 
fictitious but statistically convenient "engineering" velocity. The actual seepage veloCity v., which is 
: the actual velocity of the water flowing in the voids, is greater than the· superficial velocity. We can 
show this by applying our continuity-of-flow principle in a diffen~nt way: . 
q 
v=-
A 
q = VaA = vdA =.·vA =~.A~ 
(7.7) 
From Fig. 7.3 and Eq. (2.2), Av!A = Vv!V = n;then 
Av 
,c••"! 
•• \ 
•;;r 
v ~ nv. 
(7.8) 
Since 0% ::;;' n s 100%, it follows that the seepage veloc-
.• ity ·is .always· greater than· the. superficial or discharge 
vccccccccccco .•. vdocfty. · .. ·· ... · · ,, .· .·. · .... · .<· 
FIGURE 7.3 
Phase diagram for seepage 
and superficial velocitiesof flow (flow is. · 
.. 
From the preceding discussion you can see that 
the void ratio or porosity of a soil'affects the way wat~r 
' flows through it and thus the value of the permeability 
· .. of a particular soil. From theoretical relationships for 
flow through capillary tubes developed by'Hagen and 
perpendicular to page): 
· 
v 
7.4 Measurement of Permeability or Hydraulic Conductivity 
277 
FIGURE 7.4 Deviation from 
Darcy's law observed in Swedish 
clays (after Hansbo, 1960). 
Poiseuille about 1840 and from the more recent hydraulic radius models of Kozeny and Carman, we 
know that several other factors also affect permeability. (Leonards, 1962, Chapter 2, provides an 
excellent summary of these developments.) The effective grain size (or, better, the effective pore size) 
has an important influence here, much as it does on the height of capillary rise (Sec.6.2). The shapes 
of the voids and flow paths through the soil pores, called tortuosity, also affect k. All of the previous 
discussion of permeability was for saturated soils only, so the. degree of saturation S must influence 
the actual permeability. Finally, as noted previously, flow is affected also by the properties of the fluid, 
such as viscosity (which depends on the temperature) and fluid density. 
Darcy originally developed. his relationship for clean sands; how valid is it for other soils? 
Careful experiments have shown that Eq. (7:5) is valid for a wide range of soil types at reasonable, 
engineering hydraulic gradients. In very clean gravels and open-graded rock fills under. relatively 
high gradients, flow may be tur:bulent and Darcy's law would be invalid, At the other end of the spec-
trum, careful investigations by Hansbo (1960) found that in clays at very low hydraulic gradients the 
relationship between v and i is nonlinear (Fig. 7.4). Field measurements (Holtz and Broms, 1972) 
showed that the exponent n has an average value of about L5 in typical Swedish clays. By no means, 
however, is there complete agreement with the concept shown in Fig. 7.4. Mitchell and Saga (2005) 
summarize several investigations about this point, and they conClude. that "Darcy's law is valid, 
provided that all system variables are held constant." 
7.4 
MEASUREMENT OF PERMEABILITY OR HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY 
How is the coefficient of permeability or the hydraulic conductivity of a soil or rock determined? 
A device called a permeameter is used in the laboratory, and either a constant-head test or a falling-head 
iest is conducted [flis. 7.5(a) and (b)]. In the field, pumping tests or infiltration tests ar~ used to measure 
permeability. Infiltration tests can be either constant head or falling head, while the' other types are a bit 
more complicated. 
_ 
· 
· 
In the basic, one-dimensional, constant-head test, the volume of water Q. collected in time t 
[Fig. 7.5(a)] is 
' 
Q = Avt 
· 278 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock . 
TH _L all• t, 
h 
••. 
dh 
ll·tt·· 
. 
h2 
~ 
t 
/;!" b.;f.:::-:-r;:l· 
L 
Q 
I 
~':".\":·.i;:··,:)=l 
II a 
A 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 7.5 . Determining the coefficient of permeability bythe laboratory: ··. · 
(a) constant-h~ad test; (b) falling-head test. 
· 
· 
.. From Eq. (7.5), 
so 
k . 
kh. 
v = 
l = 
-· 
.L 
. 
··QL. 
k=-
hAt··. 
·where Q .=total dis~harge volu~e; m3, in tiine t, s, ~nd ·· 
A ~ cross-sectio~al area of soil sample, in2• 
Example 7.1 
Given: 
:"' 
(7.9) 
A cylindrical soil sample, 7.3 em in diameter and 16.8 em long;is tested in a constant-head 
. permeability apparatus. A constant head of75 em is 'inaintained during the test. After 1 min of test-
ing, a total of 945.7 g of water was collected. The temperature was 20°C. The void ratio of the soil 
waii0.43~ · 
· · 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
· 
'Required: 
Compute the coefficient of permeability in centimetres per second and in furlongs per fortnight. 
' 
' 
., 
) 
7.4 Measurement of Permeability or Hydraulic Conductivity 
279 
Solution: First, calculate the cross-sectional area of the sample: 
7TDz 
7T 
A = - 4- = 4(7.3 cm)2 = 41.9 cm2 
From Eq. (7.9), solve fork: 
. 
QL 
k=-
hAt 
945.7 cm3 X 16.8 em 
75 em X 41.9 cm2 X 1 min X 60s/min 
= 0.08 cm/s 
. To convert to furlongs per fortnight (seeAppendix A): 
k = (o.08cm)(6o~)(6omin)(24E.)(14 
d. 
) 
s 
mm 
·' . h 
d 
fortmght 
( 1 in. )( l ft)(· mi )(8 furlongs)· 
X 
2.54 em 
12 in. . 5280 ft 
mi 
furlongs 
= 4.8f 
. h 
ortmg t 
For the falling-head test [Fig. 7.5(b )] the velocity of fall in the standpipe is 
dh 
v=--
dt 
and the flow into the sample is 
From Darcy's law [Eq. (7.5)], the flow out is . 
,qout. = kiA = k£A 
By Eq. (7.3) (continuity), qin = q0u1, or 
;_adh = k!!__A 
,; 
dt. 
L 
· 
Separating variables and integrating over the limits, 
,1. h'dh 
. Aft' 
a 
-
= k-
dt 
h, h 
. L t, 
·we obtain 
'< ,, 
where M = t2 -
t1• In terms of log10 , 
(7.10a) 
280 
ChapteO. 
.Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock . 
where a = area of standpipe, 
. . . · .,. : aL· · ... h1: 
k. = 2.3 A !::..t log1o hz 
A, L = soil sample area and length, 
!::..t = time for standpipe head to decrease from h1.,to h2 , 
Example 7.2 
Given: 
(7.10b) 
,1 ,, 
A laboratory falling-head permeability test is performed on a light-gr~ygr'avelly sand (SW), and 
the following data is obtained: . , 
, .· 
.. · 
· 
Required: 
a ·,;,16.25 cm2 '· •. ··.,.,: 
: · A = 10.73 cm2 · · 
· ' . L = 16.28 c~2 
'. ; . ', 
h~ = 160.2 em 
h2 = 80.1 em, and 
!::..t = 9os for the head t()fall from h1 to h2 • 
. Water temperature:~ 20°C.: 
Compute the coefficient of permeability in cm/s. 
Solution: Use Eq. (7.10b)and solve. for~ 
k 
'· 2. 3 
6.25 
16.28 1 160.2 
= 
x--x-- og--. 
. 
10.37.• ,. '90 ·' 
'80.1' .• 
. = 0.07 cm/s at 20°C 
'•;:j 
. 
. . 
. 
Note: If the water temperature is different than 20°C, a correction for differences in the value of the 
viscosity is made. 
7.4.1 
Laboratory and Field Hydraulic Conductivity Tests 
Although the two examples given above are for laboratory tests,' the basic equations for constant and 
falling head tests also apply to field tests. This section gives the common laboratory and field k tests 
standardized by ASTM; 
· 
. 
The standard laboratory constant head permeability test is D 2434 (ASTM, 2010).This test uses a 
rigid wall permeameter and consequently is appropriate only for granular soils. For fine-grained. soils, 
ASTM (2010) D 5084 is the appropriate laboratory test, because it uses a flexible wall permeameter that 
eliminates the tendency for flow to occur between the test specimen and the permeameter wall. Also, the 
test specimen can be saturated by the use of backpressure (Chapter 12). Test standard D 5084 has six parts: 
constant head; falling head -constant tail water elevation; falling head -rising tail water elevation; constant 
rate of flow; and two constant volume methods using special mercury tube measurement devices. 
· 
"' 
--.... 
( 
7.4 Measurement of Permeability or Hydraulic Conductivity 
281 
\ 
Because of recent developments in geoenvironmental engineering and groundwater monitoring · 
for. environmental purposes, ASTM has developed .numerous procedures and tests for groundwater 
monitoring and vadose-zone investigations. Guides for comparison of these field methods, including 
pumping and slug tests, are in ASTM (2010) D 4043, D 4044, and 5126. . '· 
In field pumping tests, which are typically conducted in boreholes, water is withdrawn from a cen-
' tral well at a constant rate, and groundwater levels at various distances from the central well are moni-
tored in wells or by piezometers.· In a slug test, a volume of water is ·either removed from or added to a 
groundwater well, and the change in water level with time is monitored (this is also referred to as a "perc" 
test, since it measures the percolation of water into or out of the soil). Pumping tests are a more complex 
version of the one-dimensional, constant-head test, and slug tests are similarly a three-dimensional ver-
sion of the falling-head test. Anothertype of field permeability test is the ring infiltrometer test (D 3385), 
which can be conducted either constant head or falling head on soils at or near the ground surface. 
·' 
. 
7.4.2 
Factors Affecting Laboratory and Field Determination of k 
Several factors influence the reliability of the permeability test in·the laboratory. Air bubbles may be 
trapped in the test specimen, or air may come out of solution from the water. The degree of saturation 
could thus be less than 100%, which would affect the test results significantly. Deaired water and not tap 
water should always be used for laboratory k tests. In constant head tests on granular soils, several pore 
volumes of deaired water should be passed through the specimen until a constant value of k is obtained. 
. . In the flexible wall hydraulic conductivity test, the specimen can be saturated by the use of backpressure 
(discussed in Chapter 12). Migration of fines in testing sands and silts affects the measured values. Espe-
. dally when testing very loose granular specimens, it is difficult to maintain a constant void ratio, but if the 
void ratio changes during the test, the measured values are'obviou'slyincorrect.Temperature variation, 
especially in tests of long duration, may affect the measurements, and if the ground temperature is signif-
icantly less than the laboratory test temperature, a viscosity correction should be made. 
Although the small samples used in the laboratory are assumed to be representative of field 
conditions, it is difficult to duplicate the in situ soil structure, especially of granular deposits and of 
stratified and other nonhomogeneous materials. (Remember what you have read in Chapters 3 
and 4.) To properly account for the natural variability and inhomogeneity of soil deposits and for 
difficulties in laboratory tests, field pumping tests from wells or infiltration tests are commonly used 
to measure the overall average coefficient of permeability. These tests. have their own problems, 
including costs, but the advantage of obtaining an overall average measure of hydraulic conductivity 
at a site makes field tests often worth the time and expense. 
. 
. 
· The coefficient of permeability may also be obtained indirectly by performing a laboratory one-
dimensional compression (consolidation) test (Chapter 8), or by testing a soil sample in the triaxial 
cell, a variation of the ASTM D 5084 flexible wall k test. Triaxial tests are discussed in Chapter 11. 
7.4.3 
Empirical Relationships and Typical Values of k 
Besides the direct determination of permeability or hydraulic conductivity in the laboratory, useful . 
empirical formulas and tabulated values of k exist for various soil and rock types, 
· 
One very popular empirical equation relates the coefficient of permeability to D!0 , the effective 
grain size. This relationship was proposed by A. Hazen (1911) for clean sands (with less than 5% pass-
ing the No. 200 sieve) and with D10 sizes between 0.1 and 3.0 mm, or 
· 
k ~. cnro 
(7.11) 
where the units of k are in cm/s and those of the effective grairi size are in mm. The constant C varies 
from 0.4 to 1.2, so an average value of 1 is commonly assumed; and this constant takes into account the 
conversion of units. The equation is valid for k ~ 10-3 cm/s. 
282 
Chapter 7 ·, Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
As mentioned, the Hazen equation is very popular and often applied to soils well outside its 
specified limitations. Carrier (2003) proposed an alternative that is based on the more fundamental 
Kozeriy-Canrien equation mentioned above. Although Carrier's approach is somewhat more compli-
cated than the simple Hazen equation; it is more accurate because it takes into account the complete 
grain size distribution (not just D10), the particle shape, and the void ratio of the soil. A small but inter-
.. esting point: Carrier (2003) notes that Hazen developed his equation for use at at 10°C and not 20°C as 
commonly assumedi thus we really should multiply C in Eq. (7.11) by 1.3 .. 
'.To estimate k at void ratios other than the test void ratio, Taylor (1948) offers the relationship 
:•.! 
, ..... • 
.... · 
3 
· · . C e3 -
.C2e2: 
; . . 
. ..... 1 1 . ---
. k1:k2<"!: 1 + e1 : 1 + e2 · 
(7.12) 
where the coefficients C1 and C2, which depend on the soil structure, must be determined empirically. 
Very approximateLy for sands, C 1 .~.C2 :This means that if one has determined C for a particular sand 
using Eq. (7.11), it can be assumed to be about the same for a(er similar sand. Another relationship 
. faun? us:ful for sands is . 
. , 
· 
. 
· 
· 
. 
. . : 
• 
• 
• 
k •k -
I 2, 
,· 2 
• 
. 
( 1 ) 
1· 2- C1e1.C2e2 
7. 3 
' 
, 
1 
I 
As before, approximately for sands, c~ ~ c~. 
· 
:. 
For silts mid clays, none of these three relationships, Eqs. (7.11) to' (7.13)'works verywell. For 
kaolinites over a rather narrow range of permeabilities (say one order of magnitude), e versus log10 k 
has been found to be approximately linear, all other factors being equal (Taylor, 1948; Mesri· et al., 
1994). For compacted silts imd silty clays, however, Garcia-Bengochea et al. (1979) found that the rela-
• tionship between void ratioe and the logarithm· of permeability k is far from linear (Fig. 7.6). They 
showed that pore size distribution parameters provide a better relationship-with the ratio for some 
compacted soils. 
. 
' 
.. 
;.;, 
. ;. 
o.1 .--_:_.:._..:_.----~~~'1___:_~-;:-----:-T~----:-~~~ 
!::. 
0 
0 
o· 
0 
0.3 --~--:~~t,:,-~-::::l~;-~-~~~~~-~~i~' 
10 :' 
-10-7 
10-4 
Permeability at 20°C (cm/s) 
FIGURE 7.6 Void ratio e versus permeability k for several compacted soils (after Garcia-Bengochea 
et al.,.1979). 
· 
· 
"' 
-~. 
{ 
I
Drainage property 
Application in earth 
dams and dikes 
Types of soil 
Direct determination 
of coefficient of 
permeability 
Indirect determination 
of coefficient of 
permeability 
7.4 
Measurement of Permeability or Hydraulic Conductivity 
283 
·Coefficient of pemieability (cm/s) (log scale) 
102 
1 0 
' 
{ 
Good drainage 
Poor drainage 
I Practically impervious 
{ 
Pervious1 sections o/ dams and ~ikes . 
Impervious sec:ions of ea~h dams an~ dikes 
/c"J:ahds -
I 
Very fine sands, organic and inorganic 
"Impervious" soils e.g., 
Clean gravel 
homogeneous clays 
(clean sand and gravel mixtures 
silts, mixtures of sand, silt, and clay, 
below zone of 
glacial :ill, stratifie~ clay deposits, etc. 
weathering 
"Impervious" soils which are modified by 
the effect of vegetation and weathering; 
fissurTd, weathered clays; fr~ctured OC ~lays 
' 
Direct testing of soil in its original position (e.g., well points). 
1 
(Note: Considerable experience 
If properly conducted, rj'iable; conjiderable ex erience rec uired1 
also,required in thil range.) I 
Constant Head Permeameter; 
Constant head test in triaxial cell; 
little experience required 
reliable with experience and no leaks 
Falling Head Permeameter; 
I 
I 
Reliable; 
Range of unstable permeability;• 
Fairly reliable; 
little experience 
much experience necessary for 
considerable experience 
required 
correct interpretation 
necessary (do in triaxial cell) 
Computation: 
From the grain size distribution 
(e.g., Hazen's formula). Only 
applicable to clean, cohesionless 
·. 
" 
sands and gravels . 
.. 
Computations: 
Horizontal Capillarity Test: 
from consolidation 
tests; expensive labor-
Very little experience necessary; especially 
atory equipment and 
useful for rapid testing of a large number of 
considerable exper-
samples in the field without laboratory facilities 
I 
ience required 
.. 
. . 
1.0 
Coefficient of permeability (m/s) (log scale) 
'Due to migration of fines, channels, and air in voids. 
FIGURE 7.7 Permeability, drainage, soil type, and methods to determine the coefficient of permeability 
(after A. Casagrande, 1938, with minor additions). 
For example, Fig. 7.7 is useful. The coefficient of permeability is plotted here on a log scale, since 
the range of permeabilities in soils is so large. Note that certain values of k-1.0, w-4, and 10-9 cm/s 
(1 o-2, w-6, and 10-11 m/s)-are emphasized. Thes~ are Casagrande's benchmark values of permeability, 
and they are useful reference values for engineering behavior. For example, 1.0 cm/s (10-2 m/s) is the 
approXimate boundary between laminar and turbulent flow and separates t:lean gravels from clean 
sands and sandy gravels. A k of 10-4 cm/s or 10-6 m/s is the approximate boundary between pervious 
and poorly drained soils under low gradients. Soils around this value are also highly susceptible to · 
migration of fines or piping. Thenext boundary, w-9 cm/s (10-11 m/s ), is approximately the lower limit 
of the permeability of soils and concrete, although some recent measurements have found permeabil-
,•... 
ities as low as 10-13 m/s for highly plastic clays at the shrinkage limit. Professor Casagrande recom-
. mended that k be related to the nearest benchmark value-'--for example, 0.01 x w-4 cm/s rather than 
1 X w-6 cm/s-but that recommendation has not been especially popular. For various soil and rock 
types, Fig. 7;7.also indicates their general drainage properties; applications to earth dams and dikes, and 
the means for direct and indirect determination of the coefficient of permeability. 
·For compacted clays, permeability at constant compactive effort decreases with increasing water 
content and reac_hes a minimum at about the optimum. Figure 7.8 showsthat the ·permeability is about 
an order of magnitude higher when this soil is compacted dry of optimum than when compacted wet of 
284 
Chapter,7 .. · Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
1 o-s ---~--\{--~~-~~7-,---------f-~~~:----l·---~---~o--1--c:c=r=-
~ 
~ 
~ 
· :5 1o-s1 
~ 
-------r~~\-~--__ _jl .· 
&:. 
10-71 . =· ·JI ~~~-. ~\:~! ~--i.t=:-· d1==. :=:61 :fe. I 
12 
.. 122 1-------1--
i 
~ 118 
·u; 
c: 
Q) 
"0 
~ 
0 
11012. 
13 
14 
· .. ,Water content{%) • 
· · :. CompaCtion-permeability tests on Jamaica sandy clay · 
~· 
E 
_0, 
1.9. ~-
.z. 
·u; 
c: 
Q) 
"0 
-~ 
.0 
FIGURE 7.8 . Change ln permeability with molding vJate"r cont~nt (after, Lambe: 19S8b). 
< 
• 
' 
•.~" 
•c' ''•' 
•; 
;•;• 
,-,, 
: ••• ~.;:; 
•, 
')~; 
: 
':~' 
•;) 
.> 
' 
.1: 
''· ·,, .. · optimum. If the compactive effort is increased, the coefficient of perme~bility (hydraulic conductivity) 
. ' 
. decreases, because the.· void: ratio decreases (increasing :dry density or unit· weight). According to 
Lambe (1958b ), the permeability of soils compacted on the dry side of optimum reduces with time due 
~ 
• to permeation, whereas for soils compacted•wet of optimum, the permeability remains more or less 
constant with time. 
, , . 
. 
· 
Table 7.1 gives some additional values. of. the hydraulic conductivity for different rock types. 
Recognize that hydraulic conductivity is one of the most difficult properties to determine, especially for 
rock, and that the,values in Table 7.1 are only a rough approximation and should be used with caution. 
: Very often, the joints and fractures control the in situ hydraulic conductivity ap.d not the intact rock itself. 
"
7.5 
Heads and One-Dimensional Flow 
285 
TABLE 7.1 
'JYpical Values of the Hydraulic Conductivity for Rocks 
Rock 'JYpe 
Hydraulic Conductivity (m/s) 
Basalt 
Dolomite 
Gabbro, weathered 
Granite, weathered 
Limestone 
Sandstone, fine grained 
Sandstone, medium grained 
Schist 
Slate 
Thff 
Modified after Morris and Johnson (1967). 
7.5 
HEADS AND ONE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW 
1.2 X 10-7 
1.2 X 10-8 
2.3 X 10-6 
1.6 X 10-5 
1.1 X 10-5 
· 2.3 X 10-6 
3.6 X 10-5 
2.3 X 10-6 
9.3 X 10-lO 
2.3 X 10-6 
Early in this chapter we mentioned the three types of heads associated with the one-dimensional 
energy equation [Eq. (7.4)]-the velocity head v2/2g, the pressure head hP = plpwg, and the position 
or elevation head z. We discussed why the energy per unit, mass (or weight) was called head and had 
units of length. And we also stated that, for most seepage problems in soils, the velocity head was small 
enough to be neglected. Thus total head h becomes the sum of the pressure head and the elevation 
head, or h = hp+ z. In fluid mechanics, h is referred to as the piezometric head. However, in soil 
mechanics, h P only is called the piezometric head. This is because it is the height of water that would be 
found in an open standpipe or determined by a piezometer, as measured from the elevation at point X 
where the standpipe or piezometer inlet is located. The pore water pressure, ux, at point X divided by 
the unit weight of water (p,ng) equals the piezometric head; 
· 
The elevation head at any point is the vertical distance above or below some reference elevation 
or datum plane. It is most often convenient to establish the datum plane for seepage problems at the 
tail water elevation (the elevation at the lower. of the two phreatic surfaces), but you could just as well 
use the bedrock or some other convenient elevation as the datum. The advantage of using a datum at 
the lower phreatic surface is that ~ater at this location 'will have zero total head (hp = 0 and z = 0). 
Pressure head is simply the water pressure divided by Pwg [Eq. (7.4)]. 
These concepts are illustrated in Fig. 7.9. Here we have an open-ended cylinder of soil similar to 
the permeameter of Fig. 7.5(a). The flow into the cylinder is sufficient to maintain the water elevation 
at A, and the tail water is constant at elevation E. All energy or head is lost in the soil. 
Note that for piezometer cin the figure, the pressure head hp is the distance AC and the eleva-
tion head z is the distance CE. Thus the total head at point C is the sum of these two distances, or AE. · 
Determinations of the piezometric heads at the other points in Fig. 7.9 are made in a similar manner, 
and these are shown in the table below the figure; Be sure you understand how each of the heads, 
including the head loss through the soil, is obtained in Fig. 7.9. Note that it is possible for the elevation 
head (as well as the pressure head) to be negative, depending on the geometry of the problem. The 
important thing is that the total head must equal the sum of the pressure and elevation head at all 
times. 
As mentioned, we assume that all the en~rgy or head lost in the system is lost in flowing through 
the soil sample of Fig. 7.9. Thus at elevation C no head loss has yet occurre'd; at D, the midpoint of the 
sample, half the head is lost (11 AE); and at F, all of the head has been lost (AE). 
286 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
'\/' 
Point 
B 
c,. 
D .. 
FIGURE 7.9 
·d ·c b 
,,; 
Pressure 
Elevation 
Head 
Head 
AB 
BE 
•· ,· AC 
CE >, 
CD· 
DE .. 
-EF' 
For piezometer c: 
D 
E 
F 
Total 
Head 
AE 
I 
AE: 
CE 
;· 0 
Head Loss 
through Soil 
0 
o· 
· 1/2AE' 
AE 
lllustrationoftypes of head (after Taylor, 1948). 
" 
"( 
. 
~e 
followin~ exa~ples illustrate h?wyou dete~~inet~e. va'riou~ types of. heads and h.eadro 
· 
some stmple one-dtmensiOnal flow systems. : ·, · 
· ' ' --
· · · · · · · ' · · . 
·: 
· 
' : 
' 
1 
' ' • 
' 
I 
' 
' ·' 
; 
; • 
' __ : 
: .' ' 
. 
' j 
•. ' . 
. ( 
' r ". • ~' •• :· 
' • • ., 
• ' i 
'~ • ~ 
• : 
' _' : • 
• 
,~ 
• 
· '·Example 73 · 
'l' 
,-) 
Given: 
"• 
. ' 
The test setup of Fig: 7.9 has the dimensions shown in Fig. Ex. 7.3a. · · 
"-.. 
. '·-' 
' 
-
. ·,· 
.,_, 
;-,; 
' d 
c 
b 
·; 
,:; 
~ ; 
' '-
~ -. ~ :" ,. 
; 
FIGURE Ex. 7.3a 
(a) 
Datum 
/ 
~I
' 
7.5 'Heads and One-Dimensional Flow 
287 
Required: 
a. Calculate the magnitude of pressun; head, elevation head, total head, and head loss at 
points B, C, D, and F, in centimetres of water. 
b. Plot the heads versus the elevation. 
Solution: 
a. List dimensions and heads in a table as in Fig. 7.9, as shown below; the heads are in units of 
centimetres of water. 
. · · 
... 
Point 
B 
c 
D 
F 
E 
s. 
c: 
0 
'iii 
•5) 
[iJ 
Example 1.4 
Given: 
F 
-10 
,·, .. -) 
Pressure Hea)l 
Elevation Head 
Total Head 
Head Loss 
5 
35 
40 
0 
20 
20 
40 
0 
12.5 
. 7.5; 
20 
20 
5 
-5 
0 
40 
10 
.· 
20. ', ; .. 
Head(cm of water) .. 
(b) 
FIGURE Ex. 7.3b 
The cylinder of soil and standpipe arrangement shown in Fig. Ex. 7.4. 
Required: 
Determine the pressure head,' elevation head, total h~ad, and head loss at points B, C, and D. 
BC =CD. 
-
288 
Chapter7,' Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
FIGURE Ex. 7.4 (After Taylor, 
1948). 
,-----'------, A 
!llllfl: 
E 
Solution: Set up a table similar to that of Fig. 7.9 ·and Example 7.3. 
Point 
B 
c 
D 
Example 7.5 
Given: 
Pressure Head 
AB 
0 
-DE 
Elevation Head 
BE 
CE 
DE 
Total Head 
AE 
CE 
0 
Head Loss 
0 
~AE 
AE 
The horizontal cylinder of soil as· shown in Fig. 7.2: Assume L = 10 em, A = 10 cm2, and 
!:lh = 5 em. Tailwater elevation is 5 em above the centerline of the cylinder. The soil is a medium sand 
with e = 0.68. 
Required: 
Determine the pressure, elevation, and total head at sufficient points to be able to plot them ver-
sus horizontal distance. 
Solution: Redraw Fig. 7.2 in Fig. Ex. 7 .Sa . with the· key· dimensions. Estimate the other required 
dimensions. Label the key points as shown; Assume the datum is the elevation of the tail water. Set up 
a table as in Fig. 7.9, and fill in the blanks. The units are in centimetres of water. 
Point 
Pressure Head 
Elevation Head 
Total Head 
Head.Loss 
A 
10 
-5 
5 
0 
B 
10 
-5 
5 
0 
c 
7.5 
-5 
2.5 
2.5 
D 
5 
-5 
0 
5 
E 
5· 
,, •. 
-5 
0 
5 
The plot of heads versus horizontal distance is in Fig: 7.5(b) for the center.lin~ of the cylinder. 
' .·. 7.5 
Heads and One-Dimensional Flow 
289 
J 
5cm 
~: 
1 
tih = 5 em 
t 
1-- __ 
oa_tu_m_2c__ 
Area= 10 cm2 
1 ----!---~-t~lllll~---_; ___ · 
-+---. ~ 
+ 5 . ··I· 
.5 
·1;/s-·f 
(a) 
·. 
FIGURE Ex. 7.Sa 
. 12 
: · . . Pr~ssure he~d 
-------1 .. ·· . 
. ·· 
.·' 
. 
.~~---~:..; ___ ___ --.............. ___ _ 
Elevation head 
·-·-·-·-·-\-·-·-·-·-
:..a 
c 
D 
E· 
0 
4 
FIGURE Ex. 7.5b 
Example 7.6 
Given: 
A cylinder similar to Ex. 7.5 except the lineA-E slopes downward at 2H:1V. 
Required: 
Determine the pressure, elevation, and total head at sufficient points to be able to plot them versus 
horizontal distance. 
~ 
· 
· · · · 
Solution: Redraw Fig. 7.2 in Fig: Ex. 7.6a at the appropriate slope. Estimate the other required 
dimensions. Label the key points as shown.Assume the datum runs through pointE. Set up a table as 
in Fig .. 7.9 and fill in the blanks. The units are in centimetres of water. The plot of heads versus 
horizontal distance is in Fig.'Ex. 7.6b for the centerline of the cylinder. 
290 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
T. -
Scm 
151- t 
E l 
i 10 
5 1 
FIGURE Ex. 7.6a 
e 
~ 
20 
15 
B' 
~ 
t 
1.5 em 
2 
··~1 
Total head 
-_. ....... ~~~ 
(·_··, 
.... 
... 
.. 
........... 
~~ 
al 10 
Ql 
I 
~~ 
•----- ..-~\~Pressure 
., 
head 
5 
0 
A 
B 
c 
D 
'• 
.. 
0 
4 
9 
14 
FIGURE Ex. 7.6b 
Datum 
E· 
17. 
I 
· 7 5 
Heads and One7Dimensional Flow 
291 
Point 
Pressure Head(cm) · · Elf.!vati~n H~ad (em)· 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
Example 7.7 
Given: 
10 
12 
12 
12 
13.5 
8.5 
6.5 
4 
,.1.5 
0 
18.5 
18.5 
16 
. 13.5" 
13.5 
Head Loss (em) 
0 
0 
2.5 
5 
5 
Similar setup as Ex. i.s with two exceptions: (1) units are in metres, and (2) the two soils in the 
horizontal cylinder have different permeabilities, and k1 = 10k2 • Assume that L1 = 4 m and L 2 = 6 m. 
Note that the head loss over the full length of soil will not be linear. 
Required: 
Determine the pressure, elevation, and total head at sufficient points to be able to plot them versus 
horizontal distance. 
- · 
· 
· · 
Solution: Redraw Fig. 7.2 as in Fig. Ex: 7.7a. Estimate the' other required dimensions. Label the key points 
as shown. Assume the datum runs through points A-E. Set up a table as in Fig. 7.9 and fill in the blanks. 
The units are in metres of water. The plot of heads versus horizontal distance is in Fig. Ex. 7.7b for the 
centerline of the cylinder. 
T 
Sm + 
Sm 
I 
. _i_ 
10 
-::-
Q) 
<a 
5 
~ 
0 
§. 
"C 
ra 
0 
Q) 
:c 
-·--
A 
A 
B 
c 
Sm 
· Pressure 
head 
D 
E 
FIGURE Ex. 7.7a 
FIGURE Ex. 7.7b 
292 
Chapter 7 • · Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
. We now have the tools to solve this problem. Use Eq. (75), and.recognizethat theflow is in 
series. Thus the quantity of flow in one soil has to be the same as in the second soil. So, 
ql = k1i1A1 = qz = kzizAz 
Since the areas are the same, q1,z = k1i1 = kziz.. with k1 = 10kz and i = 11h!/. 
Substituting, 
· 
. 
11h1 
. 11hz 
. ql,z = 10kz- = kz- .. 
Lt 
Lz 
Also, the total head loss, 11h = 11h1 + 11hz. So, 11h1 = 11h - 11hz, and we obtain 
( 11h - 11hz) 
11hz 
q1;z := lOkz 
L 
.. := kzL 
. 
1 
z 
Rearranging and multiplying out, 
Lz10kz 11h - Lz10kz 11hz = kz l1hzLt 
• Rearranging and canceling out the kz's, 
. l0Lzl1h = 11hz(Lt + lOLz) 
Solving for 11hz, 
. 
10Lil1h 
l1hz = L1 + 10£2 
10 X 6 m X 5 m 
300 mz 
=--
(4m+10X6m) 
64m 
= 4.69m 
:. 11h1 = 11h - 11hz= 5 - 4.69,;,; 0.31 m 
Point 
Pressure Head (m) 
Elevation Head (m) 
Total Head (m) 
A 
10 
:_5 
5 
B 
10 
-5 
5 
c 
9.7 
-5 
4.7 
D 
5 
-5 
0 
E 
5 
-5 
0 
, Head Loss (m) 
0 
0 
0.31 
5 
5 
Because the permeability of soil 2 is so much less than that of soil 1, most of the head is lost in soil 2. 
Example 7.8 
Given: 
Same physical setup as in Ex. 7.7 except the two soils are parallel to each other. Let k1 = 5kz, 
and of course, L1 = £ 2 • Soil1 has area A1. and soil2;Az. Note that the datum in Fig. Ex. 7.8 is at the 
centerline of the cylinder and goes through points A-E. · 
T 
5m 
+ 
5 1 
• 
A 
4m 
FIGURE Ex. 7.8 
··Required: ' · 
. ::: 
(a) 
or 
(b) 
7.5. 
,~.h"= 5 m 
_j__ 
5 
3 
m 
L_£J· 
• 
E 
Heads and One-Dimensional Flow 
Datum 
·: ... 
\ 
\ _·. 
•· 
293 
, 
Determine thepressure, elevation, and total head at sufficient points;to be ableto plot them 
.. versus horizontal distance. Determine the quantity of flow in each soil.. 
· 
Solution: I~ 'this p;oblem, unlike t!ie' previous example, the gr'adieni is th~ same but the quantity of 
flow is different in the two soils because' of the different penneabilities. The physical setup is'shown in 
Fig. Ex. 7.8a, while a cross section (X -X') is given in Fig. Ex .. 7.8b. Regardless of the way we assume 
the layering (side-by-side vertically or horizontally), let's assume that the datum is along the centerline· 
'' . between the two soils. This eliminates the need for two separate solutions. 
From Fig. Ex. 7.8a, estimate the other required dimensions. Label the key points as shown. Set 
up a table as in Fig: 7.9 and fill in the blanks. The units are in metres of water. The plot of heads versus 
294 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
horizontal distance is in Fig. Ex. 7.8c for the centerline of the cylinder. Because the two soils are parallel 
to each other with different permeabilities, the total flow in each soil layer will be the sum of q1 and q2. 
The amount of flow in each soil layer is given by 
· 
q1 = k1iA1 and q2 = k2iA2 
And 
q = ql +·qz 
In this example, the k's and A's are different but the gradient is the same. We cancel the i's and substi-
tute k1 = 5k2 , or 
ql = kliAl 
qz = kziAz 
q = (ql = 5kzA1) + (qz = kzAz) 
q = 5kzA1 + kzAz + kz(5Al + Az) 
Each soil type has the same head loss, but soil 1 has five times the amount of flow as soil 2. So, we can 
just draw in the rest of the head loss between points B and D with a straight line. Because the datum is 
along the "centerline" of the two soils, the total head equals the pressure head. 
. 
' 
Point 
Pressure Head (m) 
Elevation Head (m) 
Total Head (m) 
Head Loss (m) 
A 
10 
0 
10 
0 
B 
10 
0 
10 
0 
c 
7.5 
0 
7.5 
2.5 
D 
5 
0 
5 
5 
E 
5 
0 
5 
I 
5 
If you understand the above examples, you should be able to solve a wide variety of head and 
one-dimensional flow problems, such as horizontal and inclined flow systems, multiple soil layers in 
either series or parallel, or combinations of these. 
7.6 
SEEPAGE FORCES, QUICKSAND, AND LIQUEFACTION 
When water flows through soils (such as in the permeability tests already discussed), it exerts seepage 
forces on the individual soil grains. And, as you might imagine, seepage forces affect the intergranular 
or effective stresses in the soil mass, which under certain conditions can have important practical con-
sequences. If the seepage forces are large enough, the effective stress can go to zero and the soil 
becomes essentially a dense liquid called ·quicksand. Another important consequence is liquefaction 
caused by vibrations from earthquakes and other. dynamic sources. In this section we discuss seepage 
force~ how they are calculated, and the phenomena of quicksand and liquefaction: . 
' 
' 
' 
' 
> 
' 
,, 
! 
> 
' 
7.6.1 · Seepage Forces, Critical Gradient, and Quicksand. 
d 
j 
,.' 
Let us reconsider the 5 m column of soil of Example 6.6. By connecting a riser tube to the bottom of 
the sample, we can flow water into the column of soil, as shown in Fig. 7.10. When the water level in the 
riser tube is at elevation B, we again have the static case and all the standpipes are at elevation B. If the 
: 
... i 
·L 
7.6 
Seepage Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
295 
T 
h 
Elev.Bl 
Riser tube-
L 
5m 
· a b c 
Filter screen 
')· 
FIGURE i.1 0 'SamplE~ ofsoil from 
Example 6.6, but with a riser tube 
connected to the bottom of the 
sample. Standpipes are shown for, 
the case where the water level in 
the riser pipe is at a distance h 
above elevation B. 
water in the riser tub~ is below elevation B, water will flow downward through the soil;. when it is 
... abovedevation B; the reverse i~ true. This is the same ·case as the fal1ing-h~ad permeatrieter test setup 
of Fig. 7.5(b) in whi~hwater flows upward through the soil: whe~ this h~ppens, the \vater loses some 
of its energy through friction. The greater' the head h ·above elevation B in Fig. 7.10, the larger the 
energy or head loss and the larger the seepage forces transmitted to the soil. As the seepage forces 
'' ·increase; they gradually overcome tlie gravitational forces acting on the soil column, and eventually a: 
quick condition (in this case, "quick;'. means "alive" or ~'living") or boiling will occur. Another name 
.. ·· for this phenomenon is· quicksand. To have a sand' mass· in a quick condition: the: effective stresses 
throughout the sample must be zero. 
· 
,; : · 
At what height h above elevation B does the soilbecome quick? First, from Fig. 7.10 we can 
calculate the total, neutral, and eff~ctive stress at elevation A when the water level in the riser tube 
is at elevation R We will neglect any' frictibn losses in the riser tube. Total stress at the bottom of the 
sample· (elevation A) is 
(a) 
I 
The pore pressure at that point is 
(b) 
. . . . 
Therefore the effective stress is [Eqs. (a).:- (b)]: 
'4. .·. 
' 
-
l .·' 
: 
t 
' • 
', •. 
~' ' 
'. 
~ 
-
. • • 
"' 
' 
(c) 
Let thewaterJevel rise a distance h above elevation B (Fig.7.10). Now the pore:water pressure 
at the bottom of the sample is 
· 
' 
· 
296. 
Chapter} 
;Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
-
or the pore pressure difference acting at the bottom of the sample is [Eqs. (d) - (b)]: 
b.u = Pwgh 
The effective stress at the bottom of the soil column (elevation A) is now [Eqs.: (a) - (d)]: 
u' = [p'gL + Pwg(L + hw)] - [pwg(L + hw +h)] 
or 
u' = p'gL.....: Pwgh 
(e) 
(f) 
Thus the effective stress has decreased by exactly the increase in pore water pressure b.u at the base of 
the sample [Eqs. (f) - (c) = (e)]. 
' 
What happens when the effective stress at the bottom of the soil column is zero? (Note that u' 
cannot be less than zero.) Set Eq. (f) equal to zero and solve for Eq. (h), which is the head above eleva-
tion B toca~se a q~ick condition,or 
Rearranging, 
h= Lp' 
Pw 
h 
p' .. 
. 
- = i =--,-- = lc 
L 
Pw 
(7.14) 
By Eq:(7.1), the head h divided b}/the sample length L iquals th~ hydraulic gradient i. The value i 
when a quickcondition'occurs is called the critical hydraulic gradient i~. ·.: 
. 
· 
. 
· 
. In Sec. 2.3.1 we obtained the following relationship for. tlie submerged density p': . 
' . 
" 
' 
~ 
' ' 
. ' 
:ps- Pw 
P~.= 1+ e 
' 
1: 
• 
. (2.19)· 
Combining Eqs. (7.14) and (2.19), we obtain an expression for the critical hydraulic gradientnecessary 
for a quick condition to develop: 
' 
.. :, : 
or 
. p~- p.J/ :· 
ic =.(1 + e)pw 
. 1. (~ -1) 
lc = 1 + e Pw 
1',,' 
(7.15) 
(7.16) 
The approach just used to obtain iq is based on the premise that quick conditions occur when the effec-
tive stress at the bottom of the soil column is zero. 
. 
Another way to obtain the ~ormula for'the critical gradient is to consider the total boundary pore 
water pressure and the total weight of all the material above that boundary. Quick conditions, then 
occur if thes.e forces are just equal. From Fig. 7 .10, the upward force equals the pore water pressure act-
ing on the filter screen at elevation A on the bottom of the soil column, or · · 
Fwater f = (h + hw + L)pwgA 
where A is the cross-sectional area of the sample. 
7.6 Seepage Forces, Quicksarid,'a'r1'd Liquefaction 
297 
' : ~ 
. TABLE 7.2 l)'pical Values of ic for Ps = 2.68 Mg/m3 
App~o~imate Relative Density 
Dense'" 
Medium· 
Loos~· · 
· .. 1.12 
0.96 
0.84 
". 
The total weight of soil and water acting downward at the bottom of the sample ( elevati()n A) is 
Fsoil+water! = PsatgLA + PwghwA 
Equating these two forces, we obtain 
(g) 
Use Eq. (2.17) for Psat and do the algebra to satisfy yourself that Eq. (g) red~ces to Eq. (7:15). There-
fore both approaches, total and effective, will give the same results. 
' 
. 
' 
We can compute typical values of the critical hydraulic gradient, assuming a value of Ps = 
2.68 Mg/m3 and void ratios representative of loose, medium, and dense conditions. The values of ic are 
presented in Table 7.2. Thus, f~r.estimation purposes, ic is often taken to be about unity, which is a 
relativeiy easy number to remember. 
. 
'' 
'. 
. ' 
' 
,: ' 
' ', 
' ' 
: 
• 
' 
,:: 
• • :·' • 
• 
' 
~ 
; ; ! 
Example 7.9 
Given: 
The soil sample and flow conditions of Fig. 7.10 and Example 6.6. 
Required: 
a. Find the head required to cause quick conditions. 
b. · Find the criticalhydrauliC gradient. 
·· 
Solution: 
a. From Eq. (7.14), 
. . p'L. 
Psit- Pw' 
h=-= 
L 
Pw 
Pw 
. = e·o 1~0 1.0 ).sm = 5,-~ m i 
b. The critical hydraulic gradient [Eq. (7.14)] is 
. 
p' 
(2.0 ~ 1.0) 
~·~ : 
., 
l =- = 
= 1.0 
, 
c . 
Pw. 
. '1.0 . ,;, . ·: :, 
· · We could also use Eq.{7.15) if we knew the villue of Ps and e. Assume Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3• 
Using Eq. (2.17),solve fore = 0.65. Therefore,· 
' . (2.65 - 1.0) 
ic = (1 + 0.65)(1.0) = 1;0 
298 
Chapter7, 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
Seepage forces, which may cause quicksand to develop (but not necessarily), are always present 
in soils where there is a gradient causing the flow of water. Seepage forces affect sands more than 
· clays, because sands are cohesionless whereas clay soils have some inherent cohesion which holds the 
particles together. To evaluate theseepage forces, lettuce look again at Fig. 7.10. For quick conditions 
to develop, the. upward force of water due to the head h on the left side of the figure must just equal 
the effective downward force exerted by the submerged soil column on the right side of the figure, or 
up~ardforce =downward force 
PwghA = p'gLA 
Substituting Eq. (2.18) into this equation, we get 
PwghA = Ps- Pw LA 
1 + e: g 
(?:17a) 
(7.17b) 
After algebraic manipulation, this· equation is ideptical to Eq. (7.16). In uniform flow the upward 
force pghA on the left-hand side. of Eq. (7.17a) is distributed (and dissipated) uniformly throughout 
the volume LA of the soil column: Thus 
PwghA 
LA 
= Pwgi = j 
(7.17c) 
The term ipwg is the seepage force per unit volume, c~nimonly represented by the sy~bol j. The value 
of this force at quick conditions equals icPwg, and it acts in the direction of fluid flow in an isotropic 
soil. If the right-hand side of Eq. (7.17a) is divided by LA, the unit volume, then we have 
j = p'g 
(7.17d) 
These expressions, Eqs. (7.17c) and (7.17d), can be shown to be identical when quick conditions occur 
[see Eq. (7.15)]. 
· 
Example 7.10 
Given: 
The soil sample and flow conditions of Fig. 7.10 and Example 6.6. 
Required: 
a. Find the head required to cause a quick condition. 
b. Compute the seepage force per unit volume at quick conditions. 
c. Using seepage forces, show that quick conditions really develop under the head of part a. 
d. Compute the total seepage force at elevation A. 
Solution: 
a. Froni Example 7.9, h above elevation B to cause a quick condition is 5.0 m. 
b. The seepage force per unit volume is computed from Eq. (7.17c). 
) 
. 
. . 
5m . Mg 
m 
kN 
] = lpwg = -5 -
X 1-
3 X 9.81-2 = 9.81-. -3 
· m 
m 
s 
m ·· 
We also could use Eq. (7.17d) if we knew the value of Ps or e. Assume, as in Example 7.9, 
Ps = 2.65 Mg/m3• Then e = 0.65. 
-
·,1' 
7.6 Seepag·e Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
299 
Therefore 
_ , . ~ 2.65 :_, 1.0 
= 9 81 kN 
· 1 
1.65 
g 
· 
m3 
Note that the units check (F/L3 = ML 22r2). 
c. Quick conditions develop when the upward seepage force just equals the downward buoyant 
force of the soil. Or, from Eqs. (7.17c) and (d): 
:l . ~ 
- j ; 
j 
. 
. - 1(vol).L:= p'g(vol)!. • 
vo 
kN 
2 _ 
Mg 
m 
2 
9.81-3 X 5m X 1m -:- (2.0 -1.0)-3 X 9.81-z X 5m X lm 
m 
m 
s 
49.05 kN j = 49.05 kN ! 
d. The total seepage force at elevation A is 
This force is distributed uniformly through the volume of the soil column. ·• 
';' 
The seepage force is a real force, and it is added vectorially to the body or gravitational forces to 
give the. net force acting on the soil-particles. We can 'represent these forces in two differe-nt ways that 
give identical results. In Example 7.10 we treated the probiem considering seepage forces and sub-
merged densities. A quick condition resulted because the effective or buoyant density of the soil vol-
ume (acting downward) just equaled the seepage force (acting upward). This is sometimes referred to 
as the internal solution method fo~ obtaining the solution, since it is based on a seepage force acting 
within the soil. 
· 
· An alternative approach is to consider the total saturated weight of soil and the boundary water 
forces acting on the soil; i~p and bottom, as sho~n in Example 7.1(' This is sometimes called the 
' ~xternal solutio~ method, since it is based on boundary f{)rces acting outside the soil... . 
' 
~-' 
~-
. 
'; ' ' ' _' ~::!;: :. ' ·_. 
. 
Example 7.11 
Given: 
Thesoil ~ample and conditions of Fig. 7.10 and E~amples 6.6 and 7.10. 
Required: 
Show, usirig ·total (saturated) weight of the soil above elevation A and the boundary water forces, 
that quick conditions. develop when the head his 5 m. 
Solution: For a quick condition, 2: F v =. 0. 
Fsoil ! = PsatgLA 
·.•" ·Mg 
'm -
· · .· 
-
. 
= 2.0-3 X 9.81-z X 5m X 1m2 = 98.1 kN 
m 
s 
300 
Chapter 7 • 
Fluid Flow inSoils and Rock· 
(,\ 
,'' 
:;, 
·::,l,, 
I 
Fwatertop! = Pwghw'A 
;, ''' , 
. : Mg 
. 
m. ·, 
2 
. 
=.1-3 X 9.81-z X 5m X 1m = 19.6kN 
m 
s 
Fwaterbottom j = Pwg(L + hw + h)A 
· 
··. Mg . 
rri • . . . 
. . : 
: = l ~ 
X 9.81-z X (5 + 2 + 5) m , 
.. m. . 
s. 
. 
, 
· 
~118kN' 
. 
Therefore ~ 
F down = ~ 
F up for a quick condition (i.e;,,l18 kN = 118 kN). 
;;, 
Example 7.12 
Given: 
The soil and flow conditions of Fig. 7.10, except that the left-hand riser tube is at elevation C, or 
2 m above elevation A. Assume the water level is maintained constant at elevation C. 
Required: 
Coiupute: a. the hydr.aulic gradient, b. ·effective s'tress, and c. seepage force at eie~~ti~n A. 
Solution/In this case ih'e flow of water is downw'~rd through'the soil. Assume the datum plane is at the 
tailwaterelevation,oratelevatioriB ... 
·. 
· ·. •' ·. ·. · ., •. 
· 
. · .. ·.· '·::• ···. 
d; 
' ' 
a; Use Eq. (7.1); since the head loss is -5 m (below elevation B), . . :. : · 
H 
.:..s~ -~· 
i =£ = 5 
',,:'f: 
,·1_•,·,,· 
.;•;··, 
''·' 
' ' " f.. . 
' ' -
' 
• ' 
' 
o ' 
' 
' ' 
' 
. 
~· . 
' -
• 
i ' • ' 
' ~ "\ "l 
' 
; : : ' ' ' . > ¥ 
I 
: 
I • 
' ' ' . 
' 
' • : 
' . • • 
: 
'-
o 
·· ' b;· The effective stress at elevation A may be computed m the two ways JUSt descnbed. 
, 'j,' Using bo~~dary' w~terforce'~ andsat~;~ted densities; we get (units are 'thesame as in 
' .. Example7.11) . 
· '' .. 
. ' · '· ·' 
·.·· 
· ·· 
. 
· 
. " . 
. . 
Fsoill = PsatgLA 
. = 2.0(9.8l)(5)(1) = 98.1 kN! 
Fwatertop! ';'= PwghwA 
, 
. ~ 1(9.81)(2)(1) = 19.6 kN ! 
' 
' 
! 
. ·~ 
' 
. 
' 
. 
Fwaterbottom j ; PwghA 
= 1(9.81)(2)(1) = 19.6 kN j 
·~pv~ = 19.6 +'98.1 :._'19:6 ' ' 
' 
I· 
= .98 kN ! (net or eff~ctive force) 
. 
'F 
.• 
. 
.· 
effective stress = A =, 98 kN/m2 
Thus the filter screen at elevation A must support a force of 98 kN per unit area or a 
stress of 98 kN/m2 in this case. · 
7.6 
Seepage Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
301 
2. The other way to compute the effective stress at elevation A is to use seepage forces, 
buoyant densities, and Eq. (7.17). Note that h = -5 m referenced to elevation B. 
j = Pwgi(vol) = 1(9.81)( ~
5
)(5)(1) 
= 49 kN acting down in the direction of flow 
To this we add the effective or buoyant weight: 
Fctown! = p'gLA = (Psat- Pw)gLA 
= (2.0 - 1)(9.81)(5)(1) = 49.05 kN ! 
Therefore, adding vectorially these two forces, we get the seepage force plus the effective soil 
force acting on area A, or 49 + 49 = 98 kN per unit area, as before. Or the effective stress 
at A = 98 kN/m2.'Note that this second approach also automaticaliy gives the solution to 
part c, the seepage force at A. Note that the seepage force at the top of the soil is zero and 
increases linearly to 49 kN at elevation A. 
· 
7.6.2 
Quicksand Tank 
An apparatus sometimes used in soil mechanics teaching laboratories to demonstrate the phenomenon 
of quicksand is shown in Fig: 7.11. Instead of a standpipe, as in Fig. 7.10, a pump is used to create the 
upward flow in the quicksand t1mk. The water flows through a porous stone to distribute the pressure 
evenly on the bottom of the sand mass. Piezometers at various levels on the tank eriable heads to be 
observed arid measured. As valve 1 is gradually opened, the head applied to the bottom of the sand mass 
increases, eventually becoming sufficient to cause the entire sand mass to boil or liquefy. As in Examples 
7.10 and 7.11, the seepage forces are acting upward and just balance the downward-acting gravitational 
forces. The effective stresses between the sand grains are zero, and the soil has no shear resistance. As 
long as the pump is running, the soil mass can easily be stirred with a rod or metre stick, and it acts like 
a dense liquid [Fig. 7.12(a)]. Notice the elevations of the water in the piezometer tubes A, B, and Care 
at locations 1, 2, and 3 during upward flow. They are considerably higher than the elevation of the free 
water surface. The difference in elevation of the water level between points 1 and 3 is due to the head 
loss when flow occurs between points A and C. 
' 
Next we shut off the pump, close valve 1, and open valve 2. Now the direction of the water flow 
is reversed, and the seepage forces act downward along with gravity and increase the effective 
stresses. A rod or metre stick left buried in the sand has resistance to movement, and the sand mass 
can no longer be stirred easily. Even though the sand is very loose, it can support some static loads at 
the surface, as shown in Fig. 7.12(b). This case is similar to Example 7.12. Therefore, depending on 
their direction, seepage forces can significantly increase the effective stresses and the strength of the 
soil mass. In the case of downward flow, the pore water pressures at piezometer tubes A through C are 
shown by the elevations of the water level at points 4, 5, and 6 in Fig. 7.12(b ). The effective stress at 
point A must be higher now with downward flow. This is shown by the water elevation of point 6, 
which is below the elevation of the water table. 
Some practical examples of quick conditions include excavations in granular materials behind 
cofferdams alongside rivers. To excavate and proceed with construction, the water table at the site is 
lowered by a system of wells and pumps. Water from the river invariably seeps into the excavation and 
must be pumped out to keep. the excavation dry. If upward gradients approach unity, the sand can 
become quick and the cofferdam can fail. Such failures are usually catastrophic, so high safety factors 
must be used in design. Example 7.13 is a simple example to illustrate this situation. 
302 
Chapter 7, . ' :Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock . 
1 !'i 
Piezometers 
1 2 3 4 
L____ 25" • 
.· 
~_j 
·~635mm~ 
_-_ -_-_--'----_-_-~Water-:-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-..:.. 
-
-
559 22'~ 
mm 
~ =~=~=~~: ~=~=~=~=~~ :~[~11 
1= ===::::water tank::::=== 
'-:-_-_-_-:-_--'---_-_-_-_---_-:-_-:-;.;_-jt 
-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_~_-_---: 
_-_ -_ -_ -_-_-:_ -_;.-:-_-__:-_ ~.:....-...:_ 7""";_ -_ -
~ 
19" 
·I 
483 mm 
. 
Flowmeter 
(12 gal/min capacity) 
t • 
t 
FIGURE 7.11 , Diagram of a quicksand tank (courtesy J. 0. Osterberg; Northwestern 
University). 
, 7.6 Seepage Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
303 
' 
I 
' 
( 
-~ 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 7.12 Quicksand tank: (a) under an upward gradient, the sand mass is easily stirred with a 
metre stick; (b) gradient is downward; sand is able to support a static load; (c) after a shock load is 
applied to the side of the tank, the sand mass liquefies and momentarily loses all bearing capacity. 
Notice water level in piezometers (photograph by M. Surendra; hand by R. D. Holtz). 
304 
Chapter 7, ; : Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock. 
Another place where quick conditions often occur is behind levees during floods. The water 
seeps under the levee and, as in the case of the cofferdam, if the gradient is high enough, localized 
quick conditions can occur. This phenomenon is known as a sand boil and must be halted quickly 
(usually by stacking sandbags in a ring around the boil); otherwise the erosion can spread and 
undermine the levee. Quick conditions are also possible almost anywhere that artesian pressures 
exist-that is, where the head is greater than the usual static water pressure. Such pressures occur 
where a pervious undergroundstratum is continuous and connected to a place where the head is 
higher. 
Contrary to popular belief, it is not possible to drown in quicksand, unless you really work at it, 
because the density of quicksand is much greater than that of water. Since you can almost float in 
water, you should easily be able to float in quicksand. 
Example 7.13 
Given: 
The conditions as shown in Fig. Ex. 7.13. The silty clay acts as an impervious layer and prevents 
flow of water up from the fine sand layer below it. Because of a river nearby, the fine sand layer is 
under a head of water greater than the existing ground surface (artesian conditions). A standpipe or 
piezometer installed through the silty clay layer rises to a distance h above the top of the sand layer, as 
· shown in the figure. An excavation is made in the silty clay to within a distance H s above the top of the 
sand layer. 
· 
Silty 
clay· 
*Neglect shear along sides. 
FIGURE Ex. 7.13 
Required: 
How deep an excavation can be. made so that the uplift pressure in the middle of the excavation 
will not cause the bottom of the excavation to "blow up"? Determine the thickness of the silty clay 
layer H 5 in terms of the soil properties andgeometrygiven in Fig. Ex. 7.13. Assume that the shearforce 
on the sides of the soil plug can be neglected. 
Solution: At equilibri~m, 2:Fv = 0 
H:,pg= p,ngh 
7.6 Seepage Forces, Quicksand, and Liquefaction 
305 
or 
_,,, 
· .. ; 
H- = Pwgh. 
s 
pg -
Failure will occur if Hs < Pwgh/pg. If-Hs > Pwgh/pg, then failure cannot happen, and the factor of 
safety is greater than unity. In practice, the factor of safety against catastrophic failure should be rather 
high, since, if it occurs; it can be devastating. You must be very conservative in designing such situations 
because of the possible consequences. 
7.6.3 
Liquefaction 
Another phenomenon related to quicksand is liquefaction, whiCh can be demonstrated in a quicksand 
tank [Fig. 7.12(c)].After the sand is made quick and is in a very loose state; the flow is reversed and the 
water level decreases. When the water level in the timk reaches just below the surface'of the sand, all 
the valves are shut and all flow ceases: We now have a deposit of loose, saturated sand ready for an 
earthquake! If we apply a sharp blow to the side of the tank, inst~ntly the entire soil mass liquefies and 
thesand loses all bearing capacity [Fig. 7.12(c)]; Notice that the kilogram weight sank, the water level 
:rose a few centimeters above the' ground surface (shown);'imd water levels in the piezometer tubes 
A through Crose to points 7, 8, and 9. 
. 
' 
-
· 
The reaction in Fig; 7.12(c) is exactly what happens when a loose, saturated sand deposit is sub-
. jected to loads' of very short duration, such as occur during earthquakes; pile drivirig, and blasting. The 
loose sand tries to densify during shear, and this tends to squeeze the water out of the pores. Normally, 
under static loading, the sand has sufficient permeability so the water can escape and any induced pore 
water pressures can dissipate. But in a dynamic situation, because the loading occurs in such a short 
time, the water doesn't have time to escape and the pore water pressure increases: Since the total 
stresses have not increased during loading, the effective stresses then tend toward zero [by Eq. (6.8)], 
and the soil loses all strength. Note the position of the water level in the standpipes of Fig. 7.12(c). The 
photograph was taken just after a sharp blow against the side of the tank: 
The presence of excess pore water pressure below the ground surface indicates that upward 
flow is taking place,-and liquefaction occurs. All these events happen al~ost simultaneously. During 
and immediately after many earthquakes, water has been observed squirting up through the ground 
to a metre or so in height, sometimes up to.20 minutes after the initial shock waves. Thus sand boils 
are created where the upward flow of water carries sand with it to the ground surface. 
Casagrande (1936a) was the first to explain liquefactimi in terms of soil mechanics, and he also 
describes (1950, 1975) some situations in practice where liquefaction has occurred.Among these are 
the failure of Ft..Peck Dam in Montana in 1938 and flow slides along the lower Mississippi River. Here 
sands are deposited during floods in a very loose state. Somehow strains are induced in these deposits, 
and it seems that they almost spontaneously liquefy and flow out into the river. The problem is that 
they often take levees and other flood protectionworks'along with thein, and repairs are expensive. 
Bank erosion leading to progressive liquefaction, seepage pressures from high water tables, and even 
traffic vibrations have been blamed for flow slides. Flow slides also occur in mine tailings dams. These 
structures are often very large and constructed hydraulically of very loose sands and silts. Since they 
. are essentially waste dumps, often with very fast rates of deposition, and with inadequ~te engineering 
and construction inspection, failures are' relatively common. This type of liquefactiqn is sometimes 
called static liquefaction. 
· ' · 
Since the Niigata, Japan, and the Anchorage, Alaska, earthquakes of 1964, where severe damage 
occurred due to liquefaction, there has been increasing interest in liquefaction. It has been found to 
occur in the. laboratory .in even moderately dense sands after repeated or cyclic application of shear 
306 
Chapter 7 
i .Fluid Flow. in Soils and Rock 
stress, which means that if an earthquake lastedJong enough, then even moderately dense saturated 
sands might liquefy. This phenomenon is sometimes called cyclic mobility. 
For some historical backgrouild on liquefaction and cyclic mobility, see Casagrande (1975) and 
Seed (1979). Kramer (1996) is an excellent textbook on geotechnical earthquake engineering. 
7.7 · : SEEPAGE AND FLOW NETS: TWO-DIMENSIONAL FLOW· 
'< 
The concept of head and energy loss as water flows through soils has bee~ mentio~ed several times in 
this chapter. When water flows through a porous medium such as soil, energy or head is lost through. 
friction, much as in flow through pipes and in open channels. As in the laboratory permeability test 
described earlier, for example, similar energy' or head losses occur when water s~eps through an earth 
dam or under a sheet pile cofferdam (Fig. 7.13). · 
. 
. 
. . .. . 
:· 
. 
.. 
. . 
. 1\vo types of flow conditions, confined and unconfined, are. illustrated in Fig. 7.14. Notice that 
the phreaticsurfaceisnot "confined" in layer Aby an impervious boundary but is free to seek its own 
. _location. On the other hand, layer B is an example of confined flow, because the aquifer (a layer or for-
mation of high permeability) and the phreatic surface are confined by an aquiclude. (a layer of much 
lower permeability).An aquifer readily permits flow under normal gradients, while an aquiclude does 
not and is, in effect, impervious. In terms of relative difficulty of pumping water from a geologic forma-
tion (soil or rock layer(s)), an aquitard2 is hiss pervious than an aquifer but more so than an aquiclude . 
. , Note. the different groundwater elevations in the two piezometers in Fig. 7.14. If the B layer were under 
artesian conditions, the water level in the B piezometer could. be well above the ground surface. Note 
. that all the examples in Sec. 7.5 were confined because their boundaries were impervious. 
·· 
:; 
. ;;~\;:~;i.Cf~~~-;.>;i?{[i~.~~";/;~ 
J ~ 
• 
' 
• ' '. 
; .. 
;-. 
·,1 '· 
(b) 
"' 
' 
. ' 
; 
. 
•. 
,, 
FIGURE 7.13 
Engineering examples of head loss because of seepage· 
through soils. 
· 
· 
' 
· · 
· 
· · 
·• · · 
: 2Not to be confused with an aquitart; a ~aterborne inhabitant of a light district where the predominant wavelength 
is around 750 nm. 
.. 
•' 
Aquifer 
Aquiclude 
Aquiclude 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
307 
FIGURE 7.14 Examples of 
unconfined flow in aquifer A 
and confined flowin aquifer B. 
Pumping from aquifers ca~ be either unconfined or confined, dependi~g on the geology. If a 
well penetrates only layer A in Fig. 7.14, flow toward the well is unconfined. On the other hand, if the 
well penetrates into the aquifer of layer B, seepage to the well is confined. Seepage toward wells is 
described in Sec. 7.8. When water seeps through earth dams and levees, as shown in Fig. 7.13(a), flow 
is definitely unconfined, because there is a free surface at atmospheric pressure. As explained in 
Sec. 7.9, the primary design problem is to establish the shape of the top line of seepage. 
Different kinds of heads and head losses were described in Sec. 7.5, and it might be a good idea 
to review that material before proceeding further in this section.;.·. r . 
Figure 7.15 shows how the total head (hp + z) might be determined from the positions and 
elevations of the water levels in the standpipes. Also shown in this figure is how energy or head is lost 
in flowing under a dam. Note how the water levels in each successive piezometer decrease as water 
flows from the heel to the toe of the dam.Example 7.15 explains in detail how head computations 
are made. 
FIGURE 7.15 
Example of heads and head loss due to seepage under a dam. All dimensions in rrietres. 
308 
Chapter 7: 
·Fluid Flow in.Soils and Rock · 
,. 
Example 7.14' 
Given: 
The dam with piezometers shown in Fig. 7.14. The total head loss is 19m (hL)· 
Required: 
. 
. . 
a. Calculate the pressure heads hp and the total heads h for pi_ezometers A through E. 
b. Determine the uplift pressure acting on the_base of the dam at point C. 
Solution: 
a. Pressure and total heads. 
Piezometer A: The pressure head is the length of the column of water in the stand-
pipe, or 
· · 
hp = hA + ZA = h1 = 19 + 7 ~ 26m 
., 
Note t?at this dimension is also nu~erically equal to 
hL + hz = 19 + 7 = 26m 
The total head is 
h = (hp + z) = 26 ::c.. 7 = 19m 
which is the height of rise above the datum. 
:Piezometer B: : 
· 
·' 
hp'= hfJ + zn = 
15 + 19 = 34m 
h = (hj>'+ z) ='34 .:._ 19 =15m. 
Note that h is also numerically the same as 
'hL- hLB 
or 
h = 19-4 =15m 
Piezometer C: 
' 
. . 
.· 
' ' 
hp ~he+ zc·= 10·+ 10_= 2Qm 
,. l 
·:''· 
· (We will use this pressure head io cmnpute the uplift pressure at point C, below.) 
~ 
. . h.=:. (hp + z) =:20 -;: 10 = 10m . 
(Check: h = hL- hLC = 19 -9 = 10m.) 
·Piezometer D: 
· 
· 
:hp ..;_ hv +zv =·5+ 19 =24m . 
. h ,'':' hv + ZD ;:- ZD = 5 m. : 
) 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
309 
(Check: h = hL - hie = 19 -14 = Sm.) 
.· Piezometer E: · · 
hp = h2 = 7m 
h .= hp -
ZE = 7 - 7 = 0 
· hL =19m 
Note that at the tail water all of the head has been lost. Thus the total head at this point is zero. 
b. Uplift pressure at point C: 
·! 
7.7.1 
Flow Nets 
Pe = hppwg = (he+ zc)pwg = (hL- hLe+ zc)pwg 
, = 20m (1000 kg/m3)(9.81 m/s2) ·== 196 kP~ 
We could represent the flow of water through the foundation under the dam in Fig. 7.15 by flow lines, 
which would represent an average flow path of a particle of water from the upstream reservoir down to 
the tail water. Similafly, we could represent the energy of flow by lines of equal potential, called, natu-
rally, equipotential lines, or. contours of constant total head. Along any equipotential line, the energy 
available to cause flow is the same; conversely, the energy lost by the water in getting to that line is the 
same all along the line. The network of flow lines and equipotential lines is called a flow net, a concept 
that illustrates graphically how the head or energy is lost as water flows through a porous medium, as 
shown in Fig. 7.16. 
Same elevation; ::same potential (total head) 
;~ 
. . 
~ . . . . . I . 
a 
FIGURE 7.16 
Equipotential and flow lines (only a few shown).' • · 
310 
·Chapter 7 · Fluid Flow in Soils'and Rock 
You probably can see that we could, if we wanted to, draw an infinite number of flow lines and 
equipotential lines to represent the seepage shown in Fig. 7.16, but it is more convenient to select only 
a few representative lines of each type. The hydraulic gradient between any two adjacent equipotential 
lines is the drop in potential (head) between those lines divided by the distance traversed. Or, in 
Fig. 7.16 along flow line 2, the gradient between equipotential lines a and b is the head drop between 
those lines divided by l. Because in an isotropic soil the flow must follow paths of the largest gradient, 
the flow lines have to cross the equipotential lines at right angles, as shown in Fig. 7.16. Note that, as the 
·• equipotential lines become Closer together, l decreases and the gradient increases [Eq. (7.1)]. 
Figure 7,16 represents a typical cross section of the dam. and foundation; Thus, as in all seepage 
problems considered in this tex(the flow condition is two dimensional. Three-dimensional flow is the 
more general situation in many geotechnical problems, but seepage analyses of these problems are just 
too complica'ted to be practical, so we usually simplify the problem to two dimensions . 
. Flow. nets are veryuse.ful in s~lving seepage problems in engineering practice-for example, to 
estimate seepage losses from reservoirs, uplift pressures under dams, and check points of potential 
detrimental erosion where i ~ icr· We shall explain the techniques in this section. 
A flow net is actually a graphical solution of Laplace's equation in two dimensions,· 
~ ~ 
a2h . a2h 
· 
-+-=0 
ax2 ·· · al · 
(7.18) 
·where x andy are the two coordinate directions, and his the head at any point (x, y). Laplace's equation, 
derived in Appendix B, is very important in mathematical physics; it represents the energy loss through 
·any resistive medium. For example, besides the flow of water through soils; if describes' electron flow, the 
flow of people to hospitals, and so on:. If ihe boundary conditions (geometry, flow conditions, and head 
conditions at the boundaries) are simple, then it is even possible to solve the equation in closed form-that 
is, exactly. But for most practical engineering problems, it is usually easier to solve seepage problems either 
graphically or using numerical methods. Both flow nets and numerical solutions are not exact solutions to 
Laplace's equation for a given set of boundary conditions, but if done properly, they are quite satisfactory. 
How do you make a flow net? Traditionally, they were sketched by hand, and students learned by 
experience, drawing flow nets for a variety of flow and boundary conditions. :flowev~r, this is a dying 
art, having been replaced by finite element or finite difference computer· programs. For relatively 
simple boundary conditions, though, you should still have an idea of how to sketch flow nets-for three 
reasons. First, learning to draw flow nets helps you to understand how water flows through soils and 
how that flow might impact your design. Second, you may need to get only an approximate idea of flow 
rate and other flow parameters (e.g., criticalgradient)to cross~check field measurements or to get an 
.. estimate of flow. Time and budget constraints may not warrant a full computer. analysis for such an 
'approximation. The third reason is to check computer analyses for gross errors. We all know that just 
because it is a computer solution doesn't mean it is accurate. · 
' To start sketching a flow net for two-dimensional steady~state problems, you simply draw the 
mediuin with its boundaries to some convenient scale (draw this part in ink, since you may end up 
erasing the flow. net a lot to get it right). By trial and error (mostly error, until you get some practice!) 
sketch a network of flow lines and equipotential lines spaced so that the enclosed figures resemble 
"squares" (you won't be able to avoid having many elements that have curved ~ides or corners that 
aren't exactly at 90°). Their sides intersect at right angles. Look again at Fig. 7.16, specifically the 
"square" enclosed by flow lines 1 and 2 and equipotential lines a and b. Not all the "squares" in a flow 
net have to be the same size, either. Note that a flow line cannot intersect an impervious boundary;in 
fact, an impervious boundary is a flow line. Note, too, thatall equipotential lines must meet impervi-
ous boundaries at right angles. Neither the number of flow channels (channels between flow lines) nor 
the number of equipotential drops (a drop is the decrease in head Ah from one equipotential line to 
the next) needs to be a whole number; fractional squares are allowed. 
Flow line 
Equipotential line 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets:Two-Dimensional Flow 
311 
Llh3-4 . 
_l_ 
hs 
.. • 
, Llh o= equipotential = ilh1_ 2 = ilh2_ 3 etc. 
~"drop" 
FIGURE 7.17 Flow net illustrating some definitions. 
Figure 7.17 explains some of the terms associated with flow nets. Look at the "square" with 
dimensions a X b. Note that the gradient is 
. 
D.h 
D.h1-2 
D.h2-3 
D.h4-5 
hdNd 
l = t::i = -d- = -~- = -b- = -b-. 
(7.19a) 
where the length.~f the flow pa~h in one square is b = M. The equipotential drop between two flow 
lines is D.h = hdN d• where N dis the total number of potential drops, and hL is the total head lost in the 
system. 
From Darcy's law and Fig. 7.17 we know that the flow in each flow channel is 
or, in general, 
. D.hl-2 
D.ql = k-d-. 
D.hl-2 
D.q2 = k--
g 
. D.hl-2 
.D.q3=k--
m 
. D.h 
. (hdNd) 
D.q = kt;[A = k -b- a 
(7.19b) 
(7.19c) 
312 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock ~, , 
and the total discharge q per unit depth (perpendicular to the paper) is 
q = ql + qz + q3 + · · · 
, 
( )(Nt) , 
q =c. /1qN_t = khL ~, Nd , 
(7.19d) 
(7.19e) , 
where N 1is the total number of flow channels in the flow net. If we sketched "squares" in our flow net, 
then a·,; b. Thus, we can readily estimate the quantity of flow q by simply counting the number of 
potential drops N dand the number of flow channels N 1,ifwe know the k of the material, and the total 
head loss hL. Equation (7.19e) becomes 
, 
· 
Nt 
q = khLNd 
(7.20) 
The ratio N tf N dis called the shape factor, because it depends only on the geometry of the problem. 
Besides quantity of flow, other products of flow nets are described iri Sec. 7.7.2. 
With confined flow problems, where there is no phreatic (free) surface, sketching a flow net is not 
so difficult. Start with a sketch, to scale, of the soil mass, boundaries, arid so or1. Keep the sketch small so 
you can observe the entire picture as it' develops. Use' good-quality paper, a soft pencil, and have a good 
eraser handy-you'll need it! Draw the boundaries in ink on the reverse side of the sheet. Start with, at 
most, only three orfour lines. By.trial and. error, sketch the net (lightly) until you get "squares" through-
out the region of flow. It's easier if you can manage to keep the number of flow channels to a whole 
number. The flow lines and equipotential lines should be smooth, gradual curves, all intersecting at right 
angles. As mentioned, you should be able to subdivide each square to make additional small squares. 
The .flow net shown in Fig. 7.18 is an example of a fairly well-drawn flow net for confined flow. , 
f+------... AO m 
"' 
. Impervious/ 
A 
F 
Scale:. 0 
10m 
FIGURE 7.18 Example of a reasonably' well-drawn flow net for confined flow. 
7.7 Seepage and Flow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
313 
~--Sheet' pile 
J 
' 
, 
, 
, 
: 
•• 
·, 
, 
•• 
• 
: 
,. 
• 
, 
I. 
,) .. 
FIGURE 7.19 Symmetrical flow net example showing a sheet pile driven half way into an 
aquifer. Note that the number of flow channels N, is 3 and the number of equipotential drops' . 
Nd is 6 (modified after Casagrande, 1937, drawn by W. Kovacs). 
An example of unconfined flow with a sheet pile driven halfway into an aquifer is shown in 
Fig. 7.19. The flow net is horizontally symmetrical, providing that the topand bottom flow lines (bor-
ders) are parallel and the penetration of the sheet pile is exactly one-half the depth of the aquifer. Note 
that the number of flow channels N 1 is 3 and the number of equipotential drops N dis 6. Regardless of 
how many flow channels you use, the JV1!N dratio, or the shape factor, will always be 1h for the geome-
try of this example! If the geometry is different, you will have a different solution, and the NtfN dratio 
will not necessarily be the same. · 
Another characteristic of a correct flow net is that you can inscribe a circle inside each 
"square" and it will be tangent to all four sides. As soon as you change any of the boundary condi-
tions, you change the flow net 'sohition. For any given set of boundary conditions, there is only one 
solution to the problem! 
;. 
.. 
I 
7.7.2 
Quantity of Flow, Uplift Pressures, and Exit Gradients 
We showed in the development. of Eq. (7.20) that the quantity of seepage or the flow rate is easily 
obtained from a properly constructed flow net. Even a crude flow net provides a fairly accurate esti-
mate of the flow quantities! This is because we usually do not know the hydraulic conductivity k, espe-
cially in the field, with any degree of accuracy. 
Example 7.14 indicates ho~ the uplift pressures under a dam are calculated. From the flow net, 
it is not difficult to determine the hp at various points at the bottom of thedam. Then the distribution 
of uplift pressures can be drawn. This distribution is important for analyzing the stability of concrete 
gravity dams. The procedure is illustrated in Example 7.15. · 
. 
. . 
. · ..• ·. 
. 
Another important use of flow nets is to determine gradients, especially. at· certain critical 
points-for example, at the toe of a dam or any place where seepage water exits. From·Sec. 7.6 you 
314 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
'·, ·, ,'' 
know that when the gradient approaches unity, critical conditions can occur, which leads to piping and 
erosion and possibly complete failure of the structure: Piping is a phenomenon where seeping water 
progressively erodes or washes away soil particles, leaving large voids (pipes) in the soil. These voids 
simply continue to erode and work their way backward under the structure, or they may collapse. 
Either way, if piping is not stopped promptly, failure is imminent. The critical place for piping is usually 
right at the corner of the tcie of a dam: we·can see why if we study an enlargement of the flow net at the 
toe (Fig. 7.20). 
· ·.. 
.· · ; 
For the case of the dam placed (foolishly) right on the ground surface [Fig. 7.20(a)], if we keep 
subdividing the squares, I rapidly approaches zero while Ah is still finite. Thus, the gradient rapidly 
increases and reaches the critical gradient icr. If this actually happened in a real structure, piping and 
probably failure of the structure (by undermining) would occur. 
For the example shown in Fig. 7.20(b), the dam is somewhat safer than in Fig. 7.20(a), since, 
for typical cases, the exit gradient is much less than critical. From Eq. (7.19a), the exit gradient iE 
equals Ahd AI, where. AhL equals· the head loss hL divided by the number of equipotential 
drops Nd.Thus, if all other things are the same, ari.embedded foundation will have more equipo~ 
tential drops and a lower exit gradient. Remember that the flow. net iri its enlarged condition in 
Fig. 7.20merely shows the concentration of flow. As the squares get smaller and smaller, the ten-
dency is to think thatthe exit gradientis steadily increasing! This is not so. As the number of 
equipotential drops increases; A.hL also decreases per drop, and the ratio of Ahd AI remains 
about the same. For this. example, too, you can see why the. critical place is right.next to .the 
)·: 
',,;· 
FIGURE 7.20 Exit gradilmts at. 
toe of dams: (a) dam constructed 
directly on ground surface;(b) 
dam placed below the ground .. 
surface. 
' 
-· ;·· 
,, 
''• 
/. 
•,•'• 
(b) 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
315 
downstream toe. There, the l1l is the smallest for a given lihL. The next flow channel over, for 
example, is safer since the same head (lihL) is lost over a greater length (greater distance between 
equipotentiallines). 
· 
For practical problems, where there is a danger that i could approach ic, you should be very 
conservative in your design. Use a factor of safety of at least 5 or 6 for such cases. For one thing, 
. failure is usually catastrophic and occurs rapidly and with little warning. For another, it is extremely 
difficult to know exactly what is going on underground, especially locally, Local defects, gravel 
pockets, etc., can significantly alter the flow regime and .concentrate flow, for example, where you 
niight not want it and not be prepared for it. Concentration of flow occurs, too, at corners of tem-
porary structures like cofferdams. As Terzaghi (1929) and Taylor (1948) point out, the entire flow 
regime may be widely different from that assumed in our (idealized) flow net. Great variation in 
horizontal and vertical permeability may exist from point to point under a foundation; the flow may 
not be entirely two-dimensional; geologic defects in the underlying subsoils may provide preferen-
tial routes for the water to concentrate and seep under and out of a foundation. If sheet piling is 
used, cutoff is often uncertain .(for example, piling unknowingly driven into boulders), and you 
would be wise to assume that the worst possible conditions could happen-then prepare for such 
eventualities. Since failure of cofferdams is often catastrophic, it is extremely important that large 
factors of safety be used, especially where people's lives are at stake. Failures .of earth structures 
resulting from piping have caused more deaths than all other failures of civil engineering structures 
combined. Therefore, your responsibility is clear-be careful and conservative, and be sure of your 
ground conditions and design. 
Given: 
The dam and flow net shown in Fig. 7.18. The dam is 120m long and has two 10m sheet piles dri-
ven partially into the granular soil layer. Datuni is at tail water elevation. 
· 
Required: 
a. The quantity of seepage loss under the dam when k = 20 X 10-4 crn!s. 
b. The exit gradient (at point X). 
c. The pressure distribution on the base of the dam. 
d. The factor of safety with respect to piping; 
Solution: 
a. From Eq. (7.20), the quantityof seepage is 
(N) 
.· 
q = kh£ N: 
X length 
. . 
. 
= ( 20 x ·10_
4 c:) ( 10;cm) 12m 1~.4 120m 
= 8.3 X 10-3 m3 js 
316 
Chapter 7 . 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
f ,, 
,;:.: 
, b. At point X, the exit gradient is . , 
.. :__ tl.hL •,;, 1.15 = 0.14, which is not critical 
IE-
L 
8.5 
Note: tl.hL = hL/Nd :;_ 12 m/10.4.;;, US m: L ~ 8.5 m,scaled frorriFig. 7.18,is the length of 
· squareY.' ,·· · 
· 
· 
,•:• •: 
·. '·· ·" 
· 
·· 
· · 
·· 
c. 'Pressure h~ads an! evalu~ted for points A 'thr~ugh F al~rig the base of the dam in Fig. Ex. 7 .15. 
• : 
:• 
• ' , · 
, , 
~ 
, l 
, l 
' 
' 
. 
',, , ; : 
• 
, 
• 
' 
' ·• 
' ; < 
\ 
, ' • 
,. •' 
' 
• I 
' 
·'· 
A. 
B 
F 
FIGURE Ex:7:15 
Pressu're· 
.--:-
9.38 
· head for locations A 
9.96 
· 
through F. 
· ·· Head (in) · 
' ~ .-; : ' 
The pressure head at point A, at the base of the dam and just to the right of the left 
sheet pile, is found this way: the percentage of the head loss is proportional to the number of 
...... equipotential drops: Of the total of 10.4 drops for the entire flow net, only3.5 have occurred 
by point A. Thus the pressure head at point A is 
· 
.. · 3.5 
:, hA =_12m -12mX 10.4+ 2m 
= 12.-4.04 +2.= 9.96m 
The extra 2 m brings the head from the water-soil interface down to the base of the dam. 
In a similar manner, we can calculate the head at point D: 
'•! .. " •" 
. 
: 
54 
. ' 
'< 
hv = 12- 12 X l~.4 +·2 = ,7.77m . 
.. ·· 
The heads at all the points under the dam are as follows: · 
Location 
Head (m) 
. . : , · Pressure (kPa) . 
A 
9.96 
98 
B 
9.38 
92 
c 
8.23 
81 
D 
'17.77 
76 
E~ 
6.62: 
65 
F. 
6.04 
59 
'; 
! 
7.7 
Seepage and Flow Nets:Two-DimensionaiFiow 
317 
These values of head are plotted in Fig. Ex. 7.15.To compute the uplift pressures 
on the base of the dam, we multiply the head times the product Pw8· The pressures are 
,given above. If the density of concrete is 2.4 Mg!m3, then the pressure exerted by 2m of 
concrete is 
· 
2.4 Mg!m3 X 9.81 rn!s2 X 2m = 47 kPa 
Thus at any point along the base of the dam from point C through F the uplift force exceeds 
the weight of the dam, so the dam is unstable with this design. 
d. The factor of safety with respect to piping is given by 
li' 
ic 
F.S. =-:-
l£ 
where ic = the critical gradient, Eq. (7.15), and is approximately equal to unity. With the exit 
gradient found in part b, we find the factor of safety is 
i' 
' 
' 
' 
'f ,, 
F.S. = 0.14 = 7 
Example 7.16 
Given: 
The flow net in Fig. 7.19.Assume the hydraulic conductivity is 10-4 crnlsec. The sheet pile is 13m 
long (into the paper): The thickness of the soil layer is 10 m and the sheet pile penetrates halfway 
through. A head of5 m ( hL) of water separates both sides of the sheet pile. . 
.. 
. 
Required: 
· a. Compute the amount of flow under the sheet pile foi: its full length in units of m3 /s. 
b.· Evaluatethe exit gr~dient and compute the factor of safety with respect to a quick 
condition 
· 
· · 
· , · 
· 
· 
· 
c.· Comment on what ~ptions a designer has to increase the facto; ofsaf~ty in part b. 
'Solution: 
a. The amount of flow is given byEq. (7.20). 
, . · .. Nr 
, .... 
j 
• 
, , , q ,= k~h N d peril?- of w~ll ~wall length 
' 
' '• l 
~ 
' 
J 
' 
q = 10-4 ~m/sec X 0.01 fll!cm X. 5 m X ~·X 13 m 
. q. = 3.25 X 10-4 m3/sec =.28m3/day 
318 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils:and Rock · 
· b. The exit gradient is given by 
·.:: 
·.,,; 
l::!.h 
hdNd 
iE=z;=-L-
5 m/6 drops 
iE = 
2.5 m 
1 
ig= 3 
where L = the scaled length tak,~n fro~ Fig. 7.19. The distance, L, is sho~n just below E-F 
and is approximately 2.5 m. The factor of safety with respect to boiling or quicksand is 
;:', 
F.S. = ic 
iE 
where ic is the critical gradient as given in Eq. (7.15) 'or (7 :16). The approximate value of the 
critical gradient is unity. So, 
. 
_ _!_=3 
F.S.- 113 
c. Options available to increase the factor of safety in part b. 
First, is the factor of safety adequate? If it is greater than one, is that OK? Because we 
do not know all the details about the !mbsurface soil properties and potential geologic 
. "defects," not to menti~n the consequences of failure, designers should be very conservative 
in this situatio~. A factor of s.afety of 5 to io would not b~ ~nreas<,nl.abie:. · 
'~' ' 
7.7.3 
Other Soi~:Jtions to Seepage Problems 
A number of methods other. than sketching to obtain flow nets have been developed to find solutions to 
seepage proble~s .. They include exact and approximate mathematical ,solutions for Laplace's equation 
(Harr, 1962)~ viscous flow (Hele-Shaw) models; small-scale laboratory 'flow models, electrical analog 
models, and the method offragments (Harr, 1962andl977). This last method is so simple and practical 
that we pn!sent it in Appendix c. ' . 
· · · ' 
.. . 
. 
. 
.. . . . . 
·· . 
However, by far the most common approach that practitioners take today to obtain flow nets 
and solve seepage problems under a variety of complex boundary conditions and variable soil proper-
ties is the use of finite element or finite difference computer programs. A number of these programs, 
some with student versions, are commercially available for download from company websites.J The 
output from these programs usually includes flow rates, heads, gradients, uplift pressures and other 
useful information. Figure .7.21 is a computer analysis of the dam in Fig. 7.18 and Example 7.15. The · 
flow value computed at the' section :at 50 m is 6.9 .X 10-5 in3/s/m of cross-section. If you multiply this 
value by the dam length of 120m, you get a total flow of 8.28 X 10-3 m3/s, which is very close to the 
value obtained from the flow net analysis in Example 7;15. 
3Examples include SEEP/W (wwW.ge~-slope.coin)~ SEEP2D (www.seepage-analysis.com), an'dSVFlux2D (www. 
scisoftware.com). 
7.7 
Seepage and.Fiow Nets: Two-Dimensional Flow 
319 
50 
~4o 
.S 
Flow through section 
-u 
6.9 x 1o-s m% 
~ 
:·~.·:..~·< ·::·~··.:·~. 
-~ 30 1-------------f . v· .. ~: .. ;· .•. ~"'.-. -. .,......,-.,-.-.-.~.,......-.,-. .,.-,-.,.------1="'..ll...-
1-----, 
<:.. 
., 
Q) 
c.. 
. 5 
c 
0 
~ 
Q) m 
I . 
. -
-I -
I 
_I 
I 
I· 
-I 
I 
-
-1 
I 
..:.I 
I 
I 
-
-1 -
I 
-
-1 
·I 
o~~--~~~~--~~~--L-~-L~--~~~~--~~~~---L--~--~~--~ 
0 
5 
1 0 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
1 00 
Distance (m) 
FIGURE 7.21 
Example of output from a SEEP/W analysis 'of the dam in Fig. 7.18. 
7.7.4 
Anisotropic and Layered Flow 
We mentioned earlier that flow nets are valid for isotropic soils only, a condition that is unlikely in natural 
soil deposits or even in earth dams. However, it is easy to take the directional difference in permeability 
·· .. into account by transfonriing the scale to which you draw the flow net. For example, if the horizontal per-
meability is much greater than the vertical, then you shorten the horizontal dimensions of the problem by 
the ratio~. The proof of this transformation, as well as examples for its use, are shown in Taylor 
(1948). Equation (7.20) for the quantity of seepage then becomes 
. 
' 
' 
,• 
~ 
~ 
(7.21) 
In some sedimentary soil deposits, because of the different strata and soil layering, the hydraulic 
conductivity and thus the flow in the perpendicular (usually vertical) direction will be different and likely 
less than in the parallel (usually horizontal) direction. Varved clays, mentioned in Chapter 3, are good 
examples of this. If such soils are encountered, it is necessary to obtain some equivalent permeability in 
both the parallel and perpendicular directions. Figure 7.22 illustrates two possible flow conditions in mul-
tilayered soils. In the horizontal case, the average or equivalent flow is given by 
where the k's and H's are defined in Fig. 7 .22. Because the gradient across each layer is equal; it cancels 
out, leaving· 
· 
320 
Chapter 7 . • Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
qv equivalent 
Ht 
.. 
H2 
.. 
.. ... 
. .. 
1: 
Flow 
~-
H 
qh equivalent 
(a} Horizontal flow 
(b) Vertical flow 
. FIGURE 7.22 Two flow conditions in multilayered soils: (a) horizontal flow; (b) vertical flow. 
or 
n 
~knHn 
i=l 
= 
n 
khequivalen1 
~H; 
i=l 
Ht-
H2 
H· 
' 
3., 
r 
H 5 
He 
~7.22) 
·When the flow is perpendicular to the soil layers, as in Fig. 7.22(b), the velocity will be the same 
in each layer but the gradient across each layer will be different. So, 
and 
where 
dh 
11ht 
tS.h2 -
k . 
k 
· · · -
=· k -
= kv2--
v = 
l = vequivalent H 
vl H 1 
H2 
dh = dht + f1h2 + " · + dhn 
H,; 11h 
. f1h : = kv equivalent -k }j 
n 
vn 
Combining these three equations, we get 
n 
~H; 
i=l 
kv equivalent = ~ 
~-~ 
i=l kvn 
dhn 
= kvn Hn 
(7.23) 
With the above equations, we can determine the equivalent coefficient of permeability or hydraulic 
conductivity of a layered soil deposit, once the thickness and k of the individual layers are known. 
· .7.8 . Seepage Toward Wells 
321 
Example 7.17 
·Given: . 
. ·· · ' Amultilayer soil similar in appearance to Fig. 7.22. It has a total layer thickness~f 1.8 m and is 
cornposed of four hiyers:The layers are 0.8, 0.5, 0.3, and 0.2 m, respectively: The isotropic hydraulic 
. conductivities are 10-7,10-6, 10-5, and 10-4 m/s, respectively. 
. 
. 
. .. ' 
. 
' 
.. 
: 
,. 
' 
. ' 
'•, 
' 
' 
., 
Required: 
Evaluate the equivalent hydraulic conductivities in both the vertical a~d horizontal· directions. 
Solution: Use Eq. (7.22) to determine the equivalent horizontal permeability. 
n=4 
"'2-kiHi 
i=l 
kh equivalent = 
n-4 
"'2-Hr 
i=l 
10-7 m/s X 0.8 m + 10-6 0.5 +10-5 0.3 + 10-4 0.2 
. 0.8 m + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 
= 1.3 X 10-5 m/s 
' 
> 
, 
' 
Use Eq. (7.23) to find the equivalent vertical permeability, 
n 2-H; 
i=l 
kv equivalent = ~ 
2-___!!. 
i=l kvn 
1.8m 
-------------
(
_.· _0.~8 _m_ + _0._5 + _0._3 + _0._2') 
10-7 m/s 
10-6 
10-5 ·· 
10-~ 
= 2.LX 10-7 m/s , 
Note that the perpendicular hydraulic conductivity will always be less than the parallel hydraulic 
·conductivity. 
· 
7.8 
.SEEPAGE TOWARD WELLS 
We mentioned in Sec. 7.4.1 that wells are used to determine the in situ hydraulic conductivity or coefficient 
of permeability k of the soils at a site. Wells are also commonly used to provide for domestic and irrigation 
water supply. At sites with a high water table, wells are used to dewater the site so that construction may 
take place in the dry. In siting a dam on an alluvial foundation, if there is concern that too much water 
would flow under the dam, the water flow could be calculated, provided the coefficient of permeability is 
known. Tests on laboratory samples are useful, but these relativdy small samples represent only, perhaps, 
322 
Chapter7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
one-millionth of the amount of soil that will take part in the flow of water. So, a full:scale field pumping 
test would provide a useful way to estimate the overall value of k. 
· 
To determine the hydraulic conductivity, a well-pumping test is performed. A well is installed (see 
Driscoll, 1986, for details) and is then pumped until steady state conditions are reached. Water level 
. readings are taken from nearby observation wells. The draw down of the initial groundwater table in the 
observation well~ is used in an appropriate formula to compute the in situ hydraulic conductivity. 
Although formulations are available for steady state and transient conditions, for unconfined 
and confined radial flow to a wells and slots, only two simple steady state and radial flow situations are 
presented in this section. 
. 
A typical cross section illustrating the steady state flow in an unconfined aquifer is shown in 
Fig. 7.23: The quantity of flow is obtained using Darcy's law [Eq. (7.5)], but with appropriate boundary 
conditions, or 
Rearranging 
. . . ; 
dli 
' 
q = kiA = k dr2-rrrh 
dr = ~2-rrhdh 
r 
q 
Integrating between the limits of r from r1 to r2 and of h from h1 to h2 (refer to Fig. 7.23 for definitions 
of these parameters), and solving fork, we obtain 
Pumping 
well 
q 
/ 
h1 
r2 _ k-rr.(hz _ hz) 
ln--
2 
. 
1 
Yt 
q. 
. 
Observation 
wells 
'2 
ro 
""" 
~ 
~ 
Aqui~lude 
FIGURE 7.23 
Unconfined radiai flow. 
Original GWT 
ho 
7.8 Seepage Toward Wells 
323 
Solving for k, 
'2 
'2 
In-
log-
k = !l_ 
r1 
= 2.3q 
r 1 
.. 71" (h~ - ht) 
71" 
(h~ - ht) 
(7.24) 
'. 
• 
• 
'" 
~, 
' 
-
> 
" 
The observation wells are often co~structed on a radi~lli~e from the pumpi~g well. 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
Example 7.18 (After U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1995.) 
Given: 
An unconfined aquifer with a saturated thickness of15 m (h0 ). Observation wells are located dis-
.. tances of 30, 60, and 120m from the pumping well. Water is pumped from the well at a rate of 0.08 m3 Is. 
After pumping 16 hr, the followingdrawdown information was collected: at r1 = 30m, z1 = 0.58 m; at 
r2 = 60 m, z2 = 0.41 m; at r3 ;, 120m, z3 = 0.24 m. 
· : · 
· 
i ; 
Required: 
Evaluate the hydraulic conductivity in rnls. 
Solution: Using Eq. (7.24) and inserting the appropriate values, 
60 
= 2.3 X 0.08 m3 
log30 
71" 
sec (14.592 -
14.422) m2 
= 0.003 m/s 
Where did the 14.59 come from? You take the thickness of the layer (15m), subtract the draw-
down(0.41 m); and obtain h2• See Fig. 7.23 for the definition of h2 • 
· 
Another typical situation is performing a pumping test in a confined aquifer. The drawdown 
curve must always be above the confining layer. Using the definitions from Fig. 7.24 as a guide and 
starting with Darcy's law, Eq. (7.5) (again), and with appropriate boundary conditions, we obtain 
Rearranging 
.q = ki(A) ~ k ~~ (27rrt), 
· dr · 
·· . 
' -,-· = k27l"t dh 
r 
,( ;.' 
.,_ 
Integratingand inserting the boundary conditions ofwherih'= h,);·, r = 'r~, and whenh ';= h0 , r = r0 , 
' 
we obtain ' 
. 
1 r2 _ kz7r/(·h· 
h') ,', . 
n----
-
. 
rl 
q 
w 
~ 
' I 
324 
Chapter 7 · 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
.··J· 
... ··•···· 
' 
,' 
·, 
~ . 
ho 
h2 
h1 
hw · 
1:1 
,,~ 
·
1.1 
·Aquifer 
fw 
~----------------~r 
FIGURE 7.24 Radial flow in a confined aquifer with a fully penetrating well. 
Solving fork, 
For the general case: 
' ;0 
ln-
: ·'·, 
q 
' ·'w . 
,k = 21Tt (h0 -
hw) 
: 
'z . 
, 
.. , 
. ln-. 
. . 
q 
., 
'1 
k---.-
-
21Tt (h2 - ht) 
Original 
GWT 
Aquiclude 
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: 
Aquiclude 
(7.25) 
If we multiply both sides of Eq; (7.25) by t, the product of k X t becomes the transmissivity (or trans-
missibility) T, with units L2!r or m2/day. Transmissivity and storativity are terms that you will use in 
groundwater hydrology courses and references. 
· 
So far we have discussed only steady state pumping for radial flow and fully penetrating wells. 
Solutions are available for other situations and conditions-for example, flow to slots and trenches and 
partially penetrating wells. Unsteady or transient flow also may occur at times, and we must use other 
.. mathematical models, such as_the Theis method, for solving these problems. For these and other non-
ideal pumping conditions, see Mansur and Kaufman (1962), Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air 
Force (1971), Driscoll (1986), Freeze and Cherry (1979), U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1995), Reddi 
(2003), and Todd and Mays (2004). 
7.9 Seepage through: Dams and Embankments 
325 
7.9 
SEEPAGE THROUGH DAMS AND EMBANKMENTS··· 
Thus far we.have been discus~i~g' mostly seepage problems in which the boundary conditions have 
been known. In the case of seepage through a homogenous earth dam, the upper or top line of seepage 
. is not known ~md must be found usually by trial and error (Oisagrande, 1937). 
. 
. . 
. . . 
Figure 7.25 illustrates some constraints that must be satisfied simultaneously in order for the top 
. line of seepage to be drawn correctly. For any given earth da~ geometry, we choose some whole num-
ber of flow channels. Then there is only one flow net solution for this situation. (Change the number of 
flow channels and you have a different solution.) The line XY in Fig. 7.25 is an equipotential line, while 
line XZ is a flow line. All flow lines emanating from an equipotential line must be atright angles; see 
points a, b, and c .. The line of seepage will intersect the downstream slope someplace between points D 
and Z, such that the head will be divided equally from pointY to point Z, the tailwater. Finally-and 
this is the difficult part when drawing a flow net.;.;__the. resulting equipotentiaf lines that emanate from 
the line of seepage must intersect the line of seepage at right angles. Now add the fact that the flow 
lines (from points a; b~ and c, for example) must all intersect those equipotential lines at right angles as 
well. Figure 7.26 from Casagrande (1937) illustrates these sonstraints. 
Aquiclude 
FIGURE 7.25 
Example of the start of flow net construction through a homogenous earth dam on an 
impervious foundation. 
.·. · 
· 
· FIGURE 7.26 General conditions 
·for the top line of seepage for: 
unconfined flow (after 
Casagrande; 1937). · 
326 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
After the flow net is properly constructed, the exit point along the downstream surface is 
found. When you think of it, you don't want the exit point along the line DZ. As mentioned in 
Sec. 7.7.2, illteinal erosion or piping will take place on the downstream face, and the dam may even-
tually fail. Therefore, internal filters or' special drainage features are constructed within the dam so 
that the line of seepage will emerge well below the'iop surface of the dam. Figure 7.27 illustrates some 
of these drainage features that allow seepage to exit without erosion. Notice how the various drains 
(toe filter, horizontal drain blanket, and chimney'drain) alter the phreatic surface to a position well 
(a) 
Top line of se~page ·. 
Top line of seepage 
Filter 
Rockfill toe 
.....___ Impervious foundation _____:___.._ 
(b) 
Horizontal 
. drainage blanket 
';').;,, 
.....___ Impervious foundation ..--------.... 
(c) 
'Top line of seepage 
Inclined blanket 
.....___ Impervious foundation ~ 
(d) 
FIGURE 7.27 
Ef:fect of internal drainage devices on th~ line of seepage in a 
homogenous earth dam: (a) without internal drain; (b) with a rockfill toe; 
(c) with a horizontal drainage blanket; (d) with a chimney drain (after U.S. Dept. 
ofthe Interior, 1987). 
· 7.10 Control of Seepage and Filters 
327 
below the downstream surface. The dam may leak like crazy. (not necessarily economical), but as long 
as the water is clear, there is no erosion and therefore the dam is safe in that respect. 
Casagrande (1937) is considered the classic reference for flow nets for earth dams, and it has 
many examples. See also Taylor (1948), Perloff and Baron (i976), and Cedergren (1989). From an engi-
neering point of view, the flow net does not have to be perfect to obtain a reasonable estimate of the 
quantity of flow or the uplift pressures below a structure. On the other hand, you really need a very 
good solution in order to evaluate the factor of safety with respect to plping or boiling. Small differences 
in the critical exit ~·square" may makelarge differences.in the factor of safety. It all goes back to: what 
are the consequences of failure? Typically, earth structures are seldom homogenous but are composed 
of various sections of different permeability (see Sec. 7.7.4). Usually the horizontal permeability is 
larger than the vertical permeability. Equation (7.26) may be used to prepare a transformed section 
whereby the horizontal dimensions are reduced, the flow net is .drawn, and then it is redrawn to the 
original ~xpanded size: 
· · 
where kv = vertical permeability, 
. 
kh = horizontal permeability. 
shapt! ~act()r .= jff 
(7.26) 
Figure 7.28 illustrates the case where flow is below. a dam structure. The horizontal permeability is 
three times the vertical permeability. The true section is shown in Fig. 7 .28( a). A transformed section 
is made by selecting some point (A) and reducing the horizontal distance to any _other point by the 
shape factor-in this case; 1/3. Figure 7.28(b) shows the transformed section with the flow net drawn as 
usual. Notice the horizontal and vertical symmetry of the flow net. The amount of flow and uplift 
pressures may be obtained from either Fig. 7.28(b) or (c); However, when the flow net is expanded 
back to the original size, only this true section will give the actual factor of safety with respect to piping 
or boiling, using the equation given in Example 7.15; In the event that the anisotropic permeabilities 
are not parallel to the horizontal and vertical axis but are inclined, the transformed section would be 
drawn at some angle parallel to the inclinedper,mc:abilitie.s. · · 
7.10 
CONTROL OF SEEPAGE AND FILTERS 
In the discussion of seepage forces and flow nets, piping and erosion were mentioned as a possibil-
ity if, somewhere in the porous medium, the gradient exceeded the critical gradient. Piping can 
occur anyplace in the system, but usually jt occurs where the flow is concentrated, as shown in 
Fig. 7.20,or if the flow exits at the top surface of an earth dam. When the seepage forces are large 
enough to move particles, piping anderosion can start, usually continuing until either all the soils in 
the vicinity are carried.awayor the structure collapses. Cohesionless soils, especially silty soils, are 
highly susceptible to piping, and if you mustuse such soils in an embankment dam, for example, 
then you must be very careful to see that the seepage is controlled and that the chance for piping to 
occur is very small. 
·· ... , 
. · 
. 
How is seepage controlled? The choice of methods depends on the. situation, but sometimes a 
cutoff wall or trench isconstructed to completely block the seeping water. Sometimes the drainage 
path is lengthened by an impervious blanket, so that more of the head is lost and thus the gradient 
in the critical region is reduced. If properly designed and constructed, relief wells and other kinds 
of drains can be used to positively relieve high uplift pressures at the base of hydraulic structures 
(Cedergren, 1989) . 
• 
l 
328 
Chapter] 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
a"" 
o~t>·. 
.fk; .rr 
1 
Shape factor ~.Jk; = .Jg = 3 
•• 
0 . oo <> 
...--,-r-.,..---,........-;....,--;-;~-.:A-:-1: (> • ·o •• • oo(> ~·. 
\1 o. 
-
. 
-
. 
~1:):'{l~';,'~,;H;~:q~,~~;~:f~~,J~,~j'i;~ ::'~,\:·l.·t,ci_t'~L ... 
~-
n,= 3 
nd= 10 
Impervious 
(a) Sketch of problem 
I 
I 
I 
.I 
I I . 
I . 
/'-..' •__....-
, I · .... .._: 
' . ./' 
~-ct 
I 
I 
-,...-,., · 
I 
~ 
\ 
\ 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
\ 
\ I 
I 
I 
I 
\1 
, 
I 
I 
. 
I 
.I 
I 
, I 
, 
. 
I 
. 
I 
~I 
I· 
·I 
··1 
I 
1·· 
· 
~~ 
(b) Transformed flow reduced to one-third of actual net-horizontal dimensions 
., . 
I 
I 
·hind 
iE=~e 
'· /~ / 
.. ' 
: 
/ 
\ ____ ,, 
• · 
1 1 
. 
. 
I 
. 
. 
. 
', c;, 
• . ::I : 
· . . 
1
1 
, 
\ 
', 
.. : 
, 
~ 
(c) Final flow net 
FIGURE 7.28 Use of a transformed flow net to account for anisotropic permeability in a dam 
foundation: (a) problem; (b) transformed flow net; (c) final flow net (after Perloff and Baron, 1976). 
7.1 o Control of Seepage and Filters 
329 
Another way to prevent erosion and piping, reduce potentially damaging exit gradients, and 
reduce uplift pressures is to use a protective filter. Traditionally, filters consisted of one or more layers 
of free-draining granular materials are placed in less pervious foundation or base materials to prevent 
the movement of soil particles susceptible to piping. Filters allow the seepage water to escape with 
relatively little head loss, thus reducing the seepage forces within the filter itself. Today, especially for 
routine drainage applications, filters. of nonwoven geotextiles 'and 'geocomposite drainage products 
are commonly used to replace granular filters. However, in earth dams and other important water 
retention structures, most designs still call for graded granular filters. In any case, to properly design 
·both types of filters, you need to understand basic filtration principles. 
., 
Hazen (1911), while working with water treatment filters around the turn of the last century, 
found thafthe effective size of a filter was the D10 [for example,Eq: (7.11)]; that is, this size controlled 
the performance of a filter sand as much as the remaining 90% of the sizes. 
. 
. 
. 
' 
; 
I 
< ~ 
~ 
, 
, 
> 
' 
H 
; 
< J 
--' 
. 
. 
-
' 
7.1 0.1 Basic Filtration Principles 
In 1922,Terzaghi delineated the requirements for a graded granular filter ba~ed on ·the grain size 
distributions of both the filter and the material t<? be protected. Although the requirements have been 
modified slightly based on laboratory tests by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ahd the U.S. Bureau 
of Reclamation, the basic principles are still the same.Tile filter must be ~ble to: . 
. . . 1: retain the soil pai:ticles in place and prevent their migration (piping) through the filter (if some 
soil particles do move, they must be able to pass through the filter without clogging the drain 
during the life of, th(! project); and,. 
2. allow water to flow through the filter into the drain throughout the life of the project. 
·;:_· 
. 
;;. 
,') 
The first criterion is called the retention or. piping criterion, and the second is the permeability or 
flow criterion. The subsidiary criterion that the, long-term performance must be maintained is some-
times referred to as the durability or Clogging criterion, because if the filter clogs, the flow capacity 
will be reduced, and instability may result. These principles apply to graded granular filters as well as 
geotextile filters. Both require proper engineering design, or the filter and drain may not perform as 
desired. 
· 
· 
· · 
· 
Figure 7.29 illustrates the principle of the first requirement, that of retention or prevention of 
piping. As a crude approximation, let us model the filter and soil as perfect spheres. If three equal 
spheres of the filter just touch, as shown in Fig. 7.29, then they are 6.5 times larger than the largest soil 
particle that can just pass in between them .. This model is for dense packing or dense conditions. If the 
soil to be filtered were looser, you wouldthink that even larger soil particles would be able to pass 
through the filter. However, laboratory tests have shown that the grain size of a uniform filter mater-
ial can be as large as 10 times the grain size of a uniform foundation soil and still prevent particle 
· 
movement .. This is probably because two particles of the 
same size cannot pass the filter at the same time, and the. 
larger soil particles form a filter bridge over the hole, which 
Filter 
in turn filters smaller particles of soil, which then retain the 
soil and prevent piping. Other factors such as particle shape, 
relative density, and the porosity of the filter material also 
affect the limiting size. For design; iHs: probably best to 
• .. ; 
limit this number to 4 or S.At least that is what Terzaghi 
did(Taylor, 1948). Becauseit is easier to obtain the grain 
·FIGURE 7.29 ·Soil particle retained by · ··.sizes of a soil than' the pore sizes, we use the grain'sizes as a 
an ideal filter. ;. ' 
' 
surrogate for the pore sizes in developing filter criteria. 
330 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
7.10.2 Design of Graded Granular Filters 
The Terzaghi retention (piping) criterion is 
:n,;fil;er < (4to5)Dsssoil 
< 
' 
' 
' 
and the Terzaghi permeability criterion is . 
D15 filter > ( 4 to 5)Dls ~oil 
(7.27) 
(7.28) 
where D15 and D85 a~e the 15% and 85% size passing, respectively, foi the filt~r and the soil to be 
protected. 
. 
Recall that the,effective size is D 10 , not D15, but it doesn't really m'~tter which one you use. The 
important thing is to recognize that the finer portion of the gradation control~ the hydrauli~ conduc-
tivity of the drain and filter. The permeability criterion insures that there is adequate flow through 
the filter and that any seepage forces that develop are small. The number "4 to 5" is really a safety 
factor on the hydraulic conductivity, because all we really need is for the k of the filter to be slightly 
greater than that of the soil. But a difference ink of four or five times is that much safer, and we 
probably know the value of k only to the nearest order of magnitude anyway (Sec. 7.4). The Bureau 
of Reclamation also specified that the filter a·s constructed should contain no more than 5% passing 
the 0.075-mmsieve (U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1987). Further, they recommend that the filter should 
be uniformly graded. 
· · 
· 
· 
· 
Because filters are often used adjacent to slotted or perforated pipe drains, the Bureau of Recla-
. • mation added the following criterion: 
Dss filter 2: 2 X maximum openings in pipe 
(7.29) 
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers criterion for slotted ·a~d circular hole pipes is somewhat more con-
. servative than the Bureau's, according to Cedergren (1989). For slotted pipe 
Dss filter 2= 1.2 X slclt width 
Dss filter 2: 1 X hole diameter for circular holes 
Example 7.19 (From U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 1998.) 
Given: 
~e grain size distribution ~urve A, shown in. Fig. EX.7.19. 
Required: 
ii 
., 
. 
(7.30) 
(7.31) 
·Design Filter 1 to protect the base soil, curve (range) A, and design Filter 2 to protect Filter 1. 
A plastic pipe (a "geopipe") with circular openings of 6.4 mm will be used to drain the water away 
'from the filters. 
: i 
!' 
Solution: The ranges of the completed grain size curves are also shown in Fig. Ex. 7.19. You have to start 
with a base soil or the soil to be protected; Sometimes this is called the foundation soil. The base soil can 
be a sjngle line on a grain size distribution curve or a range as shown in the figure~ From this figure, find 
minimum D 85 of the soil or base.= 0.10 mm. On the same curve, find D15 = 0.03 mm. Note that the D15 
· is on the larger size of the curve. Why? Because if the hydraulic ~onductivity of the filter is OK for the 
larger D15, then it certainly is OK for the finer-grained soil. You need to start with those two points (D85 
·and D15) in order to design a filter. Using Eqs. (7.27) and (7.28), solve for D15 of Filter 1. 
7.10 · • Control of Seepage and Filters 
331 
90 
10 
--85% size 
80 
20 
30 
80 
O.L-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~--~~~~~L-~ 100 
0.001 
FIGURE Ex. 7.19 
',.,. 
0 
•• Diameter of particle in inm .. 
The maximum value of D15 is given by 
D1; filter :=;; 5Dss soil 
:=;; 5 X 0.10 mm 
:=;; 0.50 mm (upper limit) 
Th~ D15 of Filter 1 represeu'ts the minfmum value 
D15 filter ;::: 5 X D1~ s;il 
2::5 x o.o3mffi. 
;::: 0.15 mm (lower limit) 
Plot these values on Fig. E~. 7.19, and \Vith. th~ range of grain ~ize curves.dr~wn (with some lic~nse) to be 
generally parallel to the soil the filter is to protect. For a soil to be considered well graded, the uniformity 
. coefficient [Eq. (2:34)] lies in the range ofl.5to 8. ForoFilter 1, Cu = D6ofD10 = OA5 mm/0.12 mm = 4, 
therefore it is acceptable. Notice that.<5% passes the 0.075 mm sieve .. 
, 
0 
Equation (7.29) indicates that Filter lmust have a D85 = 2 X hole opening of 6.4 mm or about 
:13 mm~ Figure Ex. 7.19 shows that D85 of Filter 1 is a mere 0.10 mm. (Remember that the resulting 
·. Dss on the left of the range of Filter 1, or range of B, is because range B was drawn using some artistic 
~ iicense' to make it somewhat parallel to curve A.) Therefore a second filter, Filter 2, is needed. 
. 
Repeating the above equations, the maximum value of D 15 is 
· 
D~5 (of Filt~r2) :=;; 5 x'. D~~ ( s~il = Filter 1) ... 
:=;; 5 X l.Omm 
:=;; 5.0 mm (upper limit) 
332 
Chapter 7, . : Fluid.Fiow in Soils and Rock 
The minimum D15 of Filter 2 is 
D15 (of Filter 2) ~ 5 X D15 (soil = Filter 1) 
2: 5 X 0.5 mm 
~ 2.5 mm (lower limit) 
For the drain pipe with 6.4 mm holes, use Eq. (7.29), or D85 (of Filter 2) ~ 13 mm. This value of D85 
becomes the minimum value. Review Fig. Ex; 7.19 for the location of all these points. M·ake sure you 
understand where all the values came from. 
In the early 1990s, the Bureau of Reclamation changed their filter criteria. They established four 
categories of filter design, depending on the amomit of "base" soil (or soil to be protected) that passes 
the No. 200 (75 J-1-m) sieve. The criteria are given in U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1994). 
As you can see, the design of graded granular filters is simple. You just have to follow the recipes. 
Note that filters may have their own filter, so as to satisfy the two requirements of not clogging the fil-
ter but at the same time allowing flow through the filter. A strong word of caution: filter design is very 
important. As you observe construction; you will notice lots of carelessness when it comes to placing 
crushed gravel over fine-grained soils, supposedly designed as a filter. With time, the crushed rock will 
get clogged and pore water will build up, perhaps leading to failure. On the other hand, flow can be 
restricted with the same result. If granular filters are deposited below water, the heavier particles settle 
out first, which ruins carefully designed filter gradations. More foundation failures are due to water 
than to other causes. 
7.10.3 Geotextile Filter Design Concepts 
Designing geotextile filters is very similar to designing graded granular filters. A geotextile is similar to 
a soil in that it has voids (pores) and particles (filaments and fibers). However, because of the shape 
and arrangement of the filaments and the geotextiles' compressible structure, the geometric relation-
ships among filaments and voids are more complex thari in soils. Since it is possible to measure pore 
sizes of geotextiles directly, at least in theory, relatively simple relationships between the pore sizes of 
the geotextile and particle sizes of the soil to be retained have been developed for design. 
The basic filtration principles stated in Sec. 7~10.1 are the basis for design of geotextile filters. 
Specifically, the geotextile must retain the soil particles (retention criterion) while allowing water to pass 
(permeability criterion) throughout the life of the structure (clogging resistance criterion). To perform 
effectively; the geotextile must also survive installation (survivability or constructability criterion) and 
· · ' · '· last throughout the life of the project or system (durabilitycriteri01i). 
· 
.. . 
. Based on a detailed study of bothNorth American and European research on filters, Christopher 
and Holtz (1985) developed what'is now called the FHWA (U.S. Federal Highway Administration) 
filter design procedure for geotextile filters used in drainage· and erosion control applications. The 
level of design and' testing required depends on the critical nature of the project and the severity of 
·the hydraulic and soil conditions (Table 7.3). Especially for critical projects, consideration of the risks. 
and the consequences of a geotextile filter failure require great care in selecting the appropriate 
geotextile. For such projects, and for' severe hydraulic conditions, we recommend you use very con-
servative designs. Because the .cost of the geotextile is usually small compared to that of the other 
components and the construction costs of a drainage system, do not try to save money by selecting a 
cheaper geotextile or eliminating laboratory soil-geotextile performance testing when it is required 
by the FHWA design procedure.· 
· 
~~~ 
:7.10 ;.control ofSeepage and Filters 
333 
TABLE 7.3 Guidelines for Evaluating the 6itical N~ture or S~werity of prai~~g~ and Ero;lon ControL~pplications 
A: Cr.itical Nature of the Project . 
Item 
1. Risk of Joss of life and/or structural damage 
High 
due to drain failure: . 
2! Repair costs versus installation costs of drain: 
· Very much greater 
··:None 
Less than or equal to 
.Yes 
3. Evidence of drain clogging before potential 
catastrophic failure: 
B. Severity of the Conditions . 
Item 
1. Soil to be drained: 
Gap-graded, pipable, or dispersible 
High 
Well-graded or uniform 
Low 
2. Hydraulic gradient: 
3. Flow conditions: 
Dynamic, cyclic: or pulsating 
St~ady state 
7.10.4" FHvvA Filter Design Procedure 
'. 
Based on the concepts just described, the FHWA filter design procedure has three criteria: retention, 
permeability, and clogging resistance. Survivability and durability also are part of the design. 
. . 
Retention Criterion-;-Because they put different demands on the geotextile filter, two flow 
• I conditions, (1 )sieadyst.ate 'and (2) dynamic, are consider~ elf or ·n;t~ntion~ 
. • • 
.. 
1~ For steady state flow conditions: 
AOS or Ogs geotextile · $ BDss soil · 
~here AOS. = ~pp~rent opening size (mm);see ASTM (2010) n'4751, . 
Ogs ';" opening size in the geotextile for which 95%are smalkr (mm);AOS .~ Ogs, 
B = a coefficient (dimensionless),and 
D85 = s~il particle size for which 85% are smaller (mm) .. 
(7.32) 
The coefficient B ranges from 0.5 to 2 and is a function of the type of soil to be filtered, its density, the 
uniformity coefficient Cu if the soil is granular, the type of geotextile (woven or nonwoven), and the 
flow conditions. 
· 
· For sands, gravelly sands, silty sands, and clayey sands (soils with less than 50% passing the 0.075 
mm sieve), B is a function of the uniformity coefficient, Cu. Therefore, for 
' 
• Cu $ 2 or 2:: 8: 
B,;l 
(7.33a) 
2:::;; C;, ::54: 
B = 0.5Cu. 
(7.33b) 
4 <C~"~8: 
B = 8/Cu 
(7.33c) 
··Recall that Cu = D6o1Dw: 
Sandy soils that are not uniform tend to bridge across the openings; thus, the larger pores may 
actually be up to twice as large ( B :::;; 2) as the larger soil particles, because, quite simply, two particles 
..... ..._~ 
334 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
cannot pass through the same hole at the same time: Therefore, use of the criterion B = 1 would be 
quite conservative for' retention, and in fact this criterion has been used by the u.s. Army Corps of 
Engineers: If the protected ·graimlar soils contain appreciable fines, use ·only the portion passing the 
4.75 mm sieve for selecting the geotextile (i.e., screen off the + 4.75 mm material and just' use the GSD 
for the remainder of the soil in your calculations). · 
~ 
· For silts and clays (soils with more than 50% passing the 0.075 mm sieve), B is a function of the 
type of geotextile: 
· 
for woven geotextiles, B = 1: 
0 95 <.D85 
for nonwoven geotextiles, B = 1.8: 
095 < '1.8D85 
a.nd for both: 
AOS or 0 95 . < 0.3 mm 
(7.34) 
(7.35) 
(7.36) 
.Due to their random pore characteristics and feltlike surface, some types of nonwoven geotex-
tiles will generally retain finer particles than a woven geotextile of the same AOS. Therefore, the use of 
B = 1 will be even more conservative for nonwoven geotextiles. If you need a review of geotextile 
types and properties, see Holtz et al. (1997 and 2008) and Koerner (2006). 
2_. For dynamic flow conditions: 
If the geotextile is not properly weighted down and in intimate contact with the soil to be protected, 
or if dynamic, cyclic, or pulsating loading conditions produce high localized hydraulic gradients, then soil 
particles can move behind the geotextile. Thus, the use of B = 1 is not conservative, because the bridging 
network will not develop and the geotextile will be required to retain even finer particles. When retention 
is the primary criterion, B should be reduced to 0.5, or: 
. 
· 
·· 
.. 0 95 :5 0.5D8s . 
(7.37) 
Dynamic flow conditions can occur in' pavement drainage applications a~d in some erosion control sit-
uations. For reversing inflow-outflow or high-gradient situations, be sure that sufficient weight is main-
tained on the geotextile filter to prevent it from moving. 
The above retention criterion assumes that the soil to be filtered is internally stable-it will not 
pipe internally. If unstable soil conditions are encountered, performance tests should be conducted to 
seleCt suitable geotextiles.According to Kenney and Lau (1985, 1986) and LaFluer et al. (1989), broadly 
graded ( Cu > 20) soils with concave upward grain-size'distributions tend to be internally unstable. 
·Permeability Criterion___:.We consider two conditions when designing for permeability: (1) less 
critical/less severe and (2) critical/severe conditions. 
· 
· 
1. For less critical applications and less severe conditions: 
kgeotextile ~ ksoil 
2. For critical applications and severe conditions: 
kgeotextile ~ 10 ksoiJ·· 
where kgeotextile = the geotextile's Darcy coefficient of permeability (rn!sec). 
(7.38a) 
(7.38b) 
For actual flow capacity, the permeability criterion for noncritical applications is conservative, 
since an equal quantity of flow takes significantly less time through a relatively thin geotextile than 
through a thick granular filter. Even so, some pores in the geotextile may become blocked or plugged 
with time. Therefore, for critical or severe applications, use Eq. (7.38b ), because with a factor of safety 
of 10, it provides an additional degree of conservatism. Equation (7.38a) may be used where flow 
reduction is judged not to be a problem, such as in clean, medium to coarse sands and gravels. 
7.10 Control of Seepage and Filters 
335 
Additional geotextile qualifiers such as the permittivity are '()ften used in filtration and drainage 
design (Holtz et al., 1997 and 2008). Permittivity, defined as the Darcy coefficient of permeability divided 
by the geotextile thickness, is a good indicator of flow capacity, and thus it is useful for making sure the 
geotextile filter has sufficient flow capacity for a given soil in a particular application. Many manufacturers 
give the permittivity value for their products according to ASTM (2010) D 4491, and products are avail-
able that meet or excee'd recommended permittivity values in Holtz et al. (1997 and 2008). 
Clogging Resistance..::__ For clogging resistance, we consider the same two conditions as we did for 
the permeability criteria: (1) less critical/less severe and (2) critical/severe conditions. 
1. For less critical/less severe conditions: 
095 geotextile ;:;: 3Dls soil 
(7.39) 
Equation (7.39) applies to soil~ ~ith Cu > 3. For Cu :5 3, select a geotextile with the maximum AOS 
value based on retention. In situations where clogging is a possibility (e.g., gap-graded or silty soils), the 
following optional qualifiers may be applied: 
For nonwoven geotextiles: 
I porosity Of the geotextile, n ;:;: soo/o 
(7 .40) 
For woven monofilament geotextiles: · 
percent open area, POA;:;: 4% 
(7.41) 
Most common nonwoven geotextiles. have porosities much greater than 70%, and most woven 
monofilaments easily meet the criterion of Eq. (7.41). Woven slit films do not and are therefore not 
recommended for subsurface drainage applications. 
· 
For less critical/less severe conditions, a simple way to avoid clogging, especially with silty soils, is 
to allow fine particles already in suspension to pass through the geotextile. Then the filter bridge men-
tioned earlier formed by the Ia:rger particles retains the srmiller particles. :The filter bridge should 
develop rather quickly; and the quantity of fine particles actually passing through the geotextile is ordi-
narily relatively small. This is why the less critical/less severe clogging resistance criterion requires an 
. AOS (095 ) sufficiently larger than the finer soil particles (D15). Those.are the p~rticles that will pass 
through the geotextile. Unfortunately, the AOS value indicates only the size and not the number of 
0 95-sized holes available. Thus, the finer soil particles will be retained by the smaller holes' in the geo-
. textile,• and, if there are sufficient fines, a significant reduction in flow rate cari occur. 
. Consequently, to control the number of holes in the geotextile, it may be desirable to increase 
other qualifiers such as the porosity and open area requirements. There should always be enough holes 
in the geotextile to maintain permeability and drainage, even if some of them clog. Filtration tests pro-
.• ·. vide another option to be considered, especially' by inexperienc.e'd users. 
· 
· 
' ' . 
. 2 •. For critical/severe conditions: 
For critical/severe conditions, first select geotextiles that meet the retention and permeability 
criteria above. Second, perform laboratory filtration tests that simulate or model field hydraulic condi-
tions and use samples of on-site soils. These are called performance tests, because they model the actual 
performance of the geotextile and soil under realistic field conditions: 
. , For sandy soils with k > 10-6 m/sec, we recommend the gradient ratio test, ASTM (2010) 
·· .. · D 5101. This test uses a rigid-wall permeameter with piezometer taps that allow for simultaneous mea-
surement of the head losses in the soil and the head loss across the soil/geotextile interface (Fig. 7.30). 
The ratio of the head loss across this interface (nominally 25 mm) to the head loss across 50 mm of soil 
is termed the gradient ratio. If fine soil particles move and clog the geotextile filter, then the gradient 
ratio (GR) will increase above the maximum recommended value of three. Experience has shown that 
as long as the GR is less than three, satisfactory long-term performance will occur. · 
336 
Chapter. 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
'," 
""'' "i' 
Geotextile 
Permeameter 
- ., 
*Make flow rate 
readings from 
this outflow port 
~-
<ll 
c: 0. s 
en· 
Q) 
~ 
Ui 
::J 
'0 
<( 
FIGURE 7.30 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers gradient ratio test device {Holtz et al., 2008). " 
For soils with~ permeability lessth~n ab~ut 10-6 m/sec, filtr~tio~ tes~~ should be conducted in a 
. " flexible wall apparatus to insu;e that the specimen is.lOO% saturated and that flow is through the soil 
· rather than i.llong the sides of the speCimen. The flexible-wall GR test combines the best features of the 
GR test (ASTM sta~dard D 5101) anct'the flexible wall permeabilitytest (D 5084). Just as withthe GR 
test, multiple ports along th~ soil column accurately determine head losses. Research by Harney and 
Holtz (2001) andBaileyetal. (2005)indicated thatthe FWGRyielded consistent imd accurate results, 
and in significantlY, less thne than the GR .. · 
.. 
. · · ·-
. 
. 
. .. 
· 
Survivability and Durability Criteria-We mentioned earlier. that survivability and durability are 
.-... , a part of geotextile filter design. To be sure that the geotextile will survive the ~onstruction process and 
. -'-. not deteriorate in the field environme~t, certain strength and durability properties are required. Proba-
bly· the ·best mat~rial specifications available • for geotextile filters. are the AASHTo' (2006). Standard 
. Specifications for Geotextiles-M 288: Minimum values for tensile strength and tear and ptmcture resis-
tance are specified fordifferentfield conditions, such as'the condition of the subgrade, anguhirity of the 
aggregate, and the way the drain and backfill materials are installed and compacted. ASTM standard 
tests are available for all the required survivability properties. -· 
· · .. , Geotextile durability relates to its longevity. Geotextiles have been shown to be basically inert 
materials for most environments and applications. However,· certain applications may expose the 
geotextile to chemical or biological activity that could drastically.influence its filtration properties or 
durability. For example, in drains, granular filters and geotextiles can become chemically clogged by 
iron or carbonate precipitates, and biologically clogged by algae, mosses, and so on. Biological clog-
. ging is a potential problem when filters and drains are periodically inundated, then exposed to air. 
Excessive chemical and biological clogging can significantly influence filter and drain performance . 
. These conditions are present, for exaniple, in municipal solid waste landfills.·-
. , - ·· 
, · For additional information about. the survivability. and· durability. tests, see Koerner (2006) and 
Holtz et al. (1997 and 2008). . 
... · · 
· 7.10 . Control of Seepage and Filters 
337 
, Example 7.20 (After Holtz et al., 1997 and 2008.) . 
Given: 
Undesirabl~seepage and occasional shallow slope failures are currently a maintenance problem 
for a rural two-lane highway. The proposed solution is to construct·an interceptor clrain at the toe of 
the slope in order to permanently lower the high groundwater table. A geotextile~wrapped trench 
drain about 1 m deep is' proposed, and representative soil samples were obtained along the proposed 
drain alignment. All three soil samples were nonplastic. Gradations of three samples are given in the 
table and shown on Fig. Ex. 7.20. 
· 
· 
Required: 
Use the FHWA geotextile filter design procedure to design the geotextile filter for the drain. 
Sieve Size 
.. 
Percent Passing, By Weight 
(mm) 
Sample A 
Sample B 
Sample C 
.25 
99 
100 
100 
13 
97 
100. 
100 
4.76 
95 
100 
100 
1.68 
90;' 
96 
100 
0.84 
78 
86 
93 
0.42 
. 55 
74 
70 
0.15 
10 
40 
11 
0.074 
1 
15 
··. ·0 
100~~~~~=~=~;~~;~~r-==~~~~~~~~~~=~~~~~~~t~',T,'~-+•--~'~mnT+r+r+r-~~--+n~rr+~~~-+~---'1 0 
. 90~+H~~ttH++~~~~H~~~~-¥~~+-~~~--~+H~-41Q 
, 80 · 
' 
-H--IHH++H-+---f~-· 
····. ~ = -:= =H·+ tH-t-t-+:--+tt+H_-+-+_-_ -_ 20 
Das 
. i 70 H+l-f+_ .. + __ +._-__ +-_-+ .. *.!+ 
... + 
.... +-... +-
..... -+ 
... -... ----#.· s·~il ~-=~--
~~\~-\{-~- r~~--t .. -'-__ -_ .. +1. +++ 
.. _H 
__ ...-1 
___ --' 
___ +. _--'-._-130 ~ 
~ 601*H-t++..-1-~H-+4-~-tm+HH-+-..-1H+B+li+I\'~\H--t+HH++~~~H..-1~~40 ~ 
050-i-..5o + -+--
j_l~_\_t~ + 
-50 ~ 
= 
1 • 
1 ·1\ -'r\-: l 
8 
~ 40 H+l-t+t-+--+.-..H+I-t+t:-t-+--ttH-H+-+-t--'---tt+t+t-\1-\-+-\-,,-tt 
.H-H+-+-t--tt+t+t-t--+---1 60 
~ 
~ 30 · · · · ·· - - -- --- ·1- · --- --- · 
· --soii·c ·· ··- -~ ··· -~-\ · · -1- --- -- ----- ·· ·· ·· ·· - - - ---- 70 ~ 
H+l-t+t-t-+--ttH-H+-+-t--H+I-t+t-+ 
20H+I-t+t-t-+--ttH-H+-+-t--H+I-t+t-t-+--ttH-H+-+~~~t+t-+-+--ttH-H+-+-+---l80 
· 
~-~+=--- -c- --
· =-=\ rt= 
r:t- 90 
015 __ 
_ 
010~10 
o~~
1 ~--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1oo 
1000 
100 
10 
1.0 
0.1 
0.01 
0.001 
Grain size in millimeters 
· FIGURE Ex. 7.20 
Grain size distribution curve for soils A, B, and C.. ··· 
338 
Chapter, 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
Solution: Determine the geotextile properties required for apparent opening size (AOS) and per-
meability. For the example, we will assume that the survivability properties can be obtairied from the 
AASHTO (2006) M-288 specifications. 
From given data, this is a noncritical application. Soils are reasonably well graded, the hydraulic 
gradients are low, and flow conditions are steady state for this type of application .• 
· 
· For retention, we use the grain size analyses in Fig. Ex: 7.20 to determine the D60 , D10 , and D85 
sizes for Samples A, B, ;md C. Determine uniformity coefficient, Cu, coefficientB, and the maximum 
. AOS. From the following table, note that the worst case soil for retention (i.e., smallest B X Dss) is 
Soil C. Any geotextile that retains Soil ·c will also 'retain Soils A and B. So for the geotextile require-
ments, AOS :s 0.72 mm. 
· · 
· 
· 
. 
· · ,·, ..... . 
Soil Sample 
A· 
B 
c 
D6o + D1o = Cu 
0.48 + 0.15 = 3.2 
0.25 + 0.06 .. = 4.2 
0.36 + 0.14. = 2.6 
B. 
0.5Cu = 0.5 X 3.2 = 1.6 
8Cu = 8 X 4.2 = 1.9 
0.5Cu = 0.5 X 2.6 = 1.3 
AOS (mm) s B X Dss 
1.6 X 1.0 = 1.6 . 
1.9 X 0.75 = 1.4 
1.3 X 0.55 = 0.72 
•. - Because this is a noncritical application and the soils are predomin~~tly sandy, we can use the 
Hazen equation [Eq. (7.11)] to estimate the permeability. The largest D10 controls permeability; there-
fore Soil A with D10 = 0.15 mni controls 
· 
-
' 
' 
· k ~ (D10? = 
(0.15f~ 2(1or2 em/sec = 2(10r4 rnlsec 
~._.,,' 
Because this application is a less critical/less severe, kgeotextile ;;:: ksoil· So, kgeotextile just needs to be 
greater than 2(10r4 m/sec. 
-. 
For clogging, because this is a less critical/less severe application and Soils A and B have a Cu 
greater than 3. Therefore, for Soils A and B, 0 95 ;;:: 3D15 • So 
· 0 95 ;;:: 3 X 0.15 = 0.45 mm for Sample 'A 
_;;:: 3 X 0.075 = 0.22 mm for Smnple B 
:Soil A controls, although-because sand-size particles typically do not create clogging problems-
Soil B could have been used as the design control. So, using Soil A, AOS ;;:: 0.45 mm. For Soil C, a 
geotextile with the maximum AOS value determined from the retention criteria should be used. 
Therefore AOS ~ 0.72 mm. Also, additional qualifiers are that the nonwoven porosity is greater than 
50% and the woven percent open area is greater than 4%. 
· . 
. l 
In summary, for the filtration, the geotextile should have 0.45 mm :s .AOS s 0.72 mm; and 
· kgeotextile ;;:: 2(10r2 em/sec. Woven slit film geotextiles are not allowed. 
· 
· 
' 
For survivability, use the AASHTO (2006) M-288 specifications. 
PROBLEMS 
7.1 A clean sand having a permeability of 4.5 X 10-3 cm/s and a void ratio of 0.45 is placed in a horizontal 
permeability apparatus, as shown in Fig. 7.2. Compute the discharge ·velocity arid the seepage velocity as 
the head ilh goes from 0 to 80 em. The cross-sectional area of the horizontal pipe is 95 cm2, and the soil 
sample is 0.65 m long. · 
· 
' 
· 
7.2 A sample of medium quartz sand is tested in a' constant head permeameter. The sample's diameter is 60 mm 
and its length is 130 mm. Under an applied head of 60 em, 119 cm3 flows through the sample in 5 min. TheM, 
Problems 
339 
of the sample is 410 g. Calculate (a) the Darcy coefficient of permeability, (b) the discharge velocity, and 
(c) the seepage velocity. (After A. Casagrande.) 
7.3 A permeability test was run on a compacted sample of dirty sandy gravel. The sample was 175 mm long and 
the diameter of the mold 175 mm. In 90 s the discharge under a constant head of 38 em was 405 cm3• The 
sample had a dry mass of 4950 g and its Ps was 2710 kg!m3• Calculate (a) the coefficient of permeability, 
(b) the seepage velocity, and (c) the discharge velocity during the test. 
7.4 During a falling-head permeability test, the head fell from 49 to 28 em in 4.7 min. The specimen was 8 em in 
diameter and had a length of 85 mm. The area of the standpipe was 0.45 cm2• Compute the coefficient of per-
.. meability of the soil in cm/s, rn/s. and ft/d. What was the probable classification of the soil tested? (After 
A. Casagrande.) 
7.5 A falling-h~ad permeability test is to be performed on a soil whose permeability is estimated to be 
2.8 X 10-6 m/s., What diameter standpipe should you use if you want the head to drop from 31.2 em to 
19.4 em in about 5 min? The sample's cross section is 12 cm2 and its length is 7.4 em. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
7.6 Show that the units ofEq. (7.4a) are in fact energy/mass. Show that Eq. (7.4b) has units of energy/weight, and 
that this comes out as a length (head). 
7. 7 Briefly describe exactly how you make a correction for temperature in a permeability test if the water is not 
exactly 20°C.Stat~ your reference. 
7.8 In Example 7.1, the void ratio is specified as 0.43. If the void ratio of the same soil were 0.35, evaluate its 
coefficient of permeability. First estimate in which direction k would go, higher or lower; then proceed. 
7.9 A falling-head permeability test on a specimen of fine sand 12.5 cm2 in area and 10 em long gave a k of 
6.2 X 10--4 cm/s. The dry mass of the sand specimen was 195 g and its Ps was 2.71 Mg/m3. The test tempera-
ture was 23°C. Compute the coefficient of permeability of the sand for a void ratio of 0.67 and the standard 
temperature of 20~C. (After A. Casagrande.) 
· 
7.10 A constant head permeability test is performed on a soil that is 2 em X 2 em square and 25 em long. The 
head differenc~ applied during the test is 18 em, and 5 cm3 is collected over a .time of 100 sec. 
_(a), Compute the permeability based on these test conditions and results. 
(b) A falling head test is to be done on the same soil specimen in the same time (i1 -
t2 = 100 sec), and the 
standpipe diameter is 0.8 em. If the average head during the test should be 18 em [%(h1 + h2) = 18], 
. what are h1 and h2? 
. 7.11 The coefficient of permeability of a clean sand was 389 X 10--4 cm/s at a void ratio of 0.38. Estimate the 
permeability of this soil when the void ratio is 0.61. 
7.12 Permeability tests on a soil supplied the following data: 
Run No. 
1 
2 
e 
0.70 
1.10 
25 
40 
k (crn!s) 
0.32 x 10-4 
1.80 x 10-4 
Estimate the coefficient of permeability at 20°C and a void ratio of 0.85. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
7.13 For the initial case in Problem 6.33, compute the head of water required at the top of the silty clay layer to 
cause a quick condition. 
7.14 Sand is supported on a porous disc and screen in vertical cylinder, as shown in Fig. P7.14. These are equilib-
rium conditions. 
(a) For each of the five cases, plot the total, neutral, and effective stresses versus height. These plots should 
be approximately to scale. 
... 
. 
. 
. 
· 
. (b) Derive formulas for those three stresses in terms of the dimensions shown and e; p, and Pw for each 
' case at both the top and bottom of the sand layer. For case IV, assume the sand is 100% saturated to the 
upper surface by capillarity. For case V, assume the sand above level he is completely dry and below he 
·is completely saturated. (After A. Casagrande.) 
· 
340 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
T 
;fffi~)ffl 1 
Case I,, 
T 
-- .. h_. 
--I 
I' 
•''. _i_ 
T
-_ 
-
. 
L 
_1_. 
Case IV. Assume that the sand is fine 
enough to remain 100%-saturated up to· 
its top _surface by capillarity. 
--FIGURE P7.14 
· 
·:.\• 
. 
' 
' 
-
Case II 
-r-
+_.h_.·'_·_·T··_·· 
t··· 
L 1 
I .. 
-~ 
't.' 
- d + 
'h -
~-
T 
-
-
L 1 
~ 
D -t 
L ± 
CaseV. Assume an idealized case'inwhfch the height 
--·-._of capillary rises he- All.soil below that height is 100% 
saturated, and all soil above that height is 0% saturated. 
·'· 
~ ... 
7.15 Given the soil cylinder and test setup of Example 7.4, with actual dimensions' as follows: AB = 5 em, 
-- BC =-lOcm, CD= lOcm, and DE= 5 em. Calculate the pressure, elevation, imd total heads at points 
A through E in centimetres of water,and plot these values versus elevation. · 
7.16 · For each of the cases I, II, and Ill of Fig. P7.16, deteimine the pressure, elevation, and total head at the 
entering end, exit end, and point A of the sample. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
T 
4m + 
4 + 
2 
Case I 
FIGURE P7.16 
T. 
1
4m 
v.' 
.. 
-
tl'f~fj 
1 
:::.-:'.<-.::::-:::·.:·::::.1-m 
-,,:·::·,,::.-.,,_ ..... _T 
Case II 
.. Case Ill 
Problems 
341 
7.17 For each of the cases shown in Fig. P7.16, determine the discharge velocity, the seepage velocity, and the 
seepage force per unit volume for (a) a permeability of 0.14 cm/s and a porosity of 46% and (b) a perme-
ability of 0.0013 cm/s and a void ratio of 0.71. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
7.18 An inclined permeameter tube is filled with three layers of soil of different permeabilities as in Fig. P7.18. Express 
the head at points A, B, C, and D (with respect to the datum indicated) in terms of the different dimensions and 
permeabilities. (a) Work the problem first assuming k1 = k2 = k 3• (b) Then work it assuming 3k1 = k2 = 2k3• 
Plot the various heads versus horizontal distance for both parts (a) and (b). (After A. Casagrande.) 
--r t 
D 
/Datum. 
j 
FIGURE P7.18 
7.19 Assume the soil of Fig. 7.10 has a saturated density of 1.89 Mg/m3• If the head of water h above elevation B 
is 2.45 m, compute the effective stress at elevation A at the bottom of the soil sample during flow. What is the 
effective stress under these conditions at midheight in the soil column during steady-state flow? 
7.20 The foundation soil at the toe of a masonry dam has a porosity of 38% and a p, of 2.73 Mg/m3• To assure 
safety against piping, the specifications state that the upward gradient must not exceed 30% of the gradient 
at which a quick condition occurs. What is the maximum permissible upward gradient? (After Taylor, 1948.) 
7.21 Show that it is impossible to drown in quicksand. (Hint: Calculate the density of the quicksand.) 
7.22 Use Eq. (2.17) for Psat and do the algebra to satisfy youcielfthat Eq. (g) in Sec: 7.6.1 reduces to Eq.(7.15). 
7.23 A contractor plans to dig an excavation as show in Fig. P7.23. If the river is at level A, what is the factor of 
safety against quick conditions? Neglect any vertical shear. To what elevation can the water rise before a 
quick condition will develop? (After D. N. Humphrey.) 
· 
· 
30 
g 20 
Excavation 
c: 
~ 10 
~ 
iii 
FIGURE P7.23 
7.24 Given the excavation as shown in Example 7.13, with h = 18m and p = 1915 kg/m3, calculate the minimum 
allowable H,. 
· 
· 
7.25 A she'et pile wall has been installed partially through a silty sand layer, similar to the one shown in Fig. 7.13(b ). 
Assume a sheet pile 12 m long penetrates 6 m (halfway) into the silty sand layer of thickness 12m. For this 
condition: 
. . 
. 
(a) Draw a flow net using three (or four at most) flow channels. Note that the flow net is completely symmet-
rical about the bottom of the sheet pile. (This part is needed for the solution of Problem 7.31.) 
342 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
. (b) If the water height on the upstream side is 5 m and on the downstream side 1 m, compute the amount of 
water flowing under the sheet pile per metre of wall if the coefficient of permeability is 3.1 X 10-4 cm/s. 
(c) Compute the maximum hydraulic gradient at the downstream side of the sheet pile. 
7.26 · Using the data of Fig. 7.18, compute the total head, piezometric head; pressure head, and elevation head for 
points C and C'. Assume any convenient datum. 
7.27 Assuming that you have completed the flow net of Problem7.25, compute the total head, piezometric head, 
pressure head, and elevation head for a point halfway up the sheet pile from its base, on either side of the 
sheet pile. Assume the datum is at the bottom of the silty sand layer. Plot gradient versus depth of piling and 
. extrapolate to find the exit gradient. 
7.28 Develop a flow net for ,the case shown in Fig. P7.28 using either manual methods or. flow net software. 
Assume three or four flow channels. 
k-----45 m -----+1 
t> 
• . ll . -
.. , 
9m 1 1 ~Cutoffwall 
I 
30r~~ 
. '· 
FIGURE P7.28 
(Adapted 
from Taylor, 1948.) 
7.29 _Develop a flow netfor the case shown in Fig. P7 .29 iising either mimual methods or flow net software. 
FIGURE P7.29 
(Adapted 
from Taylor, .1948.) 
-~~-r----::::-=:--1: 
t> 
v. 
13.3 m 
5m 
"' 
"'1 
Q 
• t> 
Q 
0 ° 0 
~ 0 
~ t> 
~'t•o 
. 'Tc 
I 
-8.3 m 5 m I 
1' 
'"' 
'. t> . 
Cutoff wall· 
Problems 
343 
7.30 For the completed flow net of Fig. P7.30, compute the flow under. the dam per meter of dam if the coefficient 
: :of permeability is 4.2 X 10-4 cm/s.· 
· · · · 
"; : · 
\ • 
' 
FIGURE P7.30 
(Adapt~d from Taylor, 1948.) 
7.31 Given the data of Problem 7.25. Using the method of fragments (see Appendix C), determine: 
(a) The amount of water flowing under the sheet pile per metre of walL 
(b) The exit gradient.. 
7.32 For the dam of Fig. 7.15 set up the problem and solve as far as you can by the method of fragments (see 
Appendix C). 
7.33 If one of the rows of sheet piles had to be removed for the problem given in Fig. Ex. 7.20a, which one when 
removed would cause the least reduction in flow? 
7.34 Same as Problem 7.33, but solve for the least amount of uplift pressure. Give your answer in terms of metres 
ofhead. 
· 
7.35 Assume a row of sheet piles as shown in Fig. Ex. 7.29a. The total thickness of the soil layer is 18 ni, while the 
difference between the head and tailwater is 12 m. Plot a graph showing how the flow under the sheet pile varies 
when the depth of the sheet pile goes from 8 m to 18m. Ignore problems associated with the exit gradient. 
7.36 Suppose there is a problem with the exit gradients, as in Problem 7.35. One solution ~ould be to place a 
horizontal filter· over the soil where the water exits. How does this help? Is it better for the filter to have 
a similar coefficient of permeability? One that is much smaller? Or one that is much larger? Explain which 
one is most desirable. 
· 
· 
7.37 A protective three-layer filter is proposed between the foundation and rock drain located near the toe of a 
compacted earth-fill dam. Samples were taken and the grain sizes of the materials were determined to be as 
follows: 
· 
Foundation, finest samples 
Foundation, coarsest samples 
Filter layer No.1 
Filter layer No.2 
Filter layer No.3 
Rock drain 
0.12 
0.3 
2.0 
5.0 
15.0 
D85 (mm) 
0.1 
0.9 
1.0 
3.5 
10.0 
40.0 
Is this filter acceptable. If not, comment on any practical consequences. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
344 
Chapter 7 
Fluid Flow in Soils and Rock 
' 7.38 .In an attempt to reduce minor surface instability and maintenance problems on the backslopes of a rural 
highway, interceptor trench drains are to be installed at the top of the slope to intercept surface and infiltrat-
ing groundwater from the hillsides above the road. The drains are 1 to 1.5 m deep, and the drainage trench 
lined with a geotextile filter. A perforated drain pipe is placed in the bottom of the trench, and the trench is 
backfilled with coarse drainage agg£egate. 
· · ' 
· · · 
· · 
Sieve analyses were performed on samples of soils typical of the problem areas along the highway 
alignment, and the following average data (percent passing) we!e obtained: 
\ 
,-
• 
,I 
/ 
U.S. Standard Sieve No. 
A 
99 
88 
68 
52 
Soils· -
B 
100 
c 
100 '; 
99 
78 
65 
62 
61 
25 
20 
Design the geotextile filter, for the interceptor drains. Extra credit: prepare material and construction 
specifications for this project.· 
~ 
( ' . ' . 
·' 
·, 
; </ '\, 
',,;'' 
'·'·)' 
" 
l, 
·\; ,' 
'· 
I ~ 
' 
' ' ~ 
.,,,_; 
,, 
~· l' 
.,,,-
··, 
,.,·, 
\il 
' 
~ : 
•;·; 
,,,1' 
.. 
8.1 
C .H A P T E R 
8 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
INTRODUCTION 
l; 
You are undoubtedly aware that when materials are loaded or stressed, they deform or strain. Defor-
mations can be either a change in shape (distortion) or a change in volume (usually compression in 
soils). While in some materials the deformation or strain occurs immediately upon loading, in others, this 
response may require a relatively long time, In geotechnical engineering, this second, time-dependent 
response is especially true for clay soils. Most of this chapter is devoted to the compressibility of these 
kinds of soils. 
. 
' 
. 
The simplest type of stress-strain relationship applies to elastic materials, in which the stresses 
and strains occur simultaneously, and if the load is removed,the material returns to its original 
shape. Elastic stress-strain reh1tionships can be either linear (as in Hooke's law for a spring) or non-
linear. Some special elasticmaterials'do riot respond immediately to loading, and these are referred 
to as visco-elastic, where "visco" refers to the influence of time on the response. TYpically, the faster 
a visco-elastic material is loaded, the stiffer it becomes; or stated another way, when a load is applied 
rapidly to a visco-elastic material, it deforms less than when the load is applied more slowly: But soils 
are even more' complicated than this-most do not return to their original shape when they are 
unloaded, but retain some permanent deformation or strain. This is referred to as plastic behavior. 
For example, Silly Putty™ is material that is almost perfectly plastic-when it is loaded enough to 
cause some deformation; then unloaded, almosfrio strain is recovered, and it retains its deformed 
shape. 
Another important characteristic of soils is that they are nonconservative materials, which means 
in engineering mechanics terminology that they have a "memory.'~Jf a soil is loaded and then unloaded, 
it retains part of that stress history, which can influence the soil's behavior if it is later reloaded. 
Soils are therefore extremely complex materials in terms of their stress-strain-time behavior. As 
a result they havebeen among the most difficult engineering materials to model, both mechanically or 
•. in computer codes, because they often hav~ all of the characteristics we've just mentioned. In summary, 
soils have 
• nonlinear stress-strain relationships; 
• time-dependent response to loading (the,visco-part); 
345 
346 
Chapter 8 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
• some recoverable deformations when loaded and then unloaded (elastic); 
• some irrecoverable deformations when loaded and unloaded (plastic); and 
• a memory, a result of their stress history .. 
This chapter deals with all of the mechanical and behavioral issues we'vejust mentioned: non-
linearity, time dependence, and elastic and plastic response to loading-unloading, and the effect of 
stress history. Since most settlement problems ingeotechnicalpractice are associated with clay soils, 
they will be the primary focus of this chapter. 
' 
· 
The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol 
--
av 
Cc 
c• 
c 
cce 
c, 
c,. 
D 
eo 
eroo 
• 
. ewoo 
·de' 
Ho 
dH 
lv 
LIR 
•. ni 
M 
(1lv 
OCR 
;S, .. · 
. Sc· 
S· 
'. l 
Ss 
St 
u 
Uo 
z 
'' 
a 
ev 
., 2:! iT~~~,' 
u'· ... 
p 
G'~ef 
O"~o 
Tf 
Dimension 
M-1LT2 
ML-1T-2 
'L 
L 
ML-1T2 
M-1LT2 
., 
; 
-
L 
L 
L 
L 
L 
ML-1T-2 
ML'"1T-2 
L• 
-
-
ML:-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T2 
Unit 
(kPat1 
kPa 
(decimal) 
Definition 
Coefficient of compressibility - Eq. (8.5) 
Compression index- Eq. (8.7) 
Burland's intrinsic compression index- Eq. (8.30) 
Modified compression index- Eq. (8.8) 
Recompression index- Eq. (8.15) 
Modified recompression index 
Constrained modulus - Eq. (8.6) 
Initial or in situ void ratio 
. 
. 
Burland's intrinsic void ratio, e, at u~ = 100 kPa 
Burland;s intrinsic void ratio, e, at u~ '=' 1000 kPa 
(decimal) . 
Change in void ratio 
.. ;• .. ·.·. 
' .· ' : 
'ill 
. · · · ·· 
Original thickness ofa soil layer- Eq. (8.3) 
m 
~; . ' 
-
kPa 
.<k.Pat1 
m 
m 
m 
m 
·m 
kPa 
kPa 
m 
-
! (%) 
·: kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
Changeiri thickn~ss of a soil layer- Eq. (8.3) 
Burland's void index- Eq. (8.29) 
· · 
Load increment ratio- Eq. (8.27) 
Dimensiorile~s.inodul~s iiu~ber ~Eq. (8.21) 
Tangent modulu~ ~ Eq. (8.21) 
. 
. 
. 
Coefficient'ofvolu~echange- Eq. (8.6) 
·Overconsolidation ratio cEq. (8.2) . 
. , , Settlement~ Eq. (8.4) :·. 
Consolidation settlement- Eq. (8.1) 
Immediate. or distortion settlement- Eq. (8.1) 
Secondary compression- Eq. (8.1) 
Total settlement.- Eq. (8.1) 
Pore water pressure 
·· · ·. Initial or hydrostatic pore water pressure 
Depth 
. 
Dimensionless stress exponent- Eq. (8.21) 
Vei:tical strain- Eq. (8.3) 
Vertical' effective consolidation stress' 
The precorisolida'tion stress oi maximum past vertiCal 
effective stress - Eq. (8.2); p~ and u~m are sometimes used 
Reference stress = ~00 kpa- Eq. (8.21) 
Vertical (effective) overburden stress .:: Eq: (8.2) 
Undrained shear strength- Eq. (8.34) 
8.3 · Compressibility of Soils 
347 
8.2 
COMPONENTS OF SETTLEMENT 
When a soil deposit is loaded-for example, by a structure or a .man-made fill- deformations occur. The 
total vertical deformation at the surface resulting from the lmid is called settlement. The movement may 
be downward with an increase in load or upward ( calle<i swelling) with a decrease in load. Temporary 
construction excavations and permanent excavations such as highway cuts will cause a reduction in the 
stress, and swelling may result. As shown in Chapter 6, a lowering of the water table will also cause an 
increase in the effective stresses within the soil, which will lead to settlements. Another important aspect 
about settlements, especially in fine-grained soils, is that they are often time dependent. 
. 
In the design of foundations for engineering structures, we are interested in how much settle-
ment will occur, and how fast it will occur. Excessive settlement may cause structural as well as other 
damage, especially if such settlement occurs rapidly. The total settlement, Sp of a loaded soil has three 
. 
' 
. . 
' 
-
. 
components, or 
where s; = the immediate settlement, 
sc = the consolid~tion (time-dependent) settlement, and 
ss ~ theseconda~ compression (also time-dependent). 
(8.1) 
The immediate 'settlement, although not actualiy elastic, is usually estimated by using elastic 
theory in clay soils. The equations for this component of settlement are in principle similar to those 
for the deformation of a column under an axial load P, where the deformation is equal to PUAE. In 
most foundations, however, the loading is usually three dimensional, causing some distortion of the 
foundation soils, which is why this is sometimes called the distortion settlement. 
Most settlements that occur in coarse-grained soils are immediate. The reason is that these soils 
typically have such a high permeability that any water or air that needs to escape in order for the soil 
to compress can do so very rapidly. Distortion settlement can be appreciable in certain fine-grained 
soils even though no compression is occurring-the permeability is too low for water to escape quickly 
and allow the soil to compress. Immediate settlements must be considered in the· design of shallow 
foundations, especially for. structures that are sensitive to rapid settlements. A brief introduction to 
estimating the immediate settlement of shallow foundations on clay soils is given in Sec. 10.4. 
The consolidation settlement is a time-dependent process that occurs in saturated fine-grained 
soils that have a low coefficient of permeability. The rate of settlement depends on the rate of pore 
water drainage. Secondary compression, which is also time dependent, occurs at constant effective . 
stress and with no subsequent changes in pore water pressure. Compressibility of geo-materials is dis-
cussed in this chapter, while the time rate of consolidation and secondary compression are discussed in 
Chapter 9. We show you how to make settlement computations in Chapter 10. 
. 
8.3 
COMPRESSIBILITY OF SOILS 
' 
• 
' 
,« 
• 
' 
• 
' 
' 
•• 
Assume for the time being that the deformations _of cmr compressible s~illayer will occur in only one 
dimension. An example would be the deformation caused by an earthfill covering a very large area. Later 
on we shall discuss what happens when a ~tructure of finite size loads the soil and produces deformation. 
When a soil is loaded, it will compress because of: 
1. deformation of soil grains, 
2. compression of air and water in the voids, and/or 
3. squeezing out of water and air from the voids .. 
_;, 
348 
Chapter 8 •: · Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
( :· 
;;l 
<Tv 
et 
·~ 
,c 
2 
.. IV ·.· · .... 
~
., 
:\-~:=(~)};:~ 
... 't . :•: 
(a) 
(b) 
3 
Time (min) 
(c) 
. 
. 
, 
':;. 
' 
<Tv 
1;; 
4 
"v 
FIGURE 8.1 
Stress-strain and stress-time curves · 
for a typical sand: (a) stress versus strain; (b) void; 
. ratio versus pressure; (c) compression versus time 
·(after Taylor, 1948); 
' 
. 
At typical engineering loads; the amount·of 
compression of the soil mineral grains themselves · 
· is small and usiuilly cim beneglected. Often, com-
pr~ssiblesoils are found belo'w the water table, and 
they can be considered fully saturated (at least we 
.. usually. assume 100% satunition .·for. most. settle- .....______ 
ment problems). Thus the compn!ssiori of the pore 
fluid can be neglected. Therefore, the last item con-
tributes the most to the volume charige of loaded 
soil deposits. As the pore fluid is squeezed out, the 
soil grains rear~ange themselves into a more stable 
and derisei'configuration, and a decrease in vol-
ume and surface settlement results. How fast this 
process occurs depends primarily on the perme-
ability of the soil. How much rearrangement and 
compression takes plac~ depends on the rigidity of 
the soil skeleton, which is a function of the struc-
ture of . the· ~~il. Soil structure, · as discussed in 
Chapter4, depends on the 'geologic and engineer-
ing history of the deposit. .• 
. . . 
Consider the case where granular materi-
als are one-dimensionally compressed. The curve 
shown in Fig. 8.1(a) is typical for sands in com-
.. pression in terms of stress-strain; Fig.8.1 (b) shows 
'the same. data as a voidoratio-versus-pressure 
. curve. Note that it is common to rotate the coordi-
nate . axes . 90° . when plotting e . versus a v data. 
Figure 8.1(c) shows the compression versus time; 
.. note how rapidly compression occurs. The defor-
mations take place in a very short ti~e due to the 
, . relatively. high permeability, of granular soils. It is 
very easyfor the water (and air) in the voids to 
squeeze . out.. Many. times, .for all, practical pur-
poses, the compression of sands occurs during 
construction and, as a result, most of the settle-
ments have taken place_by the time the structure 
is completed. However; because. they occur so 
fast, even the relatively small total settlements of 
granular layers may be detrimental to a structure 
which is particularlysensitive to rapid settlements. 
The settlement' of gduitilar soils is esti~ated. by 
using Eq: (8.1) with sc and s s neglected. Details of 
• these analyses· can be found in books on founda-
. tion engineering. · 
· 
Y:: · · .. When clays undergo ·loading, because of 
their relatively low permeability, their compres-
sion is controlled by the rate at which water is squeezed out of the pores. .This process, called 
consolidation, is a stress-strain-time phenomenon. Deformation may continue for months, years, or 
even decades. This is the fundamental and only difference between the compression of granular mate-
rials and the consolidation of cohesive soil: compression of sands occurs almost instantly, whereas 
Uv, 
overburden 
'stress 
(a) At equilibrium. 
Valve (size is 
analogous to 
permeability) · 
i1u + 
overburden 
stress, uv 
(b) Under stress, ~u. 
. 
.· 
. Note increased pore water .. 
pressure and. water flow. 
FIGURE 8.2 ·Spring analogy as applied to consolidation. 
· 8;3 
Compressibility.of.Soils 
349 
,, 
(c) At equilibrium under uv + ~u. 
· · Note settlement s. · 
consolidation is a very time-dependent process. The difference in settlement rates depends on the dif-
ference in permeabilities. · 
· 1 
' 
The consolidation of clay is readily explained by the spring analogy shown in Fig. 8.2.A piston P 
is loaded by a vertical stress ( u v) and compresses a spring inside the chamber, which is filled with 
water. The spring is analogous to the soil mineral skeleton, while the water in the cylinder represents the 
water in the soil voids. The valve V at the top of the piston represents the soil permeability. At equilib-
rium, wheri the valve is open, no water flowsoutbecause the spring is supporting the stress completely. 
This is analogous to the situation where a soil layer is at equilibrium with the weight of all soil layers 
(called overburden) above it. A pressure gage is connected to the cylinder, and it shows the hydrostatic 
pressure U0 at this particular location iri the soil. Now the soil layer is loaded by an additional stress 
increment, t:.u, Fig. 8.2(b ). At the start of the consolidation process; let us assume that the valve V is 
initially closed. Upon application of the stress, the pressure is immediately transferred to the water 
inside the cylinder. Since the water is' relatively incompressible and the valve is closed so that no water 
can get out, there is no deformation of the piston, and the pressure gage reads u0 + t:.u, where 
t:.u = t:.u, the additional stress added [Fig. 8.2(b )]. The pore water pressure t:.u is called the excess pore 
water pressure, since it is in excess of the original hydrostatic pressure u0 • 
. , 
. To simulate a fine-grained coh~sive soil with its low permeability, we' ciin ~peri the valve and allow 
water to slowly leave the cylinder under the initial excess pressure t:.u. With time, as water flows out, the 
water pressure decreases and gradually the stress t:.u is trimsferred to the spring, which compresses 
under that stress. Finally, at equilibrium [Fig. 8.2( c)] no fitrtherwater is squeezed out of the cylinder, the 
pore water pressure is again hydrostatic, and the spring is in equilibrium with the overburden and 
applied stress, u v + t:.u. 
.·. 
· 
· 
· 
Although the model is rather crude; the process is analogous to whathappens when cohesive soils 
~ in the field and laboratory are loaded. Initially; all of tlie external stress is transferred into excess p~re 
water pressure. Thus, at first there is no change in the effective stress in the soil, since the additional total 
stress is exactly equal to the amount of additional pore pressure [Eq. (6.8)]. Gradually, as the.water is 
squeezed out under a pressure gradient, the soil skeleton compresses and the effective stresses i~cn!ase. 
The compressibility of the spring is analogous to the compressibility of the soil skeleton. Eventu!uiy the 
excess pore pressure becomes zero, and the pore water pressure is the same as the hydrostatic 'pressure 
prior to loading. 
· 
· 
. 
350 
Chapter 8: :. Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
8.4 
ONE-DIMENSIONAL CONSOLIDATION TESTING 
When soil layers covering a large area are load~d ~ertically, the compr~ssi~ncan be a~s~med to beone-
dimensional. To simulate one-dimensional compression in the laboratory, .:.Ve compress the soil in a 
speCial device called a consolidonieter (sometimes confusingly referred to as an oedometer). Principal 
components of two types of consolidometers are shown in Fig. 8.3. 
. . 
. 
: .. , 
, · 'An undisturbed soil specimen, which represents· ~n element of the. compressible soil layer under ·~ 
investigation, is carefully trimmed and placed into the confining ring. The ring is relatively rigid so that 
no iateral deformation takes place; On the top and bo'ttom of th~ specimen are porous ''stones'~ ~hich 
allow drainage during the consolidation process. These stones are actually discs made of sintered co run~ 
dum or brass that is very porous. Ordinarily, the top porous stone has a diameter approximately 0.5 mm 
smaller than the ririg, so that it does not drag along the side of the ring when the specimen is being loaded. 
Usually the ratio ofthe diameter to height of the specimen is between 2.5 ·and 5, and the diameter 
depends on the diameter of the undisturbed soil samples tested. There is more trimming disturbance with 
thinner ·and to a lesser extent smaller~diameter speCimens; on the other· hand, taller specimens ha~e 
greatersidefriCtion: Side friction can be reduced to so~e extent by the use of ceramic or Teflon~lined 
rings or by application of a lubricant sud{ as molybden~m disulphide. 
. 
. 
. . , 
' In the floating-ring test [Fig. S.3(a)]the c~mpression takes place from both faces of thesoil speci-
men. It can be shown (Lambe, 1951) that the ring friction is somewhat less in this test in a fixed-ring test 
[Fig. 8.3(b) ], in which all movement is downward relative to the ring. The primary advantage of the fixed-
ring test is that drainage from the bottom porous stone may be measured or otherwise controlled. In this 
. m:mner, for exa~ple; permeability tests may be co~d~cted in the consolidometer.. 
'. 
. . • . . ; 
· FIGURE 8.3 · Schematic cross-section of the 'consolidation test apparatus, 
·. or. a consolidometer: (a) floating-ring consolidometer; (b) fixed-ring 
· consolidometer (after U.S. Army Corps of Engineers •. 1986). 
: . 
1
'' ; • < 
~· 
B.4 . One-Dimensional Consolidation Testing 
351 
·During the consolidati<jn test, to establish the relationship between load and deformation for the 
soil being tested, the applied load and specimen deformation are carefully measured. Stress is, of course, 
computed by dividing the applied load by the area of the specimen. It is common practice in North 
America to load the specimen incrementally; either through a mechanical lever-arm system or by im air 
or air-hydraulic pressure cylinder. This test is called an incrementa/load consolidatio~ test, and the stan-
dard procedure is ASTM (2010) D2435. After each stress increment is applied, the specimen is allowed 
to consolidate and come to equilibrium with little or no further ddormation and with the excess pore 
water pressure within thespecimen approximately equa.l to zero."Thus the final or equilibrium stress is 
an effective stress. The process is repeated, usually by doubling the previously applied increment, until 
sufficient points are obtained to adequately define the stress"deformation curve . 
. . The constant rate of strain cotisolidometer can· also be used to determine consolidation proper-
ties (ASTM, 2010, D 4186;Gorman et al., 1978): In this device, the specimim is loaded continuously at 
a constant rate of deformation or strain, and drainage is typically allowed only at the top of the spec-
imen: As a result, excess pore pressure exists at the base and gradually diminishes to iero at the top 
surface. The rate of deformation is COntrolled SO that the pore pressure at the base lS between 3 o/o and 
15% of the applied l~ad at the end ofloading. The load; deformation; and base excess pore pressure 
are measured, and a'nalytical methods exist (Smith and Wahls; 1969; Wissa et al., 1971) to interpret the 
results: Howe~er, this test has certain limitations in the type of data that can be extracted. We will 
focus on the incrementally loaded test. 
· · ·· 
· · . 
· 
· 
The object of the consolidation test' is to simulate the compression of the soil under given external 
_loads. What we are in fact measuring is the modulus of the soil in confined compression [Fig. 8.1(a)]. By 
·.; f?Vall.lating the compression characteristics of an undistur~ed r~presentative sample; we. can predict the 
settlement of the soillayer irithe field. 
·. 
. · 
. 
. 
. 
. 
· · 
· ' . . 
. 
· 
Engineers use several methods to present stress:deformation data. Two methods are shoWn in 
Fig. 8.4: in the first, percent consolidation or vertical strain is plotted ~ersus'the equilibiiumor effective 
consolidati'an' stress a~c·· (The 'subscripts vc' r~fer to vertical b~?soiidatio,n; ~nd the' prime ma.rk indicates 
::.;,., ,· 
.. 
. ,, 
.... ; 
· Effective co~solidatiori stress,·~~~ (kPa) 
1 
.. . . 
. (a) 
,. -
. ; --~--~ -~-
; • -· 
' 
) 
• ~-
•• • • 
< 
" 
' 
·' 
~ 
... · Effective consolidation stress; u~b (kPa) 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
. (b) 
. . 
. .. , 
1000 
FIGURE 8.4., Two ways to present consolidation test data: (a) percent consolidation (or strain)versus effective 
stress; (b) void ratio versus effective stress. Test on a specimen of San Francisco Bay mud from:-7.3 m. 
352 
Chapter. 8 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
• 0 r--=-----r--r-rrrTTT,----,--,-T""T"-r-n-n 
. ' 
"~ 10 
r.t 
Q) 
0 
~-
i-c 
. ·~ 20 ~:_::__:__:_:.__,-:-:---:-:-t-::\"---:-:--;--1 
Ji)· 
g 
Cii 
u :e 
' ~ 30 ~---,:-;-:-:--:--;--:-i:--:--:~~~-~ 
1 
' r ~ 
. 
·., 
•. 
· 
Effective consolidation stress, u~c (kPa) , 
(a) 
1 . 0 '------L-L--1-,-1-1--W.J-L--'--.1-J---'-J-I..J..U 
10 
100 
1000 
EffecJive consolidation stress, u~c (kPa), 
(b)' ' •.. 
· . FIGURE 8.5 . Consolidation test data presented as: (a) percent consolidation (or strain) versus log 
. effective stress; (b) void ratio versus log effective stress (same data as in Fig. 8.4). 
·. effective stress.) A second way't~ pr~sent stress-deformation data is to relate the void ratio to the 
. ~fiective consolidation' ~tress. Both. of these graphs show that soil is. a straiil hardening material; that is, 
the (instantaneous) modulus increases as the stresses increase. : '. 
..· 
· · · 
· 
. 
· ' 'since the stres~-~tr~in relationships shown i~ Fig. 8.4 are hlghly nonlinear, more' common ways to 
' present the results of a consolidation test are shown in Fig. 8.5~ The data shown in Fig. 8.4 are now pre-
. se'nted as p~rcent consolidation (or vertical strain) and void ratio vers~s the logarithm (base 'lo) of effec-
tive consolidation stress. It can be seenthat both plots have two approximately straight line portions 
· connected by a smooth transitional curve. The stress at which the transition or "break" occurs in the 
·curves shown in Fig. 8.5 is an indication of the maximum vertical overburden stress that this particular 
sample has sustained in the past; this stress, which is very important in geotechnical engineering, is 
known as the preconsolidation pressure, u~·. Som~times the symbol p~ or <T~m is used, whe,re the sub-
script m indicates maximum past pressure. The <T~ in soils is analogous to the yield stress in metals.: 
8.5 
PRECONSOLIDATION PRESSURE:AND STRESS HISTORY 
We have mentioned that soils have ~ ;'mem:~ry," so to speak, ~f the stress and other changes that have 
occurred since they were deposited~ These changes are part of the soil's stress history and they are pre-
served in its structure (Casagrande, 1932c). When a laboratory specimen or a soil deposit in the field is 
loaded to a stress level greater than it has ever experienced in the past, the soil structure is no longer 
able to sustain the increased load and it starts to break down. Depending 6ri the type of soil and its 
geologic history, this breakdown may result in quite a drastic difference' in: the slopes of _the. two por-
tions of the consolidation curve. In other words, the transition region may be small, and such soils are 
1- .. 
often very sensitiv~ to even small changes in the applied stre~ses. With other less sensitive soils,_such as 
silty soils, there never really is a '~break" in the curve, because the fabric gradually alters and adjusts as . 
the applied stress increases. The initial, flatter portion of the void ratio-log pressure consolidation 
curve is termed the reconsolidation portion, and the partafter the change in slope is called the virgin 
· , compression portion [Fig. 8.5(b )];Asthe latter. name implies, the soil has never before experienced a 
stress greater than the preconsolidation.stress or pressure. : 
8.5 
Preconsolidation Pressure and Stress History 
353 
8.5.1 
Norm-al Consolidation, Overconsolidation, and Preconso.lidatiori Pressure . 
We say that a soil is normally consolidated when the preconsolidation pressure a~ just equals the cur-
rently existing effective vertical overburden pressure a~0 (that is, a~ = a~0). If we have a soil whose 
preconsolidation pressure is greater than'tlie existing overburden pressure (thaiis, a~ >' a~o), then we 
say the soil is overconsolidated (or preconsolidated). We can define the overconsolidation ratio, OCR, 
as the ratio of the preconsolidation stress to the existing vertical effective overburden stress, or 
a' 
OCR=___!__ 
U~o 
(8.2) 
Soils that are normally consolidated have an OCR = 1, and soils with'an OCR > 1 are over-
consolidated; It is also possible to find a soil thathasan-OCR < l, in which case the soil would' be 
widerconsolidated. Underconsolidation can occur, for example, in soils that have' only recently been 
deposited, either geologically ~r by human activity, and are still consolidating udder their own weight. 
For example, geologically recent submarine landslides, mine tailings,: and sludge ponds are often under-
consolidated. If.the pore.water,pr~ssure were measured under conditions of underconsolidation, the 
pressure would be iri excess of hydrostatic. 
. 
There are many reaso~s why a soil may be overconsolidated: The. cause. could be either a change 
in the total stress or a change in pore water pres~ure; both chiuiges' would alter)he eff~ctive stress. 
Geologic deposition followed bysubsequent erosion is an example of a change in .the total stress that 
will preconsolidate the und~rlyirig soils. Desiccation of the upper laye.rs due'to surface drying will also 
produce overconsolidation .. Sometimes an increase in a~ occurs due to changes in the soil structure 
and alterations of the chemical' environment of the soil deposit. Table 8:i lists' some of the m~chanisms 
leading to preconsolidation of soils (see also Holtz, 1991). 
8.5.2 
Determining the Precons~lidation Pressure . · 
How is the preconsolidation pressure determined? Several procedures have been proposed to deter-.. 
·mine the value of a~. The most popular is the Casagrande (1936b) construction, illustrated in Fig.' 8.6, 
where a typical void-ratio-versus-log-pressure cunie is plotted for a'clay soil: The procedure is also 
applicable to ev~versus-log-a~c curves. The Casagrande procedure is as follows: .l 
' 
" '·: : 
• ' 
- ,, 
' 
. • . 
<"-
. 
. . • 
~ 
' 
' 
; 
' 
~ ' 
" , 
. ; 
• 
~' 
1. Choose by eye the point of minimum radiu's '(or maximum curvature) gn the consolidation curve 
(point A in Fig. 8.6):' 
· 
· · · • . i 
. • 
2. Draw a horizontal line from point A. 
, 
3; 'Draw a line tangent to the curve at poin't A.''. i 
4. Bisect th6 angle ~·ade by steps 2 and I . . ' . " • ; 
. 
S.' Extend the straigbt-line'portion of the virgin compression curve: up to where it meets the bisector 
•· • line obtained iri step 4. The point· of intersection of these two' lines is the preconsolidation stress 
' (point B 'of Fig. 8.6) .. ' · •· · : · . · · • 
>. 
_ 
' • .· 
· : • · 
• . 
' 
· · : 
· 
·, An even simpler method for estimating the preconsolidation stress is used by some engineers. 
,;:,The two straight-line portions of the consolidation'curve'are extended; their intersection defines 
another "most probable" preconsolidation pressure (point C of Fig. 8.6). If you think about it, the 
maximum possible a~ is at point D, the minirimm possible a~ is at point E, the in~ers~ction of the virgin 
:compression curve with a horizontal line drawn from ea. . 
' 
. 
. 
. 
. " 
Sallfors (1975) provides an a!temative .method to evaluate the preconsolidation •pressure. It is 
graphical like Casagrande's and has field evidence to back it up. The procedure uses the void ratio-linear 
354 
Chapter 8 · 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
TABLE 8.1 ·Mechanisms Causing Preconsolidatii:;n 
Mechanism 
· Change in total stress due to: 
Removal of overburden 
Past structu'ies 
Glaciation 
Change in pore water pressure due to: 
Change in water table elevation 
Artesian pressures 
Deep pumping; flow into tunnels 
Desiccation due to surface drying 
Desiccation due to. ~!mit life 
.. Change in soil structure due to: 
Se~ondary compression ( aging)• . 
' 
' 
:, 
' 
• 
f· 
·1 
. 
·Environmental changes such as pH; temperature, 
and salt concentration· 
'· · 
·Chemical altenitions due to weathering, precipitation,· 
. ·cementing agents, ion exchange 
change of strain rate on Ioadingb 
._...-~""'. 
Geologic erosion or excavation by m1m 
Kenney (1964) gives sea level changes 
·Common in glaciated areas 
Common in many cities . 
May have occurred during deposition 
, M~y have ~ccurred during deposition 
Raju (1956) 
Leonards and Ramiah (1959) 
Leonards a~d Altschaeffl (1964) 
Bjerrum (1967, 1972) 
· 
Lambe (1958a and b) 
· Bi~rruin (i967) · 
Lowe (1974) 
"The magnitude of cr~lcr~c related to secondary compression for mawre natural deposits of highly plastic clays may 
reach values of 1.9 or higher. 
bFurther research is needed to determine whether this mechanism should take the place of secondary compression. 
After Brumund, Jonas and Ladd (1976). 
or arithmetic pressure curve [like Fig. 8.5(a), although it appears that the early load increments are too 
·high to effectively establish the preconsolidation pressure]. Follow these steps to find up using Fig. 8.7: 
1. Extend the straight-line portions of the'e..:.log u~ curve at the break in the curve (around the pre-
consolidation pressure), as lines land 2. 
. . 
. , 
. 
. 
, 
. . 
2. Place a line tangent to the data curve ~nd ~djust it until you 'make an isosceles triangle with its 
two sides oflength x. (See below.) 
3. Extend the left side of the tangent line until it intersects with the top data line, line 1. The pre-
consolidation pressure is equal to the pressure at this intersection point. 
' 
. 
. . 
Butterfield (1979) advocated plotting the natural logarithm of (1 +e) versus log u~, with the up 
defined at the intersection of the straight-line extensions of the recompression and virgin compression 
lines. Becker et al. (1987) plotted the strain energy or "work" done to compress the soil during consolida-
tion and plotted this cumulative work (W) versus log u~. The break in theW-log u~ curve defines the pre-
consolidation pressure. For additional information on this method and several others, see Holtz (1991 ). 
Hansbo (1994) points out that using the ~-log u~ curves may give a up that may not actually exist, 
even though there is a change in. slope of the consolidation curve. The logarithmic scale chosen also 
determin~s the value of O"p. Therefore; one should check to see if a preconsolidation pressure exists by 
redrawing the data on a void ratio (or percent strain) versus (arithmetic) pressure curve. The tangent 
modulus method described in Sec. 8.8 also can be used to estimate the preconsolidation pressure, as 
can a method by Schmertmann (1955) described in Sec. 8.10. • . · 
..... 
8.5 Preconsolidation Pressure and Stress History 
355 
Minimum possible 
. 
• .... 
, • 
M. o 
.. st probable (C1'lsagrand. _e.) 
· 
tyla~imum possible 
. . 
Point: :E BD 
.. 
't H 
Minimum possible cr;, --1 cr;,-.- Mostprob~ble': · ••.. 
. 
. 
, . .,_.,. · 
· 
El· ·. 
Maxi~um~~ssible-~;, 
· ... ' 
c· 
... · 
• 
I ., . 
• 
• 
Effective consolidation stress, cr~c 
FIGURE 8.6 The Casagrande (193Gb) construction for determin-ing the 
preconsolidation stress. Also shown·are the minimum possible, the most 
probable, and the maximum possible preconsolidation stresses. 
c: ·e 
iii 
~ 
0 
0 e 
"0 
"6 > 
Effe~tive consolidation stress, cr~c · 
FIGURE 8.7 Determination of 
the preconsolidation pressure, 
cr;,, using void ratio or percent· 
consolidation versus linea·r 
effective stress (Sallfors, 1975). 
356 
Chapter 8 :' Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
8.5.3 
Stress History and Preconsolidation Pressure 
How is it possible that the simple graphical prdceclures described above predict the preconsolidation 
pressure? To understand the reason, let us follow the complete stress-strain history of a sedimentary clay 
soil during deposition, sampling, and finally reloading in the laboratory by the consolidation test. This 
history is shown in Fig. 8.8. The line OA represents the relationship between the void ratio and the loga-
rithm of effective stress of a particular element in the ground during deposition. In this case, additional 
material is deposited above our element, and the process consolidates the element to point A. This point 
represents ti'i?in situ e versus log a~c coordinates of the norinallyconsolidated,clay element. When a 
boring is made 'to sample the soil, the overburden stresses are removed by the sampling operation, and 
the sample rebounds or swells along the (dashed) curve AB. . 
· 
When the soil specimen is transferred from the sampling tube into a consolidometer ring and then 
reloaded in the consolidation test, the. (solid) reloading curve BC is obtained. About point C, the soil struc-
ture starts to break down, and if loading continues, the laboratory virgin compression curve CD is obtained. 
Eventually the field and laboratory curves OAD and BCD will converge beyond point D. If you perform 
the Casagrande construction on the curve in Fig.' 8.8,you will find that the most probable preconsolida-
tio~ pressure is very close to point A on the graph, which is the actual maximum past pressure. Observa-
tions of this sort"enabled Casagrande to develop his graphical procedure to find the preconsolidation 
FIGURE 8.8 Void ratio versus log . 
'effective consolidation stress curve 
illustrating deposition, sampling 
(unloading) and reconsolidation in 
the consolidation test apparatus. 
0 
~ 
"C 
~ 
0.90r---r---r--r-T'"T"TT",..,.---,-----,--,-""T"T"T"'rTT---, 
Field virgin 
compression 
curve in situ 
0.55 
F 
10 
100 
1000 
' 
' 
Effective consolidation stress, U~c {kPa) 
8.6 Consolidation Behaviorof Natural and Compacted Soils 
357 
stress. e If the sampling operation was of poor quality and mechanical disturbance to the soil structure 
occurred, a different curve-BC'D (long dashes) would result upon reloading-of the sainple in the con-
. solidometer. Note that with the '~disturbed" curve, ihe'preconsolidation stress has all but disappeared with 
increasing mechanical disturbance; the reloading curve will move away from point A in the direction of the 
arrow. The preconsolidation pressure is inuch more difficult to define, because sample disturbance lias 
altered the soil structure and the "break point" in the consolidation curve becomes more obscure .. 
In the consolidation test, after the maximum stress is reached, the specimen is rebounded incre~ 
mentally to essentially zero stress (points D to E of Fig. 8.8). This process allows you to determine the 
final void ratio, which you need i'n order to plot the entire e versus log ~~ curve. Sometimes another 
reload cycle is applied, like curve E to F of Fig. 8.8. Just its with the initial reconsolidation curve (BCD), 
this loading curve eventually rejoins th~_virgin'compression CUrVe. 
, 
0 
e • 
Example 8.1 
Given: 
The results of the laboratory consolid~tion test ofFig. 8.8. 
~ ", 
', 
Required: 
For the laboratory compression curve (BCD), (af determine the preconsolidation stress using 
the Casagrande procedure; (b) find both the minimum and maximum possible values of this stress; and 
(c) determine the OCR if the in
1 situ effective ov~rburden stress is 80 kPa. 
Solution: 
' 
·~ ~ . •. ~ 
~ 
a. Go through the steps of th~ Casag~ande construction' as shown on Fig. 8.6. The a~ is about 
130 kPa, 
, 
i 
' 
, 
• 
, 
• 
b. Assume eo ;, 0.84. Minimum possible a~ is about 90 kPa, and the maximum possible a~ is 
about 200 kPa. ; 
e 
' 
• 
~ 
• 
e 
• I. \ 
-. 
c. Use Eq. (8.2) 
. . ---· 
Because of the uncertaintiesin determining both a~ and a~0 , OCRs are usually given to only 
one dec~mal rlace. .. . 
. 
< 
I' 
, 
1· 
8.6 
CONSOLIDATION BEHAVIO~ OF NATURAL AND COMPACTED SOILS 
~ 
' 
' 
Typical consolidation curves for a wide variety of soils are presented in Figs. 8.9(a) through 8.90). You 
should become familiar with" thegeneral shapes of these curves, especially around the preconsolidation 
st.ress, for the different soiltyres.Also, study tlie ammint of compression .:le'as well as the 'slopes of the 
various curves. 1 . . • . 
. . 
. 
. . ' . 
:. ···.Tile test res~lts in Fig. 8.9(a) are typical·~f soils from th~ lower.Mis~issippi Rive~ V~lley near 
Baton Rouge, Louisiana. These soils, primarily silts and sand silts with clay strata, are slightly overcon-
solidated due . to wetting and drying cycles .during. deposition (Kaufman and . Sherman, 1964) .. 
Figures 8.9(b) and 8.9(c) show test results from heavily overconsolidated clays. Note. the very low void 
ratios for the precompressed glacial till soils from Canada in Fig. 8.9(b) (MacDonald and Sauer, 1970). 
358 
Chapter 8 
Compressibility of Soil and.Roc:k .. :. 
i· 
'l> 
. ' 
' ' 
"0 g 
. ~ i 
.,, 
,' 
10 
100 
<.; 
Effective consc;>lidation stress, u~c (kPa) ' 
"'" 
'',. 
.. . . 
" 
' 
.... 
Test 
Elev. 
Atterberg limits 
iT~o 
u' 
Wn , 
No. 
(m) 
Classification 
LL 
PL 
PI 
(%) 
eo 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
Cc 
... 
8 
-8.8 CL-clay, soft 
41 
24 .... '17 
34.6' 
0.94 
160 
200 
0.34 
9; 
-9.8 CL-clay, firm.·· 
,,·· 
50:' 23 
; ; 27 .36.4: :1.00. 
170' .:250' 
0.44 
10 
:-:-1.7.1 
ML-sandy silt 
31 • 25 
.. 6 
29.8 
0.83. '230, .350 
0.16 
11 
:.:20.1 
CH-clay, soft · 
8,1 
25 
56 
50.6 
,1.35 
280 
350 
0.84 
12 
-23.2 SP-sand •: · 
. Nonplastic 
. 27.8 
0.83 
. 320 
-
13 
-26.2 CH-clay w/silt strata 
71 
28 
43 
43.3 
1.17 
340 
290' 
0.52' 
',(a),; 
'.)·;; 
·FIGURE 8.9(a) 
Nearly normally consolidated clays and silts {after Kaufman and Sherman, 1964): 
'\:,':·.;j 
•.. f 
8.6 
Consolidation Behavior of Natural and Compacted Soils · 359 
Consolidation curite:· 
Unoxidized Floral formation 
sample from 
test hole No. 5 
Sandy clay: 
LL=27 
PL = 14 
PI= 13 · 
0 
Wn= 11.% 
~ 
'0 
0.4200 
0.3800 
.. -\: 
~ 0.3000 
0.2600 
Effective cons~lidation_ stress, U~c (kPa) 
(b) 
.. .. 
Consolidation curve: 
Oxidized till Battleford formation 
sample from 
test hole No. 2 
IU
1 = 370 
-', 1/ 
. 
!'' 
FIGURE 8.9(b) Overconsolidated daytills(afi:er M-acDonald and Sauer, 1970). 
Q) 
·0 
:;:::; 
/: e, 
.:2 
·o 
> 
'-,. 
··'' 
· Effectiv~ consoli~ation stress; u~c (kPa) . · 
, , . 
. ·i : (c)-..! 
··. 
Claytill: 
. 
LL,;, 34 
. PL= 20 
·.<: 1 
w;;= 23% 
d Standard test: 
s1 ~m dia. 
1.8 IT\ depth · 
Sandy clay: 
LL = 24 
PL = 12 
PI= 12 
' 10 000 
" 
" 
. 
. • 
' 
:. l.. 
• 
' ' 
• 
• . 
. ' 
• 
; ,, 
,. 
', 
.\ ·, :.,_ 
,' < 
• • 
-:' 
• 
• ·~' 
• ' 
-· 
~ 
_, 
' 
' 
•••• 'J-
'; ,. ; t ,. l-
• 
; 
-
~ '-. ', 
; ·.' 
• ; 
-, '' 
. FIGURE 8.9(c) . Overconsolidated clay tills,' showing effects of different types of sampling (after Soderman 
and Kim;,1,970). 
' 
, 
' 
1 
' 
·•• 1 
' 
• 
'r. 
• 
( . . 
: . : 
• •, 
! 
r. ; 
: 
.' _[ ·_ 
' 
' ; ' 
• 
~ 
~ .. ,, 
360 
Chapter; 8 
2.2 
2.0 
1.8 
: Q) 1.6 
0 
-~ 1.4 
"0 g 
1.2 
LO 
0.8 
0.61 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock . , 
A sensitive marine clay: :. 
LL = 56 PL =· 29 
. 
PI,;, 27 
Wn = 78% 
"',·l 
Effective consolidation stress, u~c (kPa) 
(d) 
FIGURE 8.9(d) 
Leda clay (after Quigley and Thompson, 1966). 
The effects.of sample disturbance on claytills are shown in Fig. 8.9(c). Note how the consolidation 
curves move downward and to the left (see Fig. 8.8) as disturbance increases (Soderman and Kim, 1970). 
Compression curves for another .Canadian clay, a sensitive marine clay called Laurentian or 
Leda clay, are shown in Fig. 8.9(d) (Quigley and Thompson, 1966). Botli.theundisturbed and remolded 
curves are shown. The very sharp "break" or drop-off in the undisturbed curve at the preconsolidation 
stress is typical of highly sensitive clays. Until then the compression curve is very flat, but once this 
"critical" or yield stress is reached, the soil structure breaks down quickly and dramatically.' : 
. 
Figure 8.9(e) shows the consolidation characteristics of Mexico City clay (Rutledge, 1944). Tiiis 
sediment is not a mineral-based clay but is composed primarily of microfossils arid diatoms. The porous 
structure of the fossils gives the soil a very high' void ratio, natural water content, and compressibility. 
Mexico City clay was previously thought to be c6mposed primarily of volcanic ash that weathered ·to 
allophane·(Chapter 4), since it is appears ~morphous in X-rays. Also, see-how the compression 
increases markedly after the prec~nsolidation stress is reached. As expected, remolding aimost com-
pletely destroys the preconsolidation effect (see the dashed curve). 
· 
. 
: 
Figure 8.9(f) shows the consolidation curves for two typical glacial lake clays (Rutledge, 1944). 
Both of these clays are rather silty and have much lower in situ void ratios and natural water contents 
than either the Leda or Mexico City clays. 
. 
· 
Highly expansive or swelling clays from the southwest United States have compression curves 
.. like those shown in Fig. 8.9(g). Soils in both tests started out at about the same void ratio and water 
content. Both were initially loaded so that the void ratios remained constant. Then the sample marked 
(1) was loadedincrementally and continuously in the conventional manner; the other was repeatedly 
rebounded and reloaded. Notice how much rebound (swell) occurred and also that the cyclic test 
marked (2) had essentially the same C()mpression characteristics as the conventional test. These vari-
ations probably occurred because the"samples had a long history of alternate wetting mid drying 
(desiccation) that caused the soils to be heavily overconsolidated (Chapter 6 and Table 8.1). 
8.6 Consolidation Behavior.of.Natural and Compa.cted Soils · 361 
14.5 r-r--r-rrrrrr---,--r"""T""l..,.,..,-rr-----r--,--r-rTT"T,-----r--,---.--
14.0 1-----o-_...._ 
13.5 f----o-__..__ 
\ . 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ .. 
Note: Time interval .· · \ 
between load increments, 
= 4 days 
\ 
\ 
CP4 remolded \ 
~ 
\ 
• Effective consolidation stress, a~c (k~a) 
. (e) . 
FIGURE 8.9(e) 
Mexico City clay (after Rutledge, 1944). 
5000 .. 
·(I) 
:~ 
·!!! 
"C .... 
g 
5000 
/ 
.• 
-
' 
. 
. 
·. ; " 
Effective consolidation stress, a~~ (kPa) 
. 
: .· '. . 
. . 
(f)·. ' 
. FIGURE 8.9(f) 
Chicago and Indiana glacial clay (after 
Rutledge, 1944). 
362 
Chapter 8., .. Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
Initial e const~~~O ~:;-~-:.~':..~'-~::;_~ 
.. ;_;;;;::=-.~----:-. 
--:.-,---:--.---,---"T"7 
.. '--,'i' lr-:--.,, .--:] 
to prevent swelling { ~ 
~-:::;::::--.. 
· 
0.86 
~.... 
... ... 
~ 
............... ..... 
0.82 
<ll_ 0.78 
0 
~ 
"C g 0.74 
0.70 
0.66 
0.62 10 
~ 
............ .... 
~ 
... 
~ 
.................. ... 
,,, 1 
' 
"''' 
' ..... , 
:~...... 
... ............ 
''· 
' 
............. 
',, 
' 
' 
~' 
'~ 
~ 
... 
Sample 1: conventional test 
"', 
. 
~ 
... 
Sample 2: cyclic rebound-reload 
"< 
test (loading) 
~ 
.. 
---- ---- Sample 2: cyclic rebound-reload 
,, 
test (rebound) 
wn= 31.7%, both samples 
100 
Effective consolidation stress, u~c (kPa) 
(g) 
FIGURE 8.9(g) Swelling ·clays from Texas (after Dawson, 1944) . 
3000 
'' 
. Consolidation curves for windblown silts (loess) are shown in Fig. 8.9(h). The first figure from 
Clevenger (1958) shows dry density versus applied load (arithmetic) for an initially low and an initially 
high density s·ample. The second figure shows the same data conventionally plotted as an e versus log u~c 
curve. Notice what happens when the samples are prewetted. In its natural state, loess is typically par-
tially saturated, and when it is submerged or inundated, collapse of the soil structure occurs. This condi-
tion is shown by the prewetted (dashed) curves of Fig. 8.8(h). The amount of collapse upon wetting 
depends, as you might expect, on the initial density. Had the water not been added, the consolidation 
would have followed the upper curve. Sometimes prewetting loessial soils may be desirable to reduce 
settlements after construction. 
· 
. 
Consolidation characteristics of another undisturbed silt are shown in Fig. 8.9(i). Notice the lack 
of a "break''.in the curve; this is typical of silty soils, and it makes determination of the preconsolidation 
stress difficult in practice. · 
Besides Mexico City clay, peats and other highly organic soils also have high void ratios and high 
natural water contents. The very high void ratio and concave upward shape of the compression curve is 
typical for peat, as shown in Fig. 8.90). Just as with silts, determination of the preconsolidation stress is 
often difficult for such soils. 
Compressibility of compacted clays is a function of the stress level imposed on the soil mass. At 
.• relatively low stress levels, clays compacted wet of optimum are more compressible. At high stress lev-
els, the opposite is true. In Fig. 8.10 it can be seen that a larger change in void ratio (a decrease) takes 
place in the soil compacted dry of optimum for a given change (increase) in applied pressure. 
M" 
..§ 
Cl e. 
"0 
"c. 
;:!." 
·c;; 
·c: 
Q) 
"tJ 
~ 
0 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
"' it:: :c = 
-~ 
en 
c: 
Q) 
"tJ 
~ 
0 
8.6 
Consolidation Behavior of Natural and Compacted S~ils 
363 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Low-density loess, 
·" '~ 
prewetted 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
High-density loess, 
' 
low natural moisture 
Effective consolidation stress, u~0 (kPa) 
Low initial density 
----LOWWn 
------ Prewetted 
" •. Effective consolidation stress, U~c (kPa) 
(h) 
1000 .. 
• FIGURE 8.9(h) . Loessial soils from the Missouri River Basin, showing effect of prewetting " 
on consolidation. Note the drastic reduction in the void ratio when the low natural water 
content soil is wetted (after Clevenger, 1958). · 
' 
364 
Chapter 8 · 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
(]) 
0 
~ 
"'C g 
0.6 L....;...----1.--I.....I-J....L.J.J..w._----'----1.--'--J...J..J..JCU----J 
10 
100 
1000 
Effective consolidation stress, u~c (kPa) 
(i) 
FIGURE 8.9(i) 
Newfoundland silt (after 
Taylor, 1948). 
. · 
Q) 
0 e 
"'C g 
Dry compacted or · 
undisturbed sample, 
Q) 
0 e 
. "'C 
·a 
> 
2~-L~~llll--~~~ll-~ 
10 
100 
1000 
Effective consolidation stress, U~c (kPa) 
G) 
FIGURE 8.90) 
Newfoundland peat (after 
Taylor, 1948). 
· 
:21@ .. 
0 . ..::::. 
-- .... 
" 
> 
-
/ ..... ..;_ ............. 
~ . 
I 
... .., 
' 
...... 
"'•. 
I 
............... 
Rebound for both samples 
· 
............ 
0 
. 
0 
Pressure, natural scale 
Pressure, log scale 
Low pressure consolidation 
High pressure consolidation 
.FIGURE 8.10 Change in compressibility with molding water content(after Lambe, 1958b). 
8.7 
SETTLEMENT CALCULATIONS 
How are settlements calculated? Figure 8.11 shows a soil layer of height H that is composed of both 
solids and voids, as shown in the middle of the figure. From the phase relationships described in 
Chapter 2, we can assume that the.volume of solids V8is equal to unity, and therefore the volume of 
voids is equal to e0 , the initial or original void ratio. Finally, upon completion of consolidation, the col-
umn of soil would look like that shown at the right side of Fig. 8.11 The volume of solids remains the 
same, of course, but the void ratio has decreased by the amount A.e. As you know, linear strain is 
defined as a change' in length divid~d by the original length. Likewise; we niaydefine the vertical strain 
in a soil hiyer as the ratio of the change in height to the original height of our soil column. Vertical 
strain, ev, may be related to void ratio by using Fig. 8.11, or 
.· 
A.L 
A.H 
s 
A.e 
e = -
or -
= -- = ---
v 
L 0 
H 0 
H 0 
1 .. + eo 
(8.3) 
· .. , 
··· • · 8.7'' Settlement Calculations 
365 
FIGURE 8.11 
Calculation of settlement from the phase diagram. . . 
• ,J' 
; ; 
' 
" 
' 
,· 
• ' 
. ·.' 
• 
~' 
.". 
' 
•. 
. ' 
" 
' : 
' 
; ' 
' 
' t l 
~' . 
Solving for the settlements in terms of the void ratio, we obtain: 
'. 
~e' . . . 
: 
S = -1--Ho = BvHo· 
+ eo 
Note that Eq. (8.4) is based only on phase relationships and applies to all soil types. 
Example 8.2 ·· 
,·.· 
Given: 
(8.4) 
;l ,, 
' .. 
Prior to placement .of a fill covering a large area at a site, the thickness of a compressible soil 
layer was 10 m.lts original in situ void ratio was 1.0. Some time after the fill was constructed, measure-
ments indicated that the average void ratio was 0.8. 
. , ,. 
, , 
·· 
· 
'· .• ,· 
. ,' 
·. 
'•' 
' 
\ 
,; 
. 
. . . 
.. 
Required: 
Estimate the settlement of the soil layer. 
Solution:. Use Eq. (8.4). 
ile 
1.0.- 0.8 
s = -1--H0 ·= .1, . 10 lOrn =:l.om· 
+eo 
+ . 
. 
. 
. 
•, 
' 
\I 
• • 
. 
. 
' 
· • · ~ .When we kno~ the
1relatlon~hip bet~een void r~tio and effective stress, we can comp~te the set-
tlement of a compressible .layer due to the. applied. stress. This relationship is, of course, determined 
from a one-dimensional compression or consolidation test, and we have already shown several ways to 
display the test results. The slope of the compression curve, when the results are plotted arithmetically, 
. is called the coefficient of compressibility; av, or . . 
\· .•. 
-~~; .. _ .. : 
·.··•·· 
·.:· .. 
;_;~~,.~~-.: 
'\..',''''"···.·'ii~_;:· 
r_; 
(8.5a) 
\ 
-,;, 
' 
Since the curve is not line~r [se~ Figs. 8:1(b) arid 8.4(b)], avis approximately constant over only a small 
pressure increment, (Tt to y2; .o~ 
.. , 
· 
... · 
· .. ., . . . 
. , . 
(8.5b) 
where the void ratios e1 and e2 correspond to the respective pressures a! and az. 
366 
Chapter 8 
· Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
;.' 
' 
~ c 
(' 
Example 8.3 . 
Given: 
. 
. 
. 
. 
The compression curve shown in Fig. 8.4(b ). 
' 
• 
I 
'· '. 
Required: 
Comp~te th.e coefficient of compre~sibility 'a.; for th~ stress increm~nt from 200 to 400 kPa. 
Solution: From Fig. 8.4(b ), we find t~e void nitios corresponding to th~;e· st;bss~s ar~ e~·~,;,· 1.76 and 
e2 = 1.47. Using Eq. (8.5b), we have 
~ ; • ' ' 
< ~ ; 
' 
' 
., • ' 
; ; 
i t ; 
1.47- 1.76 
. ~v = 400 
.:..._ 200 = -0.0015 per kPa 
Note that the units of av are the reciprocai ~f those for stress, or 1/kPa or m2/kN; av could be reported 
as 1.5 m2/N. 
: ' 
' 
When the test results are plotted in terms of the percent consolidation or strain as in Fig. 8.4(a), 
then the slope of t~e compression curve is the coefficient of volume change, mv, or 
. 
. _ dev ,:_ ~ev . _ ___!!!!..__ _ _!_ 
mv- d?"~. -:- ~a~ - 1 t ;eo.- ~)> 
(8.6) 
where ev is the vertical compression or strain [Eq. (8.3)], and.D is the co~strained modulus. In one-
dimensional compression, ev is equal to ~e/(1 + e0 ). 
:;, " 
Example 8.4 
Given: 
The compression curve show~ in Fig. 8.4(a) .. 
Required: 
• a. · . Compute the coefficient of volume change mv for the stress increment from 200 to 400 kPa. 
b. Determine the constrained modulus D.· . ' ·· . 
{.; 
·'! 
-·, ~ ,_- ... ' 
. ,., 
· Solution: : · 
a. From Fig. 8.4(a), the ev corresponding to'a~'of200 kPi is 23.7% ~nd thee~ corresponding to 
400 kPa is 31.4%. Use Eq. (8.6) 
'· ' 0.314 ~ 0.237 = 0.0004~er kPa 
mv= 400-200 
, 
As with av, the units of mv are the redprocal of those for stress. 
b. The constrained modulus is the reciprocal of mv, or 
D = 2600kPa 
r" 
8.7 
Settlement Calculations 
367 
· Example s:s . 
< 
' 
., 
' 
·_, ,·;_')' ,, .... 
,'!,,.', 
Given: 
.. Theresults of Examples 8.3 arid SA. 
Required: 
Show that mv = avl(1 + e0 ) for the increment 200 to 400 kPa . 
. 1 .. : 
Solution: From Examples 8.3 and 8.4, av = 0.0015 per kPa and mv = 0.0039 per kPa~ From Fig. 8.4(b ), 
eo= 2.60 
av 
0.0015 
' '' ' ' 
', 
' 
:, · ' · :-. : • 
mv = -1,-- = -1 
2 6 
~ 0.0004, or the same as above. 
, +eo 
+ . 
When test results are plotted in terms of the void ratio versus the logarithm of effective stress 
[Fig. 8.5(b)], then the slope of the virgiil. ~o'mpression curve is called the compression index, Cc, or 
Example 8.6 
Given: 
-de 
c =---
'c.' d log av 
! 
) 
' 
loga2' -'-' log aJ. 
The consolidation test. data of Fig. 8.5(b ). 
' 
. ' 
' 
'' 
' 
',· 
~ 
... 
Required: 
e1- ez 
, '·' 'a2 
log-;-
a1 
' 
' 
. '. 
Determine the compression index of this soil (a) by Eq. (8.7) and (b) graphically. 
Solution: 
(8.7) 
a. The virgin compression curve of Fig. 8.5(b) is approximately linear from 100 to 800 kPa. At 
'' · leastwe can determine the averageslope between these'twopoints. Therefore from Eq. (8.7) 
wehave' 
· 
· 
. 
,-,,, 
:,:_ 
· '· 
c = 2.10 '- 1.21 = 0 99 
c 
800 
. 
log100 
'-.:Note that C~ is dimensionless:, 
, : • 
' · 
': ;r 
' · 
b. To determine the Cc graphically, we note that 
a2 
· 1000 
··:· 
· ·· ·· · 
·-
log a' = log 100 = log_10 = 1 
1 
' 
' 
Therefore if we find the difference in void ratio of the virgin compression curve over one log 
cycle, we automatically have the Cc (because the denominator of Eq. (8.7) is one). If you do this for 
j .:.,.. 
' 
368 
Chapter 8. · ,Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
the log cycle 100 to 1000 kPa, for example; you find that de is slightly less thanT.O for a line parallel to 
the average slope between 100 and 800 kPa. Therefore Cc is slightly less than 1.0, which checks the cal-
culation of part a. 
Example 8.7 
Given: 
• ' 
; 
~ • 
: 
< 
The consolidation test data of Fig. 8.9( a). 
~ ' . ; ' 
.'. '. l' : 
' 
~ 
• " :: ~ .- ', 
~ 
j "~ 
,•, 
Required: 
Determine the Cc of tests 9 and 13 . 
. , S()_lu~ion:~f?.(;ar1 eith.er us~I~qJK?)pr do this graphic~lly. F.or te~t~9, usi11g Eq. (8..7), 
.. · . 0.88 - 0.64 = 0.42 
Cc ;,: 
1500. 
log 4oo 
This is close to what Kaufman and Sherman (1964) obtained (0.44), as shown in Fig: 8.9(a). Since the 
virgin compression curve is not exactly a straight line beyond u~, the value of Cc depends on where 
you determine the slope. 
For test 13, find de for the log cycle from 200 to 2000 kPa 
de = 1.20 - 0.67 = 0.53; 
so 
Cc = 0.53 
The slope of the virgin compression curve when thetest results are plotted as percent consolida-
tion or vertical strain versus logarithm of effective stress [Fig. 8.5(a)] is called the modified compression 
index, CCS' It is expressed as 
, 
dev 
'; 
C~e=~ 
log-, 
(Tl 
(8.8) 
Sometimes C~e is called Jh~,c~~pre~sion ratio ... The rela~ionship b'e~~~e~the modified compres-
sion index Cce and the compression index Ce: is given by 
Cc 
Cce = 1 +eo 
(8.9) 
Note that there is really nothing "modified" about Cce; rather the term is used to differentiate it from 
the compression index, Cc. The term "modified" comes from California soil mechanics practice in the 
early 1940s. 
Example 8.8. 
'~' 
Given: 
The consolidation data of Fig. 8.5( a). 
8.7 "Settlement Calculations 
369 
Required: 
Determine the modified compression index of this soil (a) by Eq. (8.8) and (b) graphically. 
(c) Check the Cc from Example 8.6 by Eq. (8.9). 
',, 
Solution: Do this problem just like Example 8.6 . 
. . a. Consider the virgin compression curve to be approximately a straight line over the stress 
range 100 to 800 kPa. Thus, using Eq. (8.8), we have 
c = 0.38 - 0.14 = 0 27 ,· 
ce 
800 
. 
log100 
b. To find Cce graphically, choose any convenient log cycle; in this case use the cycle 100 to 
1000 kPa. Then the ~evfor this cycle is 38 - 10 = 28%,or Cce = 0.28, whiCh checks part a 
adequately. 
' 
· 
· 
· ' · • · 
. · 
c. Assume e0 = 2.60 from Fig. 8.5(b ). Use Eq. (8.9). Therefore 
· • . 
Cc = Cce (1 + e0 ) = 0.27(1 + 2.6) = 0.97 
which is close to the Cc vah.ie from Example 8.6. 
Example 8.9 
... f 
Given: 
The void rafidversus log effective"p'ressure data shown i~ Fig. Ex. 8.9.: 
. 
. 
(I) 0.8 
0 e 
"0 
~ 
10 
---
FIGURE Ex. 8.9 
. 100 
300 
Effective consolidation stress, u~;, (kPa) 
1000 
370 
Chapter 8 · •.Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
Required: 
. ,: ·.. 
· Determine( a) the pre~onsolidation pressure u~; (b) the compression in'dex Cc, and (c) the mod-
ified compression index Cce• 
Solution: 
·:_. 
.. •. 
3 a. Perform the Casagrande construction according to the procedure outlined in Sec. 8.5, and 
find u~ ~ 120 kPa. 
· · 
· 
· 
· · ' ' : · ' 
b. By definition [Eq, (8.7)],. 
ll.e 
Cc=~ 
log---, 
'. 0"1 ,, 
:· 
' Using the points a and b of Fig. Ex:8.9,ea' = 'o.87, eb = 0.66, ;;.~· ~ 100 kPa; and u/, = 300 kPa. 
Therefore, 
•.:.:. ··· · ·' 
:; ~' 
C . = ea '__ eb = 0.87 - 0.66 = 0.21 = 044 
c 
• u/, 
300 
0.477 
· 
log u~ 
log 100 .. 
;,, 
' 
A second graphical \Vay is to find ll.e.ove~ one cycle; for exai11ple, .. 
1000 
log-- = log 10 = 1 
100 
When thisi.s done, C c = fl..e. 111 Fig. Ex. ?·9 the .'::ertical scale is not sufficient to extend a slope 
over ll.u' = 1log cycle to compute Cc, but it can be· done in two steps, ea to eb and ec to ea. 
(To extend the line eaeb to one full log cycle on the same graph, choose ec at the same pres-
sure as eb. Then draw the line ecea parallel to eaeb; This second line is merely the extension of 
eaeb if the graph paper extended lower t~an shown.) Or, 
I 
; 
ll.e = Cc ;, (ea-:eb) + (e~ ·.:.. ea) 
,; (0.87 - 0.66) + (0.90 - 0.66) 
'.-" ::= 0.215 + 0.236 
= 0.45, or about the same. as above 
c. The modified compressia·n index Cce is 
· 
Cc. 
0.45 
Cce = -1-- = 1 
0 87 :=0.24 
+eo 
+ . / 
8.7.1 
Consolidation Settlement of Normally Consolidated Soils 
To calculate consolidation settlement, Eqs. (8.5), (8.6), or (8.7) and (8.8) may be combined with Eq. (8.4). 
·For example, using Eqs. (8.7) and (8.4); we ()btain 
' 
·H 
u2 
-·c __ 
o . log,. 
Sc -
c 1 + eo 
0"1 
(8.10) 
8.7 :Settlement Calculations 
371 
If the soil is normally consolidated, then aJ. would be equal to the existing vertical overburden stress 
a~0 , and a2 would include the additional stress A a v applied by the structure, or 
· 
H0 
a~0 + Aav 
H~; . ' 
Sc = Cc-1--. -log 
. , 
= Cc ~(log 
CT~f - log a~0 ) 
. 
+eo 
'CTva·' 
' 
·. 
-L +~~ 
.. 
(8.11) 
When computing the settlement by means of the percent consolidation versus ··tog effective stress 
curve, Eq. (8.8) is combined with Eq. (8.4) to get 
. . 
a2 
Sc = Cce H 0 log-, 
. . 
. 
. 
(Tl 
(8.12) 
or, analogous to Eq. (8.ll), for no~mally consolidated clays, 
' . . 
a' + A a 
: 
, . 
. . ·. 
s~ = Cc,; H 0 log vo 
, 
v = Cce H 0 (log a~f - log a~o) 
CTvo 
(8.13) 
Other similar settlement equations can be derived using av and mv. In this case the average 
stress for a given stress increment mu~t be used, since the compression curves are nonlinear. 
Example 8.10 
Given: 
Test results shown in Fig. 8.4 and 8.5 are representative of the 6ompressibility of a 10m layer of 
·normally consolidated San Francisco Bay mud. The initial void ,ratio is about 2.5. 
Required: 
Estimate the consolidation settlement of a large fill on the site if the average total stress increase 
on the clay layer is 10 kPa, 
· 
· 
· · 
Solution: First estimate the 'preconsolidation stress to be about 70 kPa; Since the clayjs nonnally con-
solidated, a~ ~ a~0 • Use the results of Examples 8.6 and 8.8. Cc is 0.99 and c;e is 0.27. Use Eq. (8.11) 
( 
10m ) 
70 + 10 
.sc ,= 0.99 1 :+- 2_5 log 
70 
= 0.16 m ·. 
·Use Eq~ (8.13) 
. 
70 + 10 
Sc = 0.27(10 m) log 
70 
= 0.16 m 
With a high water table, the actual settlement would be' even slightly less, since fill that was above the 
water table would soon become sub~erged. Thus the resulting fill load would be reduced. To take this 
aspect into account, trial and error computations are required. 
' 
There are a coupie of reasons fortlie popularity in engineering practice of using the percent con-
. solidation or vertical strain versus log effective stress curve to compute settlements. First, estimating 
372 
Chapter 8: Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
l· 
\I '•'.-/ 
field settlements is simple. You can read the percent compression directly from the graph, once you 
have a good estimate of the in situ vertical overburden stress. . 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
Another reason the percent consolidation versus log effective stress plots are popular is that 
during the consolidation test it is-often desirable to know what the shape of the compression curve' is, 
so as to be able to obtain an early evaluation of the preconsolidation pressure. The void ratio verstis log 
effective stress curve cannot be plotted during the test, because we must know both the initial and' final 
. values of the void ratio. This calculation requires the determination of the dry mass of solids, which can 
be determined only at the end of the test. Therefore the eyersus log a~~ curve cannot be plotted during 
the test. However, the percent consolidation versus log pressure curve can be plotted while the test is 
being performed. Another advantage is that when the preconsolidation pressure is being approached, 
the load increments placed on the sample can be reduced so as to define more carefully the transition 
between the reloading curve and the virgin compression curve. Also, the test can be stopped when two 
or three points define the straight line portion of the virgin compression curve. Firially, as Ladd (1971a) 
pointed out, two samples may show very different e versus log a~c plots but have similar vertical strain 
versus log effective stress curves because of differences in initial void ratio. 
. 
L 
• 
< -
• 
' 
~ 
< 
' 
• 
•• 
Example s.11 
'· 
Given: 
The data of Example 8.10. 
Required: 
Estimate the settle~e~t dire~tly from Fig. 8.5(at 
Solution: If th6 p~~c6nsolidatiol1 stress is about 70 kPa, the finai stress afterloadir{g is 80 kPa. Refer to 
Fig. 8.5(a). At thea;, (which is equal toa~0 , sinceit is normally consolidated), ev is about 5.5%. At 
a~ = 80 kPa, ev is about 7.5%. Therefore ~lev is 2%, so the estimated settlement will be : - . 
'1 .:>' 
Sc = 0.02(10 m) = 0.2m 
.:-\ '; 
.The settlement is greater in this example because the slope of the virgin compression curyeis steeper 
frbm 70 to, 80 k\a tlianfrom 10 to80kPa (see Ex~mpte.8:()): 
·" · 
· ' 
· · · 
·. · 
All the equations for settlem.ent presented ~hove w~re for a single compressible layer. When the 
consolidation properties or the void ratiovarysignificantly with depth or are different for distinct soil lay-
ers, then the total consolidation settlement is merely the sum of the settlements of the individual layers, or 
n 
.Sc = ~sci 
i=l 
where sci is the settlement ofthe ith layer, of n total layers as calculated by Eqs. (8.10) thr· 
c I 
(8.14) 
8.7.2 
Consolidation Settlement of Overconsolidated Soils 
What happens ifthe soil is overconsolidated? You will recall that an overconsolidated soi~is one in 
which the present vertical effective. ~t~es_s is less than a~. Overconsolidated soils ar,e c;:ncount red more 
. often in engineering practice than normally consolidated soils, so it is important to know ho to make 
' settlement calculations for this important class of s~il deposits. 
· 
· 
· · · · · 
C) 
( 
8.7 : Settlement Calculations 
373 
e 
! ' 
'e 
! 
' 
' 
, . FIGURE 8.12 
Principle of settiement calculations f~r overconsolidated soils(after Perloff 
and Baron, 1976). 
· 
' · ' 
· 
'•.' 
' .. · 
The first' thing to do is to check whether the soil is preconsolidated. You do this by comparing the 
precons61idation pressure a~ from a laboratory consolidation test to' the existing computed vertical 
effective overburden pressure, a~0 • you already know from Chapter 6 how to calculate a~0 .If the soil 
layer is definitely overconsolidated, then you have to check to see if the stress added by the engineer-
.ing structure, ~av, plus the a~0 exceeds the preconsolida'iion pressure u~. Whether or not it does can 
make a large difference in the amount of settlement calculated, as shown in Fig. 8.12. Note that the 
ordinates in Fig. 8.12 could just as well be vertical strain. 
. . . 
. 
. 
Jfyou have the case shown inFig.8.12(a)-;-that is, if u~0 -1-'· ~uv s u~-then use either Eq. (8.11) 
or (8.13), but with the recompression indices C, oi C,.' in'place of Cc and Cce• respectively. The 
recompression index, C, is defined just like Cc, except that it is the average slope of the recompression 
part of the e versus log a~c curve (Fig. 8.8). If the data are plcittecl in terms of u v versus log U~c, then the 
slope of the recompression curve is called the modified recompression index c,. (sometimes called the 
recompression ratio). c; and c,. are related just like Cc and Cce [Eq. (8.9)], or 
Example 8.1,2. 
Given: 
c, 
c,. = ---
' 
1 + e0
, 
The void ratio versus log effective st~~ss data shown i~ Fig: Ex.8.9. 
· Required: 
' 
' 
: '.: t ,'j 
. 
. 
'• 
Calculate (a) the recompression index C, and (b)the modified recompressionindex c, •. 
(8.15) 
374 
.;<' 
:,'1: 
"'\\ 
Chapter 8, .. , Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
. 
. 
\ 
. Solution: 
\ 
( 
. 
a. The recompression index C, is found in a similar manner to theCc [Eq. (8.7)]. Using the 
points e and/over 1log cycle, we find that 
·• 
·. 
· C, =;' ee - ef = 0.79 - 0.76 ;= 0.03 
·. 
' 
. 
·-
' 
·: 
' 
b. The modified recompression index C,e is found from Eq. (8.15) 
.. 
.. 
.. c' 
C• =--'-
re 
. 1 + eo . 
: Note that neither of these terms has units. 
. 0.030 .. 
1 + 0.87 :";' 0.016 . 
To calculate settlements of overcorisolidated clays, Eqs. (8.11) and (8.13) become 
H 0 
U~0 + Auv 
H 0 
. 
Sc = c,-1--log 
I 
= c,-1--(logu~/ -logu~o) 
+.eo 
· 
Uv0 
+e 
·· 
· 
. 
. .. : . 
. u~0 + Au v 
· . ···· · .. ·· · 
··· 
· · 
Sc = c,eHo log 
I 
= c,eHo(log U~f- log U~o) 
Uvo 
(8.16) 
(8.17) 
when u~0 +Au~ :s; u~. Since C, is usually much smaller than Cc, the settlementsoccurring when 
U~o + Au v :s; u~ are much less than if tlie'soil ~ere normally consolidated.' 
' 
. If the added stress caused by the structure exceeds the preconsolidation stress, then much larger 
settlements would be expected. This is because the compressibility of the soil is much greater on the 
virgin compression curve than on the n!compression'curve, as'\vas showii;'for exa-mple, in Fig. 8.8. For 
the case;then, where u~J + ~ Aav > ;~; theseitlenieii.t 'equation ci::msistsoftwo parts: (1) the change in 
VOid ratio Or strain on the recompression CUfve from the originalin situ conditions of ( e0 , U~0 ) or 
(Bvo• a~~) to U~; and (2) t~e Change in void ratioor strain On thevirgincompressiOUCUrVe from U~ tO 
th~ fi11al conditions of (ej, u~t) or' (evf• u~f ): Note that u~1 = u~0 + Lluv. These tw() par,ts are shown 
graphically in Fig. 8.12(b ).The complete settlement equation then becomes· . 
. . .. 
. 
. 
' 
~ >; 
. ' 
· 
·H 
• 
· · 
·· ... 
< H 
.:. 
..-, 
. ·· . 
Sc =C~-
1 ° 
(1ogu~-~-_1ogu~0 ) / c;-
1, o· (l?gu[..:.. log·u~) 
. . + eo 
. 
. \ ' 
' 
.. ' 
+ eo .. 
.. 
' ' 
. . . ' 
(8.18a) 
Thi~ equation can also be written ~s 
' 
' ! • 
~ 
' • 
·; , 
.. • 
' • 
' 
-~ ' 
: • 
' 
• -
H 0 • 
u~ · 
. H 0 
T 
u~J+Au,;·• .; 
Sc = c,-1--log -, +: Cc-1-. -.-log : 
I. 
. 
· · 
+ e0 
Uvo · · 
+ e0 • 
· ··· Up 
(8.18b) 
One co~ld argue that in the right-hand term of Eq. (8.18) the void ratio cor~esponding to the 
preconsolidation pressure on the true virgin compression curve should be used. Although this is tech-
nically correct, it doesn't make any significant difference in the answer. 
·In terms of the modified indices, we have 
·· ·· ·· · · .. ·-- · · · · ... · 
. 
. 
·.·· 
Sc ~ C,eH o(log u~ - log U~o) + CceH o(log u[ - log a~) 
(8.19a) 
, 
u~. 
. 
u~0 + Auv 
Sc = c,eH 0 log-,- + CceH 0 log 
I 
, . 
::•·Uvo; 
' .. ·Up·' 
(8.19b) 
.,' 
K 
: ;,(! 
Sometimes the degree of overconsolidation varies throughout the compressible layer. You could 
apply Eq. (8.16) or (8.17) to the part where u~0 +Au v ·< u~ and Eq. (8.18) or (8.19) to' the J>'art where 
U~o + Au v > u~: In practiCe, however, it is usually easier simply\ to divide the entire stratum into 
8.7 
Settlement Calculations 
375 
several layers, apply the appropriate equation to calculate the average settlement for each layer, and 
, . : then sum up the settlements by Eq. (8.14). 
• ::· 
' · 
· · ·' 
' 
. 
,. 
' 
' 
,, -.·, 
8.7.3 
Determining C, a~d C;e 
···What is the best way toget C, and C,. for use in Eqs. (8.16)through (8.19)? Because of sample distur-
bance, the slope of the initial recompression portion of the laboratory consolidation curve (Fig. 8.8) is 
too steep and would yield .values that are too large for these indices. Leonards (1976) offers the reasons 
why in situ values are generally smaller than those obtained from laboratory measurements: '(1) distur-
bance during sampling, storage, and preparation oftest specimens; (2) recompression of gas bubbles in 
the voids; and (3) errors intest procedures mid methods of interpreting--test results. This latter item 
includes the problem of reproducing the in situ state of stress in the specimen. 
Leonards recommends that the a~0 be applied to the specimen and that it be inundated and 
. theri allowed to co file to equilibrium for at ieast 24 h~urs before starting the' incremental loading. Any 
tendency to swell should be controlled. Then the consolidation:testis continued ~ithrelatively large 
load increments: To,reproduce as closely as possible the in situ stress state, the specimen should be 
ccinsolidate'd to slightly hiss than the a~ and thell.allowed)orebciund. This is the first' cycleshown in 
Fig. 8.13. If you don't have a good idea Of the· a~; then 'consolidateinitially to' CT~0 + ~CT ~ only, Which 
is presunuibly leSS thim' CT~: The ;determination of C, Or C ;8 is OVer tne range Of CT~0 +, ~CT v, as shown 
in Fig. 8.13. (The ~CTv is the estimated stress applied by the structure).It is common practice to take 
the average slope of the two curves. From the typical test results shown in Fig. 8.13, you can see that the 
actual values of the recompression index depend on the stress' at which the rebound-reload cycle starts, 
especially whether it starts at a stress less 'than oi greater than the a~. See the difference in slopes of the 
rebound curves shown in the figur~. The value of C, also depends on the OCR to which rebounding and 
Q) 
0 e 
·;: 
-c l '' 
., g 
· Vertical effective stress (log scale) 
' J 
' 5 
.. · 
'1\"' 
~···~·FIGURE 8.13 .. ,.Typiccil consolidation c~rve show'ing.the reC~ffimended Procedure~,,~ 
for determining the C, (after Leonards, 1976). 
'· 
.. ,· 
376 
Chapter 8.. 
. Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
reloading t?k.e place-'-for example, the ratio of a'/a~ in Fig. 8.13. The final considenition affecting the 
value of C, fs'the presence of gas bubbles in the pon!s of the soil. Use of backpr~ssure (Chapter 12) can 
sometimes take care of this problem. 
"· 
' : ~ 
r : ' \ 
" 
: 
. , Example 8.13 
. ,,l 
' -~ t 
Given: 
··'• .... 
_, 
.... 
:.The' data inExample 8.1 a~d Fig. 8.8 is representative of a' layer ofsiltY'Clay 10 'm thick. 
<:.,1 
: t 
~~ 
._, 
1 · 
;·. 
:.< .-; 
· .. ;,<',!~:.·•'. ;_--:- .. ·, 
~·r_,• 
~ 
'.·! 
: · .. ' 
" __ .. --~ 
{_
1 ~ .. ;_· 
: · 
.-~ 
.Required: 
; 
·. ,. · · 
· ,, · 
:,· ~-··.:,• Esti~atethe C()l1solidation s~ttlein~~t if,thestr';lcturalloacls~t the surface "rill increase the 
.. average_s~ress ip.the l~yer by 3~kJ>a.. 
; 
S~lutioii: FromExamp~~ 8.1, ~e kno\V 'that the ~~~ is .so kPa a~d the'(TP i~ a~'o~t130 ,kPa; ~a is about 
0.84. Since the applied stress is 35 kPa, the a~0 + !::.a v, = 115 kPa < )30 kPa. Therefore, use Eq. (8.16). 
To get C, we ~ill take the average.slope' of the two curves DE and EF near the bottom of Fig. 8.8. C, is 
: 
, 
I 
. approximately0.03~ Now use Eq. (8.l6) , ;, , ,• 
. , 
.: , 
, 
, 
, , .. , ... , , 
, 
,l, 
• 
• 
! I<" ;,·'1 
, 
' 
; ,\ 
• 
· 
., 
, '• 
, 
, 
• 
• 
,•, 
: ' ': · 
10 m · 
80 + 35 
·s~ = 0.031 + 0.84 log . 80 
-~~; 
,;~:~Jj ",1:'-,lt 
{'~i 
"· 
1·' 
; 
:" 
.'':!" 
t 
_ .. _. 
., 
Example 8.14 . 
"'·: 
Given: 
The data in Example 8.13, except that. the structural~ngineer made an error in computing the 
loads; the correct loads now will produce an average stress increase of 90 kPa: in the silty clay layer. 
Required: 
Estimate the consolidation settlt~ment due to' the new loads. 
Solution: Now, the applied stress is much greater than a~0 + !::.av, or 80 + 90 =:= '170 > 130 kPa. 
Therefore we must use Eq. (8.18). Iri addition to the C, we need the compression indexCc. From 
Fig. 8.8 we find that Cc is about 0.25. Substitution into Eq. (8.18b) gives 
10 m 
130 
10 m 
80 + 90 
Sc = 0.031 + 0.84 log SO + 0.25 1 + 0.84 log 
130 
= 0.034 m + 0.158 m 
= 0.193 m 
This value should be reported as "about 20 em" due to the uncertainties in sampling, testing, and in 
estimating the a~, the applied stres~. incre~se,_ai14 C, an~ C:c: . ,· 
8.8 
8.8 Tangent Modulus Method 
377 
TANGENT MODULUS METHOD. 
~.") 
The tangent modulus method was developed by Janbu in the early 1960s and iii summarized by Janbu 
(1998). The approach is based upon the simple premise that the modulus of a material is given by stress 
divided by strain. Knowing the modulus, obtained from laboratory tests performed on high quality 
undisturbed specimens, and the resulting· stress imposed upon the· soil by the foundation, one can 
readily compute the strain and the resulting settlement. 
Go back and look again at Figs. 8.1(b) and 8.4(a). They show that as the stress increases, the strain 
also increases, but at a decreasing rate. The slope of this curve at any point is the tangent modulus M 1, 
and is given by 
. 
where da' = increment of effective stress, 
de = increment of strain. 
da'. 
Mt=-
. de 
Janbu also gives the following empirical equation for the tangent modulus: 
. 
a. 
( , )1-a 
M1 = maref -· -
·. 
a ref 
where M1 = tangent modulu~ in kPa or MPa, 
a ref= reference stress = 100 kPa = 0.1 MPa, 
a' =,effective stress in the e direction in kPa or MPa, · 
m = dimensionless modulus number, 
a = dimensionless stress exponent. 
(8.20) 
(8.21) 
The reference stress is included to make Eq. (8.21)dimensionallycoriei:t. Both the modulus number 
and the stress exponent depend on the material type: So, for settlement calculations, the strain of a typ-
ical elern~ntcan be expressed as.. 
· 
· · 
· 
1"' 1 
e = 
-da' 
~o Mt' 
(8.22) 
Combining Eqs. (8.21) and (8.22) and ~olving for the strain gives 
1 [( a't )a (a' )a] 
e 
= m a . a 
ref 
-
a:: '' 
(8.23) 
where a't = a~0 + tla', 
a~0 =' yertical effective overburden stress. 
Of course, a may not be zero in Eq. (8.23), and if we have the strain, we can readily get the settlement 
from Eq. (8.4). 
Equation (8.23) is applicable to.all types of geologic materials from normally and overconsoli-
dated clays, old and young silts and sands, rock, and normally and overconsolidated quick clays. What 
differentiates these materials is their modulus number m and the dimensionless stress exponent a. For 
overconsolidated soils and rock, a = 1.0, and for sands and silts, a = 0.5. For normally consolidated 
clays, a= 0, although for normally consolidated extra sensitive Scandinavian clays (qui~k clays), 
a = -:0.5, and some Canadian quick clays nmybe even as .Jowas -0.7 .. 
378 
ChapterS ' · Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
Whenthese values of a are inserted into Eq. (8.23) for the four different materi<iltypes, the fol~ 
lowing equations result 
Fora= 1: 
11a'· 
e = 
~-~-
· m a ref 
~ where 11a' = incremental effective stress in kPa or MPa . 
. When a = 0.5 for normally consolidated sands and silts, Eq. (8.23) becomes 
8 =~[ {(?p + 11a' 
m -y- aref 
~] 
When a = 0 for normally consolidated clays, Eq. (8.23) becomes 
1 
a~+ Au' 
e.= -In-=----
. 
m 
a;, 
,, ., 
Finally, for normally consolidated extra-seJ?-sitive clays, with a = -0.5, Eq. (8.23) is given by 
e=~[ ~­
m'V-;;r 
~ 
~ 
aref J 
a;,+ 11a' 
(8.24a) 
(8.24b) 
(8.24c) 
(8.24d) 
Typical values of a and the modulus number mare in Table 8.2. Figure 8.14 shows schematicitlly 
moduli for elastic, elastoplastic, and plastic materials. 
TABLE 8.2 Typical Stres~ E'xpone~ts arid Modulus Numbers 
Soil or Rock 
Rock 
Tills 
Gravel 
Sand 
Silt 
Silty clay and 
clayey silt 
. Clays 
Peat 
After Fellenius (2009). 
Type 
High ~trength · 
Low strength 
Dense-very dense 
Dense 
Medium dense · 
Loose 
Dense 
Medium dense 
Loose 
Hard; stiff 
~ ' ' 
Stiff-firm 
Firm-soft 
Soft marine and 
organic clays 
Stress Exponent; a 
1 
1 
1 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
',. 
ModU'lus Numb~r; in 
1000 to 1 000 000 
300to 1000 
300to 1000 
40 to400 
250 to 400 
150 to 250 
100 to 150 
80 to200 
. ,60 to 80 . 
JO to 60 
20 to 60 
10 to 20 
5 to 10 
5 to20 
· 'ito 5 
,,· 
~ 
8.8 · Tangent Modulus Method 
379 
M 
I 
( 
(a) 
a' 
(b) 
. 
,: 
' 
' 
M 
a' 
(c) 
FIGURE 8.14 Moduli for {a) equivalent elastic {a= 1.0); {b) elastoplastic (a"' 0.5); and (c) plastic 
materials (a = O) (from Holtz, 1991). 
a' 
Now comes the good part. We merely, sum up the individual compressions of the thin layers of 
thickness dz between the depths z = 0 to z = H by 
where f:J.h = consolidation settlement, 
e = vertical strain from Eq. (8.3), 
H =.layer thickness. 
.H 
f:J.h = jedz 
0 
(8.25) 
Recognize that Eq. (8.25) may take into account a multilayer deposit with different values of a and 
modulus number m. 
If a conventional consolidation test is performed, then the value of m may be obtained from the 
e log a~ curve by the following equation for normally consolidated clays: 
where Cc = compression index. 
1 + e0 
m = 2.3-c-
c 
For overconsolidated clays, m 'may be given by 
: . .. • 1 + e0 
m, = 2.3~ 
r. 
where m, = rebound or recompression modulus, .. 
C, ~ recompressim~ index. . 
. 
, 
Example 8.15 
Given: 
The data in Fig. 8.5(a). 
Required: 
(8.26a) 
(8.26b) 
Evaluate the modulus number by means of Eq. (8.26a) and compare with values for normally 
consolidated clays in Table 8.2. 
380 
Chapter 8, , . Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
Solution: Using Eq. (8.26a), we find 
l. 
·· 
1 +eo 
1 + 2.6 
m = 2.3-::c,:- = 2.3 0.986 = 8.4 
This value compares well with the value of m for soft clays in Table 8.2. 
Du;ing . our discussion of the precons~lidation press~r~ ·in Sec. 8.5.2 we saw that the tangent 
modulus method can also be a way t? find the a~. If you plot modulus versus average stress, the modu-
lus tends to reach a minin~um yalue ihat seems to represent the preconsolidation pressure . 
. . ' 
' 
'' 
,, 
,' 
' 
. 
·' 
·, 
. 
' 
' 
8.9 
. FACTORS AFFECTING THE DETERMINATION OF u~ · 
. 
: 
.• '' . 
• 
~ 
; . ·, .•. ·:' .·: 
. ' 
•. ':. ( ~ • 
•• 
! 
. ' 
! 
·,: \ ' 
' 
. 
• 
Brumund et al. (1976) discuss three factors which significantly influence the determination of a~ from 
laboratory consolidation tests (Table 8.1). We have already mentioned one-the effect of sample dis-
turbance on the shape of the consolidation curve (Fig. 8.8). We showed how the "break" in the curve 
became less well-defined with increasing disturbance. You can see these effects in Fig. 8.15(a). With 
sensitive clays especially [for example, Figs. 8.9(d) and 8.9(e)], increasing sample disturbance lowets 
the value of the a~. At the same time, the void ratio is decreased, (or the strain increased) for any given 
value of a~c· As a consequence, the compressibility is decreased when a~c <;: .. a~, and the compressibil-
ity is increased when a~c > a~. 
' 
.. · · · · . 
The load increment ratio (LIR) used in incremental loading consolidation testing is important for 
valid measurement of consolidation properties. The LIR is defined as the change in pressure or the pres-
sure increment divided by the initial pressure before the load is applied. This relationship .is as follows: 
'LIR=~ 
a initial 
(8.27) 
. 
-
. . 
where tl.a is the incremental stress, and a;nitiat is the previous stress. An LIR of unity, which is a typical 
value, means that the load is doubled each time. This procedure results in evenly spaced data points on 
the void ratio versus log effective stress curve, such as shown iri Fig. 8.5(b ). 
Experience with soft, sensitive clays [Fig. 8.9(d)] has showri that a small stress change or even 
vibration may drastically alter the soil structure. For such soils an LIR of unity may not accurately 
define the value of the preconsolidatiori stress, so an LIR of less than one is often used~ The influence of 
varying the LIR on the compressibility as well as on the a~ of a typical clay is shown in Fig. 8.15(b ). The 
effect of the duration of the load increment is shown in Fig. 8.15( c). The common procedure (ASTM D 
2435) is for each increment to be left on the sample for 24 hours. Note how this procedure affects the a~. 
Some of the terminology used for these figures will become clearer after you read Chapter 9. 
8.10 
PREDICTION OF FIELD CONSOLIDATION CURVES 
• 
< 
Since the consolidation test r~ally is a reloading of the soil (shown by curve BCD ofFig. 8.8), even with 
high-quality sampling and testing the actual recompression curve has a slop'e which is somewhat less 
than that of the field virgin compression curve (OAD in Fig. 8.8). Schmertmann (1955) developed a 
graphical procedure to evaluate the slope of the field virgin compression curve. The procedure for this 
In situ a;, 
..... 
I.. · ... 
--..... .t ,-
-"' . 
. ........_ '..;,a;, from high quality 
·,J'\ .sample 
. 
. .\ 
' 
\ \ . \ 
\ 
\ 
' 
. \ 
' 
\ \ 
. 
\ . \ \\·· 
. \ \\ . 
\ 
8.10 • Prediction ofField Consolidation Curves 
381 
<>----<>--.....:... _ __:_ ~- - ...... , 
' \ 
' 
yin 
situ 
\ 
' 
\ 
\ 
\ 
' 
•small LIR 
\/ 
\ 
\ :\ 
' \ 
\ 
\ 
\ ' 
In situ curve . 
------ In situ curve 
'\\ ·' 
··Laboratory curve with small 
LIR in vicinity of a;, 
' ' · 
\ 
_: ·• _ 
Laboratory curve on 
high quality sample 
-o-- Laboratory curve with standard LIR = 1.0 
Effective consolidation stress, a~c (log scale) 
Effective consolidation stress, a~c (log scale) 
(b) 
. 
... 
(a) 
J' 
'< 
a;, fro~ compression 
! 
curve based ori, .. 
. R10o with t = fp 
. 
(see Ch. 9) 
' 
~ 
Compression cunie at· i = · tp 
' 
", 
"" 
·, 
- -•- ·Compression curve at t = 1 day 
Effective consolidation stress, a~c(log scale) 
(c) 
FIGURE 8.15 
Factors affecting the laboratory determination of a;,: (a) effect of sample disturbance;, (b) effect 
of load increment ratio; (c) effect of load increment duration (after Brumund et al., 1976). 
'' 
~ 
' ' 
382 
Chapter 8 ;; ; Compressibility of Soil arid Rock 
·Effective consolidation stress, u~c (log scale) ; 
_(a) 
Effective consolidation stress, u~c (log scale) 
(b) 
. FIGURE 8.16 Illustration of the Schmertmann (1955) procedure t~ obtain the field virgin compression 
curve: (a) normally consolidated soil; (b) overconsolidated soil. 
construction technique is ilhistrated in Fig. 8.16, where typicalyoid ratio versus log effective stress 
curves are plotted. To correctthe laboratory virgin compression curve for a normally consolidated soil 
in the field, procee'd as follows;'· · · ~-- / 
· ·· ·· · 
1. Perform the Casagrande construction and evaluate the preconsolidation pressure a~. 
2. Calculate th~ initial voidratio~0 • Draw a horizontal line from ~0 , parallel to the log effective 
stress axis, to the preconsolidation pressur~ a~; This defines control point1, illustrated by the 
small triangle 1 in Fig:8J6(a). ·. 
· 
· 
· 
3. From a point on the v~id ratio axis equal to o.4Ze0 , draw a horizontal line, and where the line 
meets the extension of the laboratory virgin compression curve L, define another control point, 
. as shown by the small triangle 2. You should Iiote that the coefficient of e0 is nota "magic num-
ber" but is a result of many observations on different clays. ' 
' 
'. 
' '. 
' 
.. 4. Comie~t th~ two control points by a straight line. The slope ~f this line, F, defines the com-
pression index c; that most probably ~xists in the field. Line F is thefield virgin compression 
curve. The Schmertmann. correction allows for disturbance of the clay due to sampling,_ 
tra~sportation, and storage of the sample plus subsequent trimming and reloading during 
the consolidation test. 
' 
Example 8.16 
Given: 
,_·;.; 
The e versus log a data of Fig. Ex. 8.16. This consolidation data is from an ll_,ndisturbed clay 
sample taken from the midpoint of a compressible layer 10m thick. The OCR = 1.0. 
8.10 Prediction of Field Consolidation Curves 
383 
: Re~uired: 
a. Determine the slope of the field virgin cohipression curve ~sing th~ Schmertmann procedure. 
b. Compute the settlement of this. ~lay lay~i if 'til~ ~tre;s 'ih6~~as'e~ 'i~oiit 27S to.800 kPa. Use 
both the l~?orato!y and field virgin compression curves. 
c. Comment on the difference, if any, in the calculated settlement. 
' 
~ 
\ 
Solution: 
<'' 
, '' ~ 
. 
. . 
-
. 
' 
" 
, 
a. : First, establish the field virgin compression curve according to the Schmertmann procedure 
outlined above. Perform the Casagrande'construction on the curve shown in Fig. Ex. 8.16 to 
obtain the preconsolidation pressure. to be about 275 kPa. Draw a horizontal line from 
e0 = 0.91 to ihe point where'it inter~ects, the preconsolidation pressure to establish control 
point 1, shown by trianglel. Extend the virgin compression curve to 0.42e0 (0.42 X 0.91) or 
0.38, to establish control point 2. Connecting the two control points t to 2 creates the field 
virgin compression curve. 
. :, 
,., 
... " 
':: ·: · 
· · 
· You determine the value of Cc from the field virgin compression curve just as you did 
for the laboratory consolidation curve (see Examples 8.6, 8.7; and 8.9). For the log cycle from 
1000 to 10 000 kPa, e1000 = 0.705 and e10,000 ~ 0.329; therefore Cc = 0.705 - 0.329 = 0.376. 
The slope of the laboratory virgin compression curve is found in the same way and equals 0.31. 
We'lineedthisvahtelater.:•·~ · 
·. · · .· · :· 
,.· 
·, 
; 
i 
, FIGURE Ex. 8.16 
".Effective consolidation stress; u~~ (kPa) ., 
J 
b. · To compute the settlement, we may use either Eq: (8.4) or (8J1). Use Eq. (8.4) first:· 
' .. l 
I 
384 
Chapter 8 · ,(ompress)bility ofSoil and Rock' 
; 
The change in void ratio, ~e, is merely the difference in void ratio for a ;, 275 kPa and 
a. = 800 kPa. These values are 0.912 at point a and 0.744 at point b in Fig. Ex. 8.16 on the 
field virgin compression cu~e~Theref()re,. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . ... 
,(, 
0.912 --,- 0.744 i() m ,;, 0.88 m 
s~ = 
1 + 0.912·. 
· 
Using Eq. (8.11): 
" 
" 
.·Cc, 1
. 
.a~o+~av. 
sc = -1--H0 log . 
, 
. 
·.+ e0 
t 
avo·.· 
... 
. ' 
·,.-·· 
" ' 
~ l 
i 
, 0.376 
' 
I 
' 
800 
' 
' 
' ' 
-= '1 + 0.912 (lO m)log275 =: 0·91 m · 
,,,· 
i 
The slight difference in. the calculated values of the consolidation settlement sc is due to 
small errors in reading data points from Fig. Ex. 8.16.· 
··If we calculate the consolidation settlement using the laboratory virgin compression 
curve to establish Cc; we obtain [Eq. (8.p)]:: 
· 
• 
1
_ 
o.3r 
.. ( .··). 'sao . .:._ ··· 
. 
0 
• 
Sc -
• 
, ,.,w .. 10m log 275 
~ 0.75 m,od6Yolow~r 
. 
, , 
. 
I··.· 
-· 
' 
c. Comment on the difference. Sixteen percen.t could be significant in some cases, especially if 
the proposed structure is particularly sensitive to settlements. Ladd (1971a) has found the 
Schmertmann correction will increase compression indices about 15% for fairly good sam-
ples of soft to medium clay. Since the procedure is simple, it would seem prudent to use it to 
make the best possible estimates of field compressibility. On the other hand, beware of too 
much precision in settlement calculations. When foundation engineers present their results 
1 
in an engineering report, they commonly report the expected settlement as, for example, 
''approximately 0.9 m,'; because including more significant figures would imply more than 
the actual precision. It is often even better to give a range of settlements possible, along with 
your calculated "most probable" predicted value. 
· 
. The Schmertmann pro'cedure for an overconsolidated ~oil is illustrated in Fig. 8.16(b ). If it is sus-
pected that an overconsolidated soil is being tested, then it is good practice to follow the test procedure 
suggested in Sec. 8.7 and Fig. 8.13. A cycle of partial unloading and reloading is shown in Fig. 8.16(b) 
and in Figs. 8.9(a), (b), and (c). The average slope of the rebound-reload curve establishes C,. The 
remaining steps in the Schmertmami. procedure are as follows: 
1. Calculate the initial void ratio e0 • Draw a horizontal line from e0 ; parallel to the log effective 
stress axis, to the existing vertical overburden pressure .a~o· This establishes control point 1, as 
shown by the small triangle 1 in Fig. 8.16(b). 
2. Fro~ control poirit l, ch:aw a line parallel to the rebo~nd-reload curve to the preconsolidation 
pressure a~. This will establish control point 2, as shown by the small triangle 2 in ~ig. 8.16(b): 
3. In a manner similar to that used for the normally consolidated soil, draw a horizontal line from a 
'void ratio equal to 0.42e0 : Where this line intersects the laboratory virgin compression curve L, 
establish a third control point, as shown by triangle 3 in Fig. 8.16(b ). Connect control points 1 
and 2, and 2 and 3, by straight lines. The slope of the line F joining control points 2 and 3 defines 
the compression index· Cc. for the field virgin compression curve. The slope of the line joining 
..A 
8.10: Prediction of Field Consolidation Curves 
385 
control points 1 and 2 of course represents the recompression index C;. An example of a field 
compression curve is shown in Fig. 8.9(c). 
Example 8.17 
Given:· 
The void ratio versuspresstiredata shown below. The initial void ratio is 0.725, and the existing 
vertical effective overburden pressure i.s 130 kPa. 
Void Ratio 
Pressure (kPa) 
Required: 
0.708 
··0.691 
.. 0.670 
0.632 
0.635 
0.650 
0.642 
0.623 
0.574 
0.510 
0.445 
0.460 
0.492 
0.530 
a. Plot the data as e versus log a~c.' 
b. Evaluate the overconsolidation ratio. · · 
25 
50 
100 
200 
100 
25 
50 
200 
400 
800' 
1600 
400 
100 
25. 
c. Determine the field compression index using the Schmertmann·procedure. 
d. If this consolidation test is representative of a 12 m thick clay layer, compute the settlement 
of this iayer if an additional stress of 220 kPa Wt<re added. 
Solution: 
a.. The data is plotted in Fig. Ex. 8.17 .. 
b. The given value of a~0 is plotted on the graph, and the Casagrande construction performed 
· to evaluate a~. A value of 190 kPa is found 
, .. ·; 
.. OCR;, a~ ·=' 190 = 1.46 
' 
a~0 
130 
;, 
' 
Thus the soil is slightly overconsolidated .. 
c. ··Using the Schmertmann procedure for overconsolidated clays, control points 1, 2, and 3 are 
· established; as shown in Fig. Ex. 8.17. The values of C, and Cc are evaluated directly from 
Fig. Ex. 8.17 over one log cycle. C, = 0.611- 0.589 = 0.022, and Cc = 0.534- 0.272 = 0.262. 
(Note that C, ~ 10% of Cc.) 
386 
Chapter 8 
0.7 
0.6 
Q) 
0 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
eo 
' 
Uvo 
C,= 0.022 
--
-I 
.. -p-~-:---...:._;. 
~ 0.5 
"C ·a 
> 
Cc= 0.262 
0.4 
f 042 e, 
0.3 
0.2~--L-~~~~----~~~~LU--~--L-~~~~~ 
10 000 
10 
100 
1000 
Effective consolidation stress, a~c (kPa) 
FIGURE Ex. 8.17 
(Data modified slightly from Soderman and Kim, 1970.) 
d. Using Eq. (8.18b), the settlement is computed: 
C, 
a~ 
Cc 
a~0 + da. 
Sc = -1--H0 1og-, + -1--H0 1og 
, 
+ eo 
avo 
+ eo 
a P 
0.022 
(12 . ) i ' 190 + ; 0.262 
(1 
) 1 130 + 220 
1 + 0.725 
m og 130 
1 + 0.725 
2 m og 
190 
= 0.025 m + 0.484 m 
= 0.509 m iO;j 0.5 m 
Schmertmann (1955) also proposed an alternative method to obtain the in situ preconsolidation 
pressure fro~ the shape of the de versus log a~o curve, where de is the difference in the ordinate 
between the laboratory curve and the estimated in situ virgin compression curve. That field com-
pression curve producing the most symmetrical de versus log a' curve is considered the correct one. 
Figure 8.17(a) illustrates the concept for an overconsolidated clay. Just as in Fig. 8.16(b), we define the 
coordinates of point 1: a~0 , e0 • 
· 
Next, after assuming a reasonable, albeit arbitrary, value of a~, we establish point 2. From 
point 2 we draw a line to where the laboratory curve (extension) is 0.42 X e0 , point 3:Next, we merely 
scale off the distance de for any given a. The magnitude of de is the vertical distance between the lab 
curve and the assumed field virgin compression curve comprised of points 1-2-3; This procedure to find 
./' 
8.10 Prediction of Field Consolidation Curves 
387 
Q) 
0 
(a) e 
"C 
"15 > 
Q) 
<l 
r:: 
0 
~ 
::l 
(b):~ 
0 e 
"C 
"15 > 
; .~ ' 
I 
I 
Log pressure, u' 
FIGURE 8.17 Schmertman'n pr~c~dur~ for pr'ec6~sblidation' · _ 
pressure: (a) laboratory and assumed field virgin compression· 
curve; (b) void ratio reduction curve (after Schmertmann; 1955). 
; 
,. 
l 
lle is repeated at other values of u for the first of several assumed field virgi~ cortipressio~ curves, as 
__ shown in Fig. 8.17(b ). The assumed curve that produces the_ highest order of symmetry defines the pre-
-· consolidationstress_. 
1 ·_ · 
, 
• 
_ 
. __ . _ 
. 
_ 
• 
. 
Peck,(1~74) presents a case history as shown iri_ Fig.8.18 and illustrates this procedure. In this 
. case, the dashedline is found using Eq. (825), afirstestimate ofthe field virgin compression curve . 
. Next, Peck assumed three other possible field virgin compression curves along the line 1-2. The result-
ing V()id ratio redtiction CUrV~S are shown toward the bottom right of theJigure. }3ased upon the void 
ratio reduction, Peck suggested: that the _preconsolidation pressure was on. the order of 6 tsf 
(575 kN/m2), and not what was originally determined by the designers .. 
388 
Chapter 8 . ·Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
Q) 0.5 
0 
~ 
:g g 
0.4 
CO·'<!" 
CO 
. C\i 
C"i 
L() 
cO 
Cc = 0.009 (35-10) ~ 
Range for Casagrande 
graphical method 
Hysteresis loop 
Slope = 0.025 
Boring 20 
Elevation 542 
--~ --~ 
0 
C\i 
Slope 0.025 
Stratigraphic unit 5 1 
. ~® · 
0.3 
1 
0.05 
0. 
Pressure ton/sq ft 
(1 ton/sq ft = 95.8 kN/m2) 
FIGURE 8.18 
Example of Schmertmannprocedure to obtain the in situ 
preconsolidation pressure (Peck, .1974): 
. · 
· 
· · . 
8.11 
SOIL PROFILES 
! " 
In Table 8.1 we list some of the caus~s 'of preconsolidation in soil deposits. In this section, we study 
some typical soil profiles from various parts of the world and indicate their preconsolidation stresses as 
. well as their effective vertical overburden stresses with depth. These overburden stress profiles were 
calculated just like those of Chapter 6, using the densities and thicknessesof the soillayers·as well as 
the depths to the water table. To perform a detailed settlement analysis, typical profiles such as these 
are established for the proposed site and an; based on subsurface investigations, undist~rbed sampling, 
and laboratory testing. The typical soil profiles are presented in Figs. 8.19 through 8.23. 
' 
' 
. 
. 
. 
I 
.c 
c.. 
Q) 
0 
'E 
£ a. 
Q) 
0 
u~0, u;, (kPa) 
(a). 
u~0 , u;, (kPa) 
' (b) 
Range of u;, from. 
laboratory oedometer 
tests 
'· 
1,, 
Fill 
Organic 
silts, clays 
Stiff yellow clay 
clay w;, -30% avg . 
Soft bl~e clay: 
occas. 'sand lenses 
Pl-25: 
w~ -40o/~ avg. 
8.11 
Soil Profiles 
389 
Dense 'sand, gravel till 
Slate o'r shale bedrock 
Silty sand 
Soft sensitive 
gray silty clay; 
occas.shells 
and sand seams 
Pl-15i 
Wn-50% avg. 
Silty sand 
FIGURE 8.19 Overburden 
and preconsolidation 
~. ··. stress profiles for marine 
' clays ofthe Boston area: 
; : ·,: (a) Mystic power station 
'.:. ; (after Casagrande and 
Fadum, 1944); (b) 1-95 test 
section,. Portsmouth; NH 
. (after Ladd, 1972). 
390 
Chapter 8. ·· 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
FIGURE 8.20 Overburden and 
preconsolidation profiles .for two. 
Swedish clays: (a) Ska-Edeby test 
field near Stockholm (after Holm 
and Holtz, .1977); (b) Kalix test site 
(after Holtz and Holm, 1979). 
g 
.r:: 
.:E. 
·Q) 
Cl 
, O'~o 
u~0 ~ u;, (kPa) 
(a) 
u~~. u;, (kPa) 
~ 
I 
J I 
>-+-< 
\ 
\ 
\ 
>\+-< \--
\ 
u' 
\ 
p 
+ 
\: 
\ 
\ 
\ 
(b) 
./· 
Dry fissured cr~st 
Inorganic glacial and 
·-. post-glacial clay 
Pl-40-80 ; 
; 
Wn-40-100% l 
Dry crust 
Black/fissured. 
organic clayey-silt 
and silty-clay 
Pl-85-125 
. 
w,;-100-180%' 
:c 
§: 
:5 
0. 
(J) 
0 
2 
4 
8 
Very soft 
fissured 
greyish-green 
clay (shell 
content 
increases with 
depth) 
Pl-90 
10 
Wn-15-155% 
, 
, ( 
) ' ',· 
a vo• a p kPa . : · 
(b) 
Soft, light gray · 
clay; silt seams. 
------------~--
Soft, dark gray· 
silty clay 
Pl-40-60 
Wn-72-85% : 
Stiff fissured 
clay 
. ' ~ 
· 8.11 
Soil Profiles 
391 
FIGURE 8.21 · Overburden 
and preconsolidation stress 
' profiles for marine days 
near Bangkok, Thailand: .:; 
(a) Bangkok-Sirachahigh::. 
way (after Eide and' 
, Holmberg: 1972); (b) Asian 
Institute ofTechnology,: , :: 
(after Moh et at 1972). 
392 
Chapter 8 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
FIGURE 8.22 Overburden 
and preconsolidation : • 
stress profiles for Lake ·. · 
Champlain deposits 
(Laurentian or Leda clays) : 
of Eastern Canada: 
(a) Saint-Aiban, Qu'ebec.' .. 
test fills (after Leroueil. ·. 
et al., 1978a); (b) C. F. s: 
Gloucester.test (after 
Bozozuk and Leonards, 
1972). 
g 
'E. 
Q) 
Cl 
g 
.c c. 
Q) 
Cl 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 ' 
2f-
4f-
6~ 
8f-
14 
i'-
16 
18 
u~0 , uj, (kp8 ) 
/ee 
/ 
'4 . 
/ . 
/ 
./ . 
/ . 
•• \. I 
.. ,, ... 
... ,.. . ~, . , .. ,. ". .. 
\• . 
\ /\ . 
. u;, . ..,_\ 
(a) 
u~0 , uj, (kPa) 
"'--'"" 
,..__. 
y· 
~ 
... \ 
_.,. 
"~ 
/ 
... 
U~o 
,..\ 
\ 
>\< 
"' 
~ 
...,, 
·~ 
,_..\ 
~ 
-)," 
.... ' 
(b) 
Dry crust 
Soft, sensitive 
silty clay 
changing to 
clayey silt 
with' depth . 
PI-1Q-25 
. Wn-4D-110% 
~ 
Gray-brown 
silty clay 
Soft gray 
silty clay 
Pl-20-32 
Wn'-60-80% 
Gray silty clay 
'PI - 20 
! Wn-55% 
Gray clay. 
PI -27-34 
Wn-JD-90% 
Gray silty clay 
Pl:-17-24 
Wn-47-65% 
30 
10 
~ 
.s::: a. 
,CT~o 
Q) 
0 
20 
30 
u~0 , u;, (kPa) 
(a) 
u~0 , u;, (kPa) 
u' 
p 
I • 
\ .. 
\.; i 
-~ 
~-
'ft ; ' '· 
:'1 
'------? ------\ . 
\ 
'~, .. 
(b) 
·Chicago 
silty clay 
Pl-11-16 · 
Wn-18-27% 
Sand 
' Medium gray 
; silty clay; · 
·Wn-:-24% avg.,-,-
;·r 
'\' ' 
• 8.11 
Soil Profiles 
393 
FIGURE8.23 
Overburden 
and preconsolidation stress 
profiles for glacial lake 
clays (reworked till?) of the 
. Chicago area: (a) Chicago 
, ~'Loop" (after data from 
Prof. J. 0. Osterberg's grad-
uate soil mechanics class, · · 
Northwestern University, 
1966); (b) Hammond, 
Indiana (after Osterberg, 
1963). 
394 
ChapterS 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
8.12 
APPROXIMATE METHODS AND TYPICAL VALUES OF COMPRESSION INDICES 
Because of the time and expense involved in consolidation testing, it is sometimes desirable to be able 
to relate the compression indices to the simple classification properties of soils. These relationships are 
also commonly used for preliminary designs and estimates and for checking the validity of test results. 
Table 8.3 is a list of some published equations for the prediction of compression indices (Azzouz 
et al., 1976). 
Terzaghi and Peck (1967) proposed the following equation, based on research on undisturbed 
clays of low to medium sensitivity: 
· 
· ' 
Cc = 0.009(LL -' 10) .. 
. (8.28) 
which has a reliability range of about ±30%. This equation is widely used, despite its wide reliability 
range, to make initial consolidation settlement estimates. The equation should not be used if the sen-
sitivity of the clay is greater than 4, the LL is greater than 100, or the clay contains a high percentage 
of organic matter. Some typical values of the compression index, based on our experience and the 
geotechnical literature, are listed in Table 8.4. 
' 
TABLE 8.3 Some Empirical Equations for Cc and Cce 
Equation 
Cc = 0.007(LL- 7) 
Cce = 0.208e0 + 0.0083 
Regions of Applicability 
Cc = 17.66 X 10-
5w~ + 5.93 X 10-3wn - 1.35 X 10-l 
Cc = 1.15(e0 
-
0.35) 
Remolded clays 
Chicago clays 
Chicago clays 
All clays 
Cc = 0.30(e0 -
0.27) 
Cc = 1.15 X 10-2Wn 
Cc = 0.75(e0 
-
0.50) 
Cce = 0.156e0 + 0.0107 
Cc = O.Olwn 
Inorganic, cohesive soil; silt, some clay; silty clay; clay 
Organic soils-meadow mats, peats, and organic silt and clay 
Soils of very low plasticity 
All clays 
Chicago clays 
Note: w. = natural water content. 
After Azzouz et al. (1976). 
,_ 
TABLE 8.4 Typical Values of the Compression Index Cc 
Soil 
' · Normally consolidated medium sensitive clays 
Chicago silty clay (CL) 
.·Boston blue clay (CL) 
Vicksburg buckshot clay (CH) 
Swedish medium sensitive clays (CL-CH) 
Canadian Leda clays (CL-CH) 
Mexico City clay (MH) 
Organic clays (OH) 
Peats (Pt) 
Organic silt and clayey silts (ML~MH) 
· San Francisco Bay mud ( CL). · 
San Francisco Old Bay clays (CH) 
Bangkok clay (CH) 
Cc 
0.2 to 0.5 
0.15 to 0.3 
0.3 to 0.5 
o.5 to o.6 
1 to 3 
.1 to 4 
.7 to 10 
4 and up 
10 to 15 
L5 to4.0 
0.4 to 1.2 
0.7 to 0.9 
0.4 
8.14 Burland's Intrinsic Compressibility Properties 
395 
Often C, is assumed to be 5% to 10% of Cc, but this assumption may lead to too large values of 
C,. Typical values of C, range from 0.015 to 0.035; lower values are for clays of lower plasticity and low 
OCR. Values of C, outside the range of 0.005 to 0.05 should be considered questionable (Leonards, 
1976). Recognize that if you use too high a value of C, you will overpredict the settlements. Although 
large overpredictions may not be dangerous, they could mean excessively expensive foundations. 
Additional correlations between Cc and C, are summarized in Kulhawy and Mayne (1990), 
where Cc versus LL, ea. arid wn, and C, versus PI, are presented. Considerable scatter is evident in 
these correlations. 
· 
8.13 
COMPRESSIBILITY OF ROCK AND TRANSITIONAL MATERIALS 
J 
Relatively speaking, rock and rocklike materials have low compressibility when compared with soils. We 
like to think that we are on a "rock solid" fmindation and don't really have to worry about settlement. For 
the most part, this is the case except for very heavy loadings or weak or badly jointed rock. Sometimes it is 
difficult to determine exactly where soil ends and rock begins,c as discussed in· Sec. 4.12. This problem 
becomes acute when owners and contractors disagree on excavation costs directly related to material type. 
The settlement and supporting capacity of rock depends upon the rock type, amount and width 
of joints and their orientation, and empirically on the RQD (Rock Quality Designation.:..Sec. 4.13). The 
strain is 9etermined once the modulus is known. The modulus may be obtained from laboratory tests 
or from field tests. With very specialized test equipment, triaxial tests (Chapter 12) are performed, 
while field seismic refraction tests, plate load tests, and pressuremeter tests (Baguelin et al., 1978) can 
be performed to obtain the modulus. For. natural geotechnical materials, ·a relationship between the 
maximum Young's modulus and the compressive strength (Chapter 12) may be used to obtain the mod-
ulus. A typical value for the ratio of Emaxlqu for uncemented soils is 1000 and for soft and hard rocks 
about 500. More about the compressive strength, qu, of soils and rocks is found in Chapter 12. For addi-
tional information on the strength and deformation of rocks, see Barton et al. (1974), Bieniawski (1976), 
Hoek and Brown(1980), Tatsuoka and Shibuya (1992), and Wyllie (199~): 
8.14 
BURLAND'S INTRINSIC COMPRESSIBILITY PROPERTIES 
Burland (1990) proposed so-called "intrinsic properties" to describe compressibility and strength 
characteristics of reconstituted clays, and he used them as a reference for interpreting characteristics 
of natural sedimentary clays. He started by performing one-dimensional consolidation tests on many 
sedimentary clays after they had been reconstituted, or completely remixed to between 100% and 
150% of their liquid limit without prior drying; These compression curves were also plotted in e-log u~ 
space [Fig. 8.24(a)]. The parameters ·eroo and erooo are the so-called intrinsic void ratios for the soils 
tested, corresponding to .their void ratios at u~ = 100 kPa and 1000 kPa, respectively. The compression 
curve is then normalized1 bydefining a void index I vas follows: 
(8.29) 
where 
(8.30) 
Figure ,8.24(b) shows the normalized intrinsic compression curve, Iv versus log u~, developed 
from three tests on reconstituted clays having liquid limits ranging from 35 to 128; Burland concluded 
1Normalizing is the process of manipulating data from various sources in th~ same way with the goal of making the 
data comparable ... 
'\: 
396 
Q) 
0 
~ 
I. 
o Kleinbelt -ton (LL = 127.1) 
. •. Argile plastique (LL = 128) 
o ·London clay (LL = 67.5) • , 
I 
• 
< 
> 
• Wiener Tegel (LL = 46.7) . 
1:>. Magnus clay (LL = 35) 
• Lower Cromer till (LL = 25) 
OL---~~~~~~~~~~~--~~~~~ 
10 
100 
1000 
10 000 
u~ (kPa) 
(a) 
' 1 
....: 
>< 
Ol. 
· .......... Argile plastique (LL = 128) 
--·· London clay (LL = 67.5) . 
- ':"'.-: Magnus clay (LL = 35) 
... , .. , .. 
. 
'~ 
----- ,,, 
~ 
~ 0 
-~ 
c: 
·;:: :s 
-1 
10 
u~ (kPa) 
I* v 
10 
1.18 
40 
0.46 
100 
0 
. 
i ,,, ~ 
400 
-0.63 
1000 
-1.0 
4000 
-1.46 
-to--· ----. 
- ~' 
-
0 
----.-
0 
' 
.. 
u~ (kPa) 
(b) 
(Continued) 
,, 
"''' 
8.14 Burland's Intrinsic Compressibility Properties 
397 
-2 '' 
. 0.1 
' 
63' 
'58 .. 
·c 1a· 
· 46 
95 
54. 
: 
~ Grangemouth 41 
~· · Draminen : ; 38 
x Detroit 
28 
® S. Joaquin 
64 
.. : Ell· Milazzo 
62 
~ Baku 
40 
Intrinsic comp,ression line 
. : u~0 (kPa) 
(c) . 
10 000 
'FIGURE 8.24'. Developm~~t of the intrinsic con{ pression amlsedimentation compression 
line's: (a) one-dimensional compression d.irves for various n:!constitute'd days; (b) normalized 
compression''curves for three reconstituted clays; and (c) intrinsic compression line from 
' 
' ;·"(b) plotted with sedimentation compression line for normally consolidated clays (after 
: J.B. Burland, personal communication, 2008); 
. 
· · 
that this normalized relationship, termed the intrinsic compression line (ICL), is reasonably unique for 
many reconstituted soils and can be expressed as follows: 
'. •' 
" 
lv,ICL = 2.45 - 1.285log u~ + 0.015(1og £!~)
3 
(8.31) 
' . 
.• 
. ,· ':,l :,·: 
Using the void index I vas a unifying parameter among different deposits, Burland computed the in situ 
voidindexl~0 ofanumberofsoils 
· 
, 
· 
·.·· · ·, · .: '· 
"·., 
' 
'· · 
· 
398 
Chapter. 8 1 . Compressibility of Soil and Rock · 
where e0 is the void ratio of normally consolidated clay under effective overburden pressure u~0 • 
Burland (1990) then plotted the in situ void ratio for a number of dep~sits versus their respective in 
situ u~-i.e., the e-u~ combinations in situ for a·number of deposits_..:thus mimicking the deposition 
(sedimentation) states ofthese soils. These void ratios were normalized in the void index space, and it 
was found that the various sedimentation curves. can be fitted· into a line termed the sedimentation 
compre~sionline [SCL;Fig. 8.24(c)].Within the range of u~ = 10 kPa to 10,000 kPa, the SCL is approx-
imately parallel to the ICL, with following form: ' ·· · 
: 
... 
' 
' 
{' 
' 
' 
I v, SCL ='= 3.2436 - 0.6239ln U~ + 0.0244(ln CT~)~ - 0.0012(ln CT~)
3 
'·' 
:·1 
(8.33) 
. 
' 
Within this stress range, for a given value of1vo• the' supported u~ of natural sediments is approxi-
mately five times that of equivalent reconstituted day. At u~ values greater than 1000 kPa, the ICL and 
SCL tend to converge. These concepts are consistent with those of Mitchell and Soga (2005) regarding 
soil structure. 
' · 
· · 
· 
· . 
Figure 8.24(c) shows the relationship of ICL versus SCL in Ivo-log CT~ospace. The ICLis reason-
ably unique for many sedimentary clays, allowing it to be.used as a reference line for comparison with 
a soil's natural, in situ state. The unique SCL represents a group of normally consolidated clays with 
structures that can be represented by their rehitioriship to the ICL. Thus, these two u~ique lines con-
stitute the basic framework for evaluating clay structure; i.e., the distance of a soil's in situ 1 vo to the 
. ICL can indicate the degree towhich its structure has developed when compared to the set of e-u~ 
states under intrinsic and sedimentation conditions. While the Iva-log CT~o for most sedimentary clays 
will lie close to the SCL at various stress levels (corresponding to their depth below the surface), 
many soils exposed to other mechanisms that influence their structure may lie above the SCL. This 
would be characteristic of. the structured, sensitive clays from, say, Eastern Canada or Scandinavia. 
Conversely, recent deltaic deposits from the Mississippi River, which have developed little structure 
due to rapid deposition, will have more oriented particles and natural I vo-log CT~o states that lie close 
to the ICL. 
8.15 
IN SITUDETERMINATION OF COMPRESSIBILITY 
Some of the most important compressibility parameters, such as the compression indices and exist-
ing void ratio, must· be determined· from the results of laboratory tests. As we will learn in 
Chapter 12, there are four field tests that may be used to estimate the preconsolidation pressure: 
cone penetration test (CPT), with and without a pore pressure device to measure pore pressure; flat 
plate dilatometer test. (DMT); self boring pressuremeter test (PMT); and field vane shear test 
(VST). Each of these tests measures the' resistance to· loading in the .vertical and/or horizontal, and 
the resulting measurecl parameters ·are compared ~ith.ihe pieconsolidation pressure: .An. example 
of one such relationship using theVST is shown in Fig. 8.25 (Kulha\Vy and Mayne, 1990). [Note that 
the relationship between preconsolidation pressure and undrained shear. strength (Chapter 12) is a 
log-log plot, which can hide a lot of scatter in the data.] Based upon this data, the relationship is 
. : givenby 
. 1 
,. :, 
:, 
. : 
u~ = 3:53 Tt 
.. 
(8.34) 
: ,'-'' 
11' 
< 
:· 
--1· 
"\ "'' 
where u~ = preconsolidation pressure, kPa, 
'·· 
·.::: 
. ·it ~: un'clrained shear strength, kPa. 
J,' ··,; 
·, 
i 
"'-i.',. '',') 
When using the above relationship and those from other in situ devices, understand that the r~sults are 
only approximate and empirical. 
· 
· 
20 
· u;, = 
·3.54, T1(VST) 
n 
~ 205:·r2 ~ O.B32, . "' 
. ~ ' 
'I '.t, 
; ,l 
',' ., 
' 
( '' 
~ 
FIGURE 8,.25 
Correlation of u;, 
0.1 '-----'--'---'-.l...L..w...J:..I----'---L-'--'--L--'-'-"--'----'----'-'-J 
with vane shear test (VST) shear 
strength data normalized by 
atmospheric pressure (after 
Kulhawy and Mayne, 1990). 
O.Q1 
5 
Field va,ne strength, Tr(VST)!Patm 
PROBLEMS 
8.1 For thee versus log u curves of Fig. 8.9(a), compute the compression indices. Explain why it is possible to get 
slightly different answers'than those shown at the bottom of the figure. ' '' 
8.2 Verify the values of thepreconsolidationstress shown in Fig. 8.9(a). 
· 
8.3 Determine the overco~solidation ratio (OCR) fc;r the five fine-grained soils of Fig. 8.9(a). 
8.4 Verify that the values f~; the preconsolidation 'stress and the virgin co~pression index shown in Fig. 8.9(b) 
are correct. . 
.. 
, .. , , 
8.5 Whati~th~OCR~fth~claytillinFig.8.9(c)?' . . 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
: ' ·' 
8.6 . Est~ate the prec~~solidation -str~ss for ( ~) the undist{u.bed ~da clay i~ Fig.'8.9( d), (b) undisturbed Mexico City 
clay in Fig. 8.9(e), (c) undisturbed Chicago clay in Fig. 8.9(f),and (d) the swelling clays fr~m Texas in Fig. 8.9(g). 
· 8. 7 Dete~mine the 2ompressio~ i~dices for the four soils of Problem 8.6. _··.· .. · . 
. . 
" 
' 
. . 
' 
' ' 
,' 
~ 
' 
' 
• 
• 
' 
' ' 
' 
' ' ' 
' , 
. . 
i 
' 
' 
• 
' 
' 
' 
• 
•. ' 
• . 
' 
' 
j 
' 
•• ' 
' 
' 
, , 8.8 ~ The p~essu~e versus void ratio data determined from a consolidation test on an undisturbed clay specimen 
are as follows: 
'); 
·. ,;·.' 
Pressure (kPa) 
:20 
40 
80 
160 
320 
640 
VoidR~tio 
Pressure'(kPa) 
' ' '·1280 
·320: ., 
_.,,.' 
80 
'20 
o~ 
Void Ratio· 
: 0.602 
. ·0.628 
0.663 
0.704' 
0.801:. 
· (a)· Plot the pressure versus void ratio curve on both arithmetic and semilogarithmic graphs. 
(b) Determine the equations for the virgi~ compression curve,and for the rebound curve for unloading, 
starting at 1280 kPa. 
. 
. , 
. 
. . 
. . . 
. . 
. 
. (c) What are the correspo~ding modified compressi~n and recompression indices for this soil? 
(d) Estimatethe stress to which this clay has been preconsolidated. (After A: Casagrande.) 
. 
' 
. 
'·' 
.···: 
•' 
'• ":. _,, 
'. ' 
' 
"" 
"' 
. '"!. 
' 
400 
Chapter 8 
Compress.ibility of Soil and Rock 
8.9 · A building is to be constructed on a stratum of the clay 7 m thick for which" consolidation data are given in 
Problem 8.8. The average existing effective overburden pressure on this clay stratum is 126 kPa. The average· · 
applied pressure on the clay
1 after construction of the building is 285 kPa. 
(a) Estimate the decrease in thickness of the clay stratum causedby full consolidation under the building load. 
(b) Estimate the decrease in thickness due to the building load if the clay had never been preconsolidated 
under a load greater than the existing overburden. 
· · · 
· 
. 
. (c) Show on the eversus log u plot of Problem 8.8 the values of Ae used for making the estiniates in parts 
(a) and (b). (After A. Casagrande:) 
. . 
. : 
8.10 The compression curve for a certain clay is astraight line on th.e semilogarithmic plot, anc.t"it passes through 
the pointe = 1.15, u~ ,;, 65 kPa, e = 0.76, u~ =. 825 kPa. Determine an equation for this relationship. (After 
Taylor, 1948.) 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
8.11 Show that Eqs. (8.9) and (8.15) are valid. 
8.12 The following consolidation t~st data were obtained from undisturbed San Francisco Bay mud. For this clay, 
LL = 85, PL = 38, Ps = 2.70 Mg/m3, and Wn = 105.7%. Initially, the specimen height was 2.54 em and its 
volume was 75.14 em\ Plotthedata as percent consolidation versus log pressure. Evaluate the preconsoli-
dation pressure and the modified,virgin compression index:... 
. 
Void Ratio 
·, ,, 
.0: 
2.765 
:5: 
···"-" 
2.712 
,10' 
2.703 
20 
.. 2.679 :' 
40 
2.541. 
80 
2.211 
160 
1.849 
320 
''' ~ 
1.486. 
640 
:2.548 
·:.', ·1.224 
,.,,;' 
160 
. ' 
' ,2.951. 
1.285 
~ " 
,I 
40 
"' d 
3.533 
11.374' 
; ~ ) 
.··.5 
: ·· · ., .; 4.35o' 
1
"11".499 ,: . 
8.13 Plot the data of Problem 8.12, on a void ratio versus log pressure graph. Evalu~t~ th~· preconsolidation 
pressure and the virgin compression in de~. Do thesev~lues ~gre~· with what you found in Problem 8.12? 
Comme~ts? · .. ,··:.· ·' · ,· .. :,: 
·.:. 
.···.::,,,·.:~ :•'··. · "·''· 
,. · 
· ·· 
' 
8.14 The initial w~tei: c~rii~nt ~fthe s~mple ln Proble~· 8.1Z i; los:?%; and the d~n~ity. of the solids, p,, is 
2.70 Mg/m3• Compute the wet arid dry density and degree ofsaturation of tlie consolidation test sample if 
·the dry weight of the sample is 52.8 g. If the firial water content is 59.6%, compute'the degree of saturation 
1 and dry density at the end of consolidation. ' 
. 
1 8.15 A7.8 mthick layerofsoft SariFranciscoBay mud is to' be loaded with a granular fill3.2 m thick, on the 
. ave!age. Thetotaldensity of the fill is about 1.8 Mg/m3. Assume that the test data in Problem 8.12 is typical 
· of the. clay layer, and that the layer is normally consolidated. What consolidation settlement will take place 
due to the weight of the fill?Make these calculations (a) using the Cc'e determined in Problem 8.12, (b) using 
the Cc determined in Problem 8.13·, and (c) directly from the percent consolidation-versus-Jog-pressure 
diagram you plotted in Problem 8.12. 
8.16 Assume the laboratory test results in Problem 8.12 are typicarof another San Francisco Bay mud site, but 
where the clay is slightly overconsolidated. The present vertical effective overburden stress is calculated to 
be about 15 kPa, and the thickness of the clay is3.9 m~At this location, the granular fill (p = 1.8 Mg/m3) will 
be only about 1.2 m thick. Estimate the consolidation settlement due to the weight of the fill. 
8.17 What settlement wciuld you expect at the overcorisolidated site in Problem 8.16 if ui~ fill to be constructed 
were 4 m thick? Do this problem (a) directly from the percent consolidation plotand (b) using Eq. (8.18) 
. 
· or(8.19).Howdotheresultscompare? 
1 '' 
' 
,, · 
•,:•: 
'" 
,': .. 
8.18. I Plot the following data and' d~terrnine the prec~ns~lidation pressure. and the modified c6mpression index. 
' !!'_~ 
.c 
Problems 
401 
% Consolidation 
Pressure 
% Consolidation 
Pressure 
(Compression is +) 
(kPa) 
(Compression is +) 
(kPa) 
0.09 
5 
7.34 
160 
. 0.11 
10 
·7.60 
320 
0.12 
20 
8.35 
640 
0.26 
40 
12.65 
1280 
0.98 
80 
17.41 
2560 
1.91 
160 
22.18 
5120 
4.19 
320 
21.65 
1280 
8.05 
640 
20.63 
160 
8.03 
320 
19.26 
40 
7.83 
160 
•15.35 
5 
7.21 
80 
Specimen height is 25.4 mm, wn = 32.5%, Pd = 1.45 Mg/m3• Sample is from a depth of -11.5 m. 
8.19 At the site where the sample of Problem 8.18 was taken; the soil profile consists of about 6.5 m of sand and 
rubble fill and then 9.1 m of clay. The water table is about 1.8 m below the ground surface. Average densi-
ties of the sand and rubble fill are 1.45 Mg/m3 above the water table and 1.?0 Mg/m3 below the water table. 
Estimate the consolidation settlement if the average stress increase in the compressible layer is (a) 50 kPa, 
(b) 100 kPa, and (c) 250 kPa. Use both Eq. (8.19) [or Eq. (8.17)] and rour percent compression plot from 
Problem 8.18, and compare the results. Comments? 
· 
8.20 Plot the following void ratio versus pressure data, and evaluate the compression index and the recompres-
sion index. Determine the preconsolidation stress, 
8.21 
8.22 
8.23 
8.24 
8.25 
8.26 
8.27 
8.28 
8.29 
" 
Void Ratio, e 
Pressure (kPa) • Void Ratio, e. 
Pressure (kPa) 
•1.025 
0 
0.837 
300 
1.006 
10 
0.780 
400 
0.997 
20 
0.655 
800 
0.978 
40 
'0.504 
2000 
0.950 
. 80 
0.542 
500 
0.911 
160 
0.589 
160 
0.893 
200. 
0.681 
20 
Use the consolidation data from Problem 8.20 to compute the settlement of a structure that adds 175 kPa to 
the already existing overburden pre~sure of 130kPa at the middle of a 6 m thick layer. 
What would be the settlement of the same structure in Problem 8.21 if the overconsolidation ratio of the clay 
were 1.0 and u~0 + Au v = 305 kPa at the middepth of the clay layer? Show your work and assumptions on 
the e versus log u curve of Problem 8.20. 
. · · 
The consolidation curve of Fig. Ex. 8.9 is typical of a compressible layer 5 m thick. If the existing overburden 
pressure is 50 kPa, compute the settlement due to an addition.~! stress of 150 kPa added by a structure. 
For the test data of Problem 8.12, construct the field virgin compression curve using the Schmertmann 
procedure for an OCR of unity. 
· · 
Do Problem 8.24 for an OCR = 2.5. 
At the midpoint of a 7.5 m thick soil layer, the void ratio is 1§Find this point on'the field virgin compression 
curve determined in Problem 8.24. What is the co~responding pressure? If this pressure is doubled over the 
entire site, compute the consolidation settlement of the layer. 
· 
Show that the field virgin compression curve shown on Fig. 8.9(c) (Cc = 0.19) is correct. 
Show that the point of intersection where the laboratory and field virgin compression curves meet for the 
percent consolidation versus log u' graph is equal to 0.58ec/(1 + e0 ). This intersection is equivalent to the 
. 0.42e.o point on thee versus log u' graph. 
· 
. 
·. 
Using the app;opriate empirical relationship .from Sec. S.12, estimate the compr~s;ion and recompression 
indices and both modified indices for as many of the clays of Fig. 8.9 as you can. How well do the empirical 
relationships agree with the laboratory data? 
· 
402 
Chapter 8 
Compressibility of Soil and Rock 
8.30 Do Problem 8.29 forthe clays in Problems 8.8, 8.12; 8.18, and 8.20. Again, how good is the agreement? 
. 
' 
\ 
-
. 
8.31 Figure P8.31 shows a proposed foundation site, with 10ft of sand overlying 15 ft of clay with consolidation 
properties shown. The clay is normally consolidated. Assume 1-D conditions. 
(a) Compute the initial u~ at the middle of the clay layer prior to excavation and construction. 
(b) After excavation imd during construction, the foundation area will be heavily loaded with the structure 
and equipment so that u~ at the middle of the clay layer will be increased to 3900 psf. Determine the 
settlement that will occur under these conditions. 
(c) After construction is completed, the equipment will be removed and the final u~ at the middle of the 
clay layer will be 3200 psf. 
10' 
':..,·, 
15' 
FIGURE~8.31 
Sand 
'Yd= 110 pc( 
Clay. 
'Yt= 120 pel 
. Cre = C58 = 0.033 , 
c, ;= 0.165 
.As part of your answer, please be sure to sketch the compression curve followed in parts(b) and (c). 
8.32 As part of a construction project, a 7.5 m thick layer of clay is to be' loaded with a temporary 3 m thick sand 
layer (refer to Fig: P8.32). The figure shows the water-table location, soil unit weights, and the compression-
curve properties for_ th~ ·day. A_ssume the sand layer remains dry. 
· 
(a) Calculate the value of u~in the middle of the clay layer (at 3.75 m below the water table) before the sand 
layer is applied, and after consolidation is complete. 
(b) Based on your answer in part (a), and the compression curve characteristics, calculate the settlement that 
will occur under these conditions. 
· 
(c) How much will the clay !ayer heave when the 3m sand layer is removed? 
FIGURE P8.32 
3m 
Applied sa.nd layer, 'Yd = 16 ~N/m
3
; . 
--+---==-
7.5 m 
clay, 'Yr= 2o.6 kNtm3 
u;,=74kPa, Cre:::: C58 =0.03, Cc,;=0.18 
_<; 
8.33 Refer to Fig.8.5(a). 
(a) Using log interpolation between 100 and 1000, determine the u~ value at a vertical strain; ev = 20%. 
(b) If the initial void ratio, ~o = 2.6;determine C, and Cc for this soil. ForCe; use the portion of the curve 
between u~ = 100 and 500 kPa. 
(c) If the original clay layer thickness is 9.5 m, determine the settlement that occurs in the layer when it is 
loaded from 200 to 400 kPa. (Note: You don'tneed t~e results from part (b) to do this.) 
8.34 Alarg~ embank~ent is to be built on the s~rface of a 15-ft clay layer. B~fore the embank~ent is built, the 
initial u~ at the middle of the clay layer is 480 psf. The results from ai-D consolidation test on the clay from 
the middle of the layer are as follows: · 
' 
. 
u~ = 1800 psf; 
. c,. = 0.0352, 
cce = _0.180 
If the fin~! u~ at the middle' of the layer after the embankment loading is 2100 psf, what is the settlement, in 
inches, of the clay layer resulting from this loading? · 
· 
. 
8.35 Figure P8.35 shows a proposed site where ari excavation will be made: The 10 ftlayer ofsand will be 
removed, so that the top of the 24 ft normally consolidated clay layer wili be exposed. Assume full capillarity 
in the clay only. 
. 
. 
· 
I 
JO' 
Problems 
403 
(a) Assume that the water-table location remains the same during excavation. Compute the uv, u~ and u 
values at the middle of the clay layer before and after the excavation. 
(b) Assuming 1-D conditions, compute how much the clay layer will deform due to this excavation, in inches. 
Specify whether this is settlement.~r heave. 
Before excavation 
.. After excavation 
Sand, 'ld = 110 pcf 
3' 
¥ 3' 
Clay, 'ft= 120 pcf 
24' 
G,. = GSe = 0.035 . 
Gee= 0.170 
FIGURE P8.35 
8.36 Figure P8.36 shows the soil profile at a site where you plan to lower the water table. You have results from 
two consolidation tests, one from the upper 12 ft thick overconsolidated crust, and another from the lower 
32ft thick normally consolidated zone. You plan to lower the water table from its current 12ft depth to 20ft 
below ground surface. The consolidation properties for each layer are shown. Assume full capillarity. 
(a) Compute the u~ in the middle of each layer before and after the water table is lowered. 
(b) Determine the total settlement that will result from lowering the water table. 
oepth (ft) 
0.-----
, Stiff clay, 'It= 120 pcf, Gre = GSe = 0.029, Cc., = 0.178, u~ = 1650 psf 
12~::-----
-
:', 
i'· 
20 ¥·-
Soft clay, 'It= 118 pcf, Gre = GSe = 0.034, Gee= 0.185 
44L-----
FIGURE P8.36 
8.37 When a consolidation te~t is performed on some soils, the virgin compressi~n: region is not linear, but bilinear. 
Figure P8.37 shows such a compression curve from a 15 ft thick layer. · 
-
(a) What Vertical Stniin, Bv, OCCUrswhen the SOil is loaded from an initial U~i =.560 psf tO U~z = 3000 psf? 
(b) If you load the soil further, to u~3 = 4000 psf, how inu-ch additional settlement occurs? 
(c) Finally, if you unload from 4000 psf back to u~4 :: 3000 psf, what additional deformation (in ft) occurs? 
u~ 1 = 560 psf 
· 
u~ = 980psf 
Gre = GSe ,; 0.032 
u~3 = 4000 psf 
log u~ 
FIGURE P8.37 
8.38 Refer to the compression curve marked Soil13 in Fig. 8.9(a). Disregard tb.e small unloading cycle in the 
middle of the curve. The initial void ratio for this soil is 1.17, and the preconsolidation pressure is 290 kPa. 
(Note: The right-hand vertical boundary of this graph is at U~c = 2000 kPa.) , 
(a) Determine the C, and Cc for this soil based on the compression curve. 
(b) If a layer of this soil12 m thick is loaded from 50 to 800 kPa (two of the data points shown on the curve), 
what settlement will result, in m? 
9.1 
) 
··~ 
404 
CHAPTER 
9 
r:· 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
... ,,:,. 
INTRODUCTION 
- '·•, 
In Chapter 8 we showed how to calculate the consolidation settlemen~ of a clay layer below a structure 
when it reaches equilibrium with the·external stress .. We described how the pore water pressure in 
excess of hydrostatic dissipates with time (consolidation) and how the increase in the effective stress of 
the layer ultimately becomes equal to the applied stress. It was mentioned that the~ rate of consolida-
tion would depend, among other things, on the permeability of the soil. 
This process of excess pore pressure dissipation is called primary consolidation· to distinguish it 
from the other time~dependent component of total settlement, secondary. compression. Recall from 
Sec. 8.2 that secondary compression occurs after essentially all of the excess pore water pressure has 
dissipated; that is, it occurs at cons.tant effective stress, which is why it is often referred to as drained 
creep (creep is theterm used in materialsengineering todescribe deformation under constant applied 
stress). In some soils, especi<illy inorganic clays; primary consolidation is the largest coinpori{mt of total 
settlement; whereas secondary compression can constitut~ a major part ofthe total settlement of peats 
and other highly organic' soils: In this ch~pter, the theories for estimating the time rate of both primary 
c<;>nsolidation and secondary co-~ pression of fine-grained soils are discussed. . ; . '. :. . . • . 
·Why is it important to know how fast a structure will settle under the applied load? For example, 
if the design life of a structure is 50 years, and it is estimated that it will take "500 years for all the settle-
ment to occur, then the foundation engirieer would expect only minor settlement problems during the 
life of the structure: On the other hand, if the settlement is expected to take about the time required to 
build the structure, then most if not all of it will have occurred by the time the structure is completed. 
If the structure is sensitive to rapid settlements (for example, reinforced concrete frames or concrete 
pavement), then structural damage could result. Most structures on clay foundations experience grad-
. • ual settlements during. their lifetimes, which may or may not impair their performance. In addition, 
we sometimes intentionally cause a clay layer to settle prior to construction, typically by building a 
temporary embankment (a process' known as preloading); In these cases, it is importantto know how 
long this settlement process will occur for purposes of construction scheduling. This chapter presents 
procedures for estimating the rate of foundation setth!ment. The engineer then can decide what effect, 
if any, the settlement may have on the structural integrity as well as. the intended use of the structure. 
The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
-o::-
9.2 
; ,. 
Symbol 
Dimension 
Ca 
Cae 
Cv 
'L2T-1. :·. 
Cvh 
L:T1 
Hdr 
L 
H, 
L 
Hv 
L. 
R 
L 
Re 
L 
Ro 
·L' 
R· 
n 
L 
s(t) 
L 
T 
Uavgor U 
Ue 
ML-1T-2 
u,_ 
~ 
-
a 
Unit 
m2/s 
m2/s 
m 
m 
m 
m 
m. 
mm 
mm 
m 
(%) 
kPa 
-(or%) 
9.2 The Consolidation Process 
405 
Definition 
Secondary 'compression index- Eq. (9.27) 
Modified secondary compression index- Eq. (9.29) 
Coefficient of consolidation- Eq. (9.3) 
· 
.Coefficient of consolidation- Eq. (9.25) 
Length of drainage path- Eq. (9.5) 
Height of solids- Eq. (9.31) 
Height of voids- Eq. (9.31) 
Equivalent piezocone radius- Eq. (9.25) · 
Equivalent dilatometer blade radius~ Eq! (9.26) 
Initial dial reading or converted displacement 
transducer reading- Eq. (9.23) 
Dial reading or converted displacement transducer 
reading at time t, n = 1, 2, ... 
Consolidation settlement at time t 
Time factor- Eq. (9.5) 
Degree .of consolidation 
Excesss pore pressure 
Consolidation ratio- Eq. (9.9) 
Depth factor- Eq. (9.9) 
, 
. 
Factor for simplifying finite difference formulation -
Eq. (9.21) 
. 
THE CONSOLIDATION PROCESS 
' 
' 
! 
',' 
' 
' 
; 
J 
l' 
' 
' 
' 
': 
It is useful to return to.the spring analogy as presented in Chapter 8 (Fig. 8.2). Figure 9.1(a) shows a 
spring with a piston and a' valve in a single cylinder.· A pressure versus depth diagram is· shown in 
Fig. 9.1(b). The soil, represented by the spring, is'at equilibrium with an initial effective stress u~0 • For 
the time being, we shall assume that all of the applied stress on the piston, ~u; is initially transferred to 
the excess pore Water pressure ~U (excess above· hydrostatic Or initial U0 ). This is the. case for one-
dimensional loading but (as we shall see later) not for three-dimensional loading .. 
With time,· water is squeezed out through the valve, and the excess pore water pressure 
decreases. Thus, there is a' gradualtransfer of stress froni the pore water to the soil skeleton and a con-
current increase in effective stress.· Figure 9.1(c) shows the initial effective stress u~;,, the change 
(increase) in effective stress, ~u', and the pore pressure still to.be dissipated, ~u, at t ;;,. t1. The verti-
cal dashed lines, labeled t1, t 2 ; .... , represent times from the start of load application. They are called 
.. , , isochrones1 becal1se they are lines of equal times. Finally, at t -
oo all of the excess pore water pressure 
~u .will be dissipated, and the effective stress will equal the initial stress u~0 plus the applied stress 
increment ~0'· Duri~g-this,time, the piston will have seUled an amount that isdirectlyr.elated to how 
much wateris squeezedoutof the cylinder. . 
. .. , ; , . 
' 
, 
. , . 
. . Atypical ~oil layer is much morecomplexthan thesimple model shown in Figs. 9.1(a)-(c). 
Let.us increase the, number of springs, pistons, and valvesasshown.Fig. 9.1(d). As)Jefore, we can 
' ' ~ ' 
1/sobars are dthe;'arctic taverns or don tour lines of equal pressure fou~d o~ a ~~a~her map; isbp~chs are lines of 
equal thickness of a geologic deposit; and isotachs are lines of equal velocity on wind maps. 
· · 
1.' '.' 
. 
. 
. 
406 
Chapter 9 
· Time Rate of Consolidation 
···u~o +au 
, . 
•• l •• t·' 
,, 
('/,1:·. 
Pressure~ 
f..u 
.r;• 
~I· ·- >I• 
•I 
···rJ. 
' (d) 
:: . ~· 
" (e)_ 
.r; a 
<I> 
Cl 
t 
au~aii 
Pressure_:____:.: · 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, U~o 
:au: 
au' /I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
' 
t1 
t2 
too 
I 
I 
(c) 
Pressure-
FIGURE 9. 1·. Spring analogy for consolidation: (a)-(c),' model of a single soil layer; 
·· (d)-(f), model of multiple soil layers; 
:. 
•· .. · 
, 'r . 
\ ~ 
i 
' ' i 
,,·.\. 
: ~ . 
. show the' initial effective stress. O'~d within. the soil layer, and the' corresponding induced pore water 
pressure sii; due to the e'xterm11 stress on the pistons ~cr, iri Fig. 9.1( e }. Let us allow drainage to 
·.' ,_,occur through; each piston: and valve so that we have both internal as weli as top and bottom 
drainage. In order for the water to be squeezed oufof cylinders 2, 3, and 4, some cif the water in 
· - : · ' cylinders Lm:ci s' musf es'cape beforeh'and. Likewise; before the water can be squeezed out of the 
soil in cylinder' 3, some ofthe water in cylinde~s 2 and 4 must' be squeezed out first, and so on. 
Becau'se all valves are open, upon application of the external stress tlu,;water will start to flow out 
immediately from the top ar1d bottom cylinders. This will result in an immediate reduction of the 
excess pore water pressm~ and an increase· iii effective stress in cylinders '1 iuid 5, arid so on: As shown 
in Fig. 9.l(f), with time the pore pres'sure is~chrones nl()Ve to the right, and they' are segmented 
9.3 
9.3 Terzaghi's 0n7-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
407 
lines because. of the finite number of pistons and valves. With an infinite number of pistons, the 
isochrcines' would be. smooth curves thatnither: accurately. represent what. is physically occurring 
with time in a consolidating soil deposit. At the center of a doubly drained layer, which is mocjeled 
· by Figs. 9.1(d)-(f), it can be seen that the decrease. in the induced pore water pressure, for example at 
t1, is small compared to the change at the' top and bottom of the layer. This is because the drainage 
path for the center cylinder is considerably longer than for cylinders 1 and 5; As a result it takes a 
longer time for the center of a'doubly drained layer (or.the bottom of a singly drained layer) to dis-
sipate its excess pore pressure. 
. . . 
. 
. 
·· · 
· : 
· 
The flow of water out of the cylinders (soil voids) is physically due to the gradienti, which equals 
· hll = · ( !lulpwg )I llz. The slope of the segmented isochrom!s in Fig. 9.1(f) is !lui llz. At the exact center 
of the clay layer the' flow is zero, because the gradient !lui !lz is zero. At the: ends, the gradient 
. approaches infinity, and thus the flow is greatest right at the drainage surfaces.·· 
· · ·•. · 
The process just described is called consolidation. The amount of settlement the spring-piston 
:system (or clay layer) experiences is directly related to how much water has squeezed out of the cylin-
ders (or voids in the day). How much water has squeezed out and thus the change in void ratio of the 
clay is in turn directly proportional to the amount of excess pore water pressure that has dissipated. 
Thus the rate of settlement is directly relah.id to.the rate of excess pore pressure dissipation. What we 
need in order to predict the rate of s~ttlement of a foundation is an equation or theory that predicts 
the pore pressure and void ratio at any" point in time and space in the consolidating clay layer. Then 
the change in thickness or settlement of the layer after 'any tinie of loading can be determined by 
integration of the equation over the thickness of the clay layer. The theory of consolidation most 
commonly used in soil mechanics is one-dimensional. It was first developed byTerzaghi in the 1920s, 
and its derivation and solution are summarized in the sections that follow. 
\ 
TERZAGHI'S ONE-DIMENSIONAL CONSOLIDATION THEORY 
. 
. 
In this section, we present the Terzaghi (1925) one-dimensional consolidation equation and discuss 
some of the assumptions necessary to derive it. A detailed derivation and the solution to tlie equation 
are given in Appendix B-2. In order to use the Terzaghi theory with some confidence, you need to 
understand its assumptions and therefore its. limitations. 
The compressible soil layer is assumed to be both homogeneous (same composition at all points) 
. ' and completely saturated with water' and the mineral grains in the soil and the water in the pores are 
assumed. to be incompressible .. Darcy's law (Sec. 7.3) is considered to govern the egress ofwater from 
the. soil pores, and usually both drainage and compression are assumed to be one~dimensional. Usually 
drainage is provided at both the top and bottom of the compressible'layer, but it just as easily could be 
only at one surface. TheTerzaghi theory is a small strain theory in that the applied stress increment is 
•. ,assumed to produce onlysmall strains in the soil; therefore both.the·coefficient of compressibility av. 
[Eq: (8.5)] and the Darcy coefficient of permeability, k, remain essentially constant during the consoli~ 
dation process. If av is a constant over the increment of applied stress, then there is a unique relationship. 
between the change in void ratio !le, and the change in effective stress !lu'. This implies also that there 
is no secondary compression; otherwise the relationship between !le and !lu' would not be unique, by 
definition, since more than· one void ratio value would be' possible at a. given !lu' at different times. 
(Recall that secondary compression is the change in void ratio that occurs with time at constant effec-
tive stress.) 
· · 
The derivation ()fthe Terzaghi equation considers the .volume of water flowing out of a differ-
ential compressible soil 'element. From Darcy's law, we ;know the quantity of flow depends on the 
hydraulic gradient as well as on the permeability-offue soil. Tlie hydraulic gradient causing flow can 
be related to the excess pore water pressure~in th~ element by. ulpwg. Since the water. is assumed 
408 
Chapter 9: · Time Rate of Consolidation,,· 
,'( t"''' 
incompressible, by continuity the volume change in the element must be the difference between flow 
in and out of the element in a differential time dt. This part of the equation can be written as 
,{ 
! 
::1· 
. . 
-k.cPu. . 
, .;. ' : , . Pwg az2 dz dt 
,:; : 
•.i 
I' 
, 
where z is the space or depth variable in the soil element. Everything else is as previously defined. 
Partial differentials must be used because u is a function of both the position z and time t. 
The other part of the equation is obtained by relating the volume change or change in void ratio . 
of the soil skeleton to the change in effective stress by means of the coefficient of compressibility av, 
. which we determined in the consolidation test (Thus av is really the stress-strain relationship or "mod-
ulus:' of our soil.) From the effective' stress principle; we can equate the change in effective stress to the 
. change in pore pressure; In other words, as long as the total stress is constant, as the excess pore pres-
sure dissipates with time, there is a concurrent increase in effective stress, or t.a'. = . - t.u. As before, u 
is a function of both z and t. This half of the equation is usually written as 
'·<;' 
. -av au 
1 + e
0 atdtdz 
.P~ttirig the two p~rts t6gethe~, we obtain 
. ; . ; 
. 
. 
. . 
' 
' . 
~ 
' , . 
Rearranging, we obtain 
· · · . where 
·'_;,k a2u. ' ' '·.:....av au 
-.. -. -dzdt.= -.-. -.--,-dtdz. 
Pwgaz2 
1 +eo at. 
a2u 
au 
c-=-
v az2 
··· at· 
' k· l+eo 
Cv,=,p,;g ~· 
• 
• 
I 
(9.1) 
(9.2) 
' 
(9.3~ 
The coefficient Cv' is called the coefficient ofconsolidation, because it contains the 'material properties 
·that govern the consolidation process. If youperforrri a dimensional analysis of Eq.'(9.3); you will find 
that cv has dimensions 'of L z.r-t or m2/s. . 
': · .. · 
. , 
' •. ··' 
· .. ·Equation (9.2) is the Terzaghi one~dimensional consolidiltion equation. It could just as easily be 
· written in three dimensions, but rriost of the time in engineering practice one-dimensional ~onsolida­
tion is assumed. Basically, the equation is a form of the diffusion equation from mathematical physics. 
·Many physical diffusion phenomena are described by this equation-:-foi example, heat flow in a solid 
· : body. The "diffusion constant" for the soil is the Cv· Note that we are referring to Cv as· a·constant. It 
''really isn't, but we must assume that it is.:_i.e., that k; av, and e,;•are constants-in order to inake the 
''equation linear and easily solvable. 
·So, how do we solve the Terzaghi consolidation equation? Just as we solve all other second-
• ·,,order partial differential• equations with constant coefficients. There·· are a variety . of. ways, some 
mathematically exact and others only approximate. For example, Harr (1966) presents an approxi-
mate solution using the method of finite differences, as do Perloff and Baron (1976), among others. 
I Later in this section we show you how to use finite differences to solve consolidation problems. We 
begin, though, with a mathematically rigorous solution developed by Terzaghi (1925a) of his own 
·consolidation equation. 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
409 
9.3.1 
Classic Solution for the Terzaghi Consolidation Equation 
A mathematically rigorous solution ofTerzaghi (1925a) was refined and further developed byTerzaghi 
and Frohlich (1936) in terms of a Fourier series expansion. Here we just give an outline of the solution, 
following Taylor (1948). See Appendix B.2 for the details. 
First, the boundary and initial conditions for the case of one-dimensional consolidation are: 
1. There is complete drainage at the top and bottom of the compressible layer. 
2. The initialexcess hydrostatic pressure !lu = ui is equal to the applied increment of stress at the 
boundary, !lu. 
· 
We can write these boundary and initial conditions·as follows: 
At z = 0 and z = 2H -+ u = 0 
At.t = 0-+ llu = ui = !lu = (uz- ui) 
We usually take the thickness of the consolidating layer to be 2H, so that the length of the longest 
drainage path is equal to H or H dr· Of course at t = oo, !lu =. 0, or complete dissipation of the excess 
pore pressure will have occurred. 
· 
Terzaghi (1925a) was obviously familiar with earlier work on heat transfer, and he adapted those 
closed-form solutions to the consolidation problem. The solution comes out in terms of a Fourier series 
expansion of the form 
00 
u = (u2 - ui) 2: ft(Z)fz(T) 
(9.4) 
n=O 
where Z and Tare dimensionless parameters (see also Taylor, 1948). The first term, Z, is a geometry 
parameter, and it is equal to z!H, or the actual depth below the top of the layer divided by the drainage 
distance. The second term, T, is known as the time factor, and it is related to the coefficient of consoli-
dation Cv by 
. 
,I' 
(9.5) 
where t ,; time, and 
H dr = length of the longestdrainage path. 
We have already mentioned that Cv has dimensions of L 21
1 or units of m2/s (or equivalent). 
From Eq. (9.3), the time factor can also be written as 
T ~ k (1 + e~) t . 
· 
avpwg 
Har 
(9.6) 
Note that t has the' same time units ask. That is, if kis in centimetres per second, then t must be in sec~ 
onds. The drainage path for double drainage would be equal to half the thickness H of the clay layer, or 
2H/2 ':"' H dr-If we had only a si~gly drained layer, tlie drainage path would still be H d;, but it would be 
·equal to the entire thickness of the layer. 
.. . . · , · . 
. . 
.. · . . · 
. . 
. 
. · 
The progres~ of consolidation after some time t and at imy depth z in the consolidating layer can 
be related to the void ratio at that time and the final change in void ratio. This relationship is called the 
. consolidation ratio, expressed as 
' 
.' 
410 
Chapter 9. · Time Rate of Consolidation 
e 
+ 
fle 
_L 
;i' 
v. 
.· 
'fle 
e1 - e2 
Bv = --:.-, ~ -,--, 
flu · u2- u1 
flu' =flu= U; 
CI
1 
-
u1 
u 
FIGURE 9:2 
Laboratory compression curve: 
·-' 
._.,~!,. 
where e is some intermediate void ratio, .as shown on Fig. 9.2. Note that in Fig. 9.2, a' - aJ. = 
(a2 - al) - u = u; -
u. What we are looking at graphically in that figure is the ratio of ordinates 
· corresponding to AB and AC. In terms of stresses and pore pressures, ~q: (9.7) beco~es 
I 
a'- al 
U
-
. 
I 
z- a2..:. a1 
u: - a! =· u;.- u = l .:..:,.!!._ : . 
!::J.a'. 
·u;. · 
u; 
:-..,,,'!,:·. 
' 
(9.8) 
where a' and u are intermediate values corresponding to e in Eq. (9.7), arid u; is the initial excess pore 
pressure induced by the applied stress Sa'. You should satisfy yourself that these equations are correct 
from the relationships shown in Fig. 9.2 and from !::J.a' = - !::J.u. (See also Appendix B.2.) 
From Eqs. (9.7) and (9.8), it is evident that U z is zero at the start of loading, arid it gradually 
increases tol(or 100%) as the.void ratio decreases from e1 to e2 • At the same time; of course, as long as 
'tb.e total stress renulins constant, ui~; effective stress increases from a! to a2 I as the excess hydrostatic 
stress (pore water pre~sure ), dissipates from u; to zero .. The corisoiid~tion nitio U zissometiines called the 
degree or percent consolidation, and it represents conditions at a point in the consolidating layer. We can 
now put our solution for u in Eq. (9.4) in terms of the consolidation ratio, Eq. (9.8);or . 
· 
' 
·.· 
· .. , ' 
.. 
' 
. 
:. 
,. 
. 
,· 
' 
.;: 
' 
·~· 
. 
' 
.(X) 
,' .•. : 
u = 1 - 2.ft(Z)f2(T) 
· 
n=O 
(9.9) 
The solution to this equation is shown graphically in Fig. 9.3 in terms of the dimensionless parame-
ters already defined. The tedious calculations involved in solving Eq. (9.9) are no longer necessary. 
9.3 
Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
411 
Consolidation ratio, Uz 
FIGURE 9.3 
Consolidation for any location and time factor in a doubly drained 
layer (after Taylor, 1948). 
I 
~.I.·. 
~~.· 
From Fig. 9.3 it is possible to find the amount or degree of consolidation (and therefore u and u') for 
any real time after the start of loading and at any point in the consolidating layer. All you need to 
· know is the Cv for the· particular soil deposit, the total thickness of the layer, and boundary drainage 
· conditions. With these items, the time factor T can be calculated from Eq. (9.5). It is applicable to 
any one-dimensional loading situation where the soil properties can be assumed to be the same 
throughout the compressible layer. 
• Figure 9.3 also is a picture of the progress of consolidation. The isochrones (lines of constant T) 
in Fig. 9.3 represent the degree or percent consolidation for a given time factor throughout the com-
pressible layer. For example, the percent consolidation at midheight of a doubly drained layer (total 
thickness = 2H) for a time factor equal to 0.2 is approximately 23% (see point A in Fig. 9.3). At the 
same time (and time factor) at other locations within the soil layer, however, the degree of consolidation 
is different. Af 25% of the depth, for example, z/H = 1/z and Uz = 44%. Similarly, near the drainage 
surfaces at z!H = 0.1, for the same time factor, because the gradients are much higher, the clay is 
already 86% consolidated, which means that at that depth ahd time, 86% of the original excess pore 
pressure has di~sipated and the effective stress has increased by ~ corresponding amount. 
Example 9.1 
Given: 
A 12 m thick layer of Chicago clay is doubly drained. (This means that a very pervious layer 
compared to the clay exists on top of and under the 12 m clay layer.) The coefficient of consolidation 
Cv = 8.0 X 10-8 m2/s. 
. 
412 
Chapter 9 ~···. ·Time Rate of Consolidation 
",.{ 
Required: 
Find the degree or percent consolidation for the clay 5 yr after loading at depths of 3, 6, 9, and 12 m. 
Solution: First, compute the time factor. From Eq. (9:5), 
Cvt 
T=-2 
· 
Hdr 
_) 
· 
8.0 X 10-8 m2/s(3.1536 X 107 s/yr)(S yr) 
• 
, = 
(6)2m2 
. . 
= 0.35 
Note that 2H = 12m and H dr = 6 m, since there is double drainage. 
Next, from Fig. 9.3 we obtain (by interpolation) forT = 0.35: 
Atz =3m, 
. 
.z!H·= o.so,\' 
Example 9.2 
Given: 
At z = 6 m, 
zl H = 1.0,' I 
. 
-
.··I 
Atz := 9m, · 
Atz =12m, 
z/H- 1.50,, 
z!H ::o:.2.0, 
The soil conditions of Example 9.1. 
Required: 
Uz = 61% 
Uz ~46% 
Uz = 61% 
Uz = 100% 
·-.. 
~ 
·If the structure applied an average vertical stress increa~e of 100 kP~ to the clay layer, estimate 
.···the excess pore wa~er pressureremaining in the clayafter 5 yrfor the depths in the clay layer of 3, 6, 9, 
' and 12 m. ' 
';: 
Soluti()n: Assuming one-dimensional loading, the induced ~xcess pore water' pres stir~ at the' beginning 
of consolidation is 100 kPa. From Eq; (9.8), 
. 
, · .. , 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
. 
· . 
·.or. 
Uz = 1- ~ 
U; 
u = u;(1 ·~ Uz) 
From the solution in Example 9.1 we obtain: . 
·: Atz =3m, 
Uz = 61%, 
At z = 6 in, 
·Uz = 46%, · 
Atz = 9m, 
Uz = 61%, 
Atz =12m, 
Uz = 100%, 
'· 
u = 39kPa 
· it =54 kPa 
u = 39kPa 
u = OkPa 
Fig~re Ex. 9.2 shows these v~l~es vers~~ depth. Note that they are excess pore pressures-that is, they 
are above the hydrostatic water pressure .. · 
· 
· 
t 
"I 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Di~ensionaiConsolidation Theory 
413 
Soil profile 
Depth (m) 
,.......,..._,..,..,...,.,.,....,~---:---~o . • . 
. 
}::\.~:~r~:;::.:;::.:.::::--=~~: ------1 
• 
. ..... p, .1.8 Mg/m 
~ 
· e0 = 0.62 
Wn = 23.2% 
Soft 
clay 
Ps = 2660 kg/m3 
FIGURE Ex. 9.2 
5-
10-
9 
15-
20-
50 
u(kPa) 
150 . 200 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
.. \ 
\ 
\ 
U; = 100 kPa 
\ 
at t = 0 
\ 
v~'. 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
t = 5 yr 
\ 
\ 
In most cases, we are not interested in how much consolidation has occurred at a given point in 
a layer. Of more practical interest is the average degr~e or perce~t consolidati~n of the entire layer. This 
value, denoted by U or U avg, is a measure of how much the entire layer has consolidated, and thus it can 
be directly related to the total settlement of the layer at a given time after loading. Note that U can be 
expressed as either a decimal or a percentage. 
· To obtain the average degree of consolidation over the entirelayer corresponding to a given 
time factor we have to find the.areaunder the T curve of Fig. 9.3. (Actually we obtain the area outside 
the Tcurve, as shown in Fig. 9.4.) Hbw the integration is done mathematically is shown in Appendix B.2. 
Table 9.1 presents the results of the integration for, the case where a linear distribution of excess pore 
water pressure is assumed. 
· 
· · 
: · · 
· 
The results in Table 9.1 are shown graphically in Fig. 9.5. In Fig. 9.5(a) the relap6nship is shown 
arithmetically, whereas in Fig. 9.5(b) the relationship between U and .Tis shown semilogarithmically. 
Another form of the relationship is found in Fig. 9.5(c), where Uis plotted versus W. As discussed in 
the next section, Figs. 9.5(b) and 9.5( c) show certain characteristics of the theoretic~! U-T relationship 
to better advantage than Fig. 9.5(a):Note.that as T becomes very large, U asymptotically approaches 
100%. This means that, theoretically, 'consolidation never stops but continues indefinitely. It should also 
be pointed out that the solution for. U versus Tis dimensionless and applies to all types of problems 
where !J.u. =. !J.u varies linearly with depth. 
· 
· 
Solutions for cases where the initial pore pressure distribution is sinusoidal, half sine, and trian-
gular are presented by Taylor (1948) and Leonards (1962), and the results in terms of U versus T for 
these various initial pore pressure distributions are actually quite similar. When you consider the many 
assumptions in the Terzaghi theory and the real possibility of drainage that is not just one-dimensional, 
a uniform linear initial distribution of pore pressure is not as inaccurate as you might think. That is why 
.it is the only one we present. Shortly, we will introduce.a finite difference solution to problems with 
unusual initial pore pressure distributions. 
· 
· 
. 
f• 
414 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
~' ' . 
"' 
Excess pore 
pressure dissipated 
u~. t = u2- u;.- Uz, t 
=:' l::.u- Uz, t 
Uavg (%) = -----
D 
X 100 
__ ';-, 
·At t= 0 :: 
ui + t:.u 
. 
·' 
. -', 
Excess pore . 
pressure remaining 
~ 
1 
-
-----X100 
D 
~IGURE 9.4 Average degr~~ of c~n~~·li.dation, U~~9, d.efined. : .. 
'<' 
' 
" 
' 
'. 
' 
' 
'<' ' 
' 
< ~ 
• 
: 
• 
' 
' 
' 
'' 
' 
•• 
·. ·~ ·" 
)_·, 
:TABLE 9.1 
Values of Uavg versus Tfrom Fig. 9.5 •. · 
,;;. 
•'0.2 
'·0.3· :. 
0.4 
::· 0.5 
0.6 
·,,0.7 
. 0,8 .. 
0.9 
0.95 
,1.0. 
; 0.008. 
0.031 
•· .. 
0.071 
. 
0.126~ ·, ... 
;. 0.197 · ... 
·0.287.''. 
• 0.403:::: ... 
/, ;:' . 0.567 
.. 
0.848 
', .. 1.163 
,, :> ..• 1 
. ; 
" 
'' 
· Casagriride (1938) and Taylor (1948) provide the following useful approximations: . 
·For U < 60%,· 
· 
·· > 
.·· 
· 
: 
<-· . 
' ·. : . ··' ·' ·_ 
' 
' : · 
' 
• 
_. 
! •. · 
T = '!!.uz = '!!. U '!o ... -
-. 
( 
0 )2 
. 
4 
.· . 4' <100 
' 
· For lJ > 60%, 
T = 1.781 - 0.933log(100- JJ%) 
(9.10) 
(9.11) 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-DimensionaiConsolidation Theory 
415 
T 
; i: 
o 
· 0.2 
o.4 
o.6 ' 
o.a ; 
•· 1.0 ·· 
~ 
~ 
""'"'·-··-·+ - --+··-·-··-··· -+-··-·-······· +-·-······-·-+-->;----+··-·-··-- -+-··-··-·--+--·-··-··-··h--···:-··-·; ....... ,_, __ 1······-·····-·-·· ·-·-··-··-··-·-·· 
-~ 
sof---+~~~--+---~--+--~:--~--,-~---+-~~-+--~--+-~ 
-..."' . 
---·--+---:c-:··t-:~-'""'-l:-----t----+-----t------+·---------t-:---·---+-,--·--·~··---t·-·'----+-----+----1 
-.J 
-
.. 
-·-
~'...... 
(b) 
Vf 
FIGURE 9.5 
Uavg versus T: (a) arithmetic scale; (b) log scale; (c) square root scale. 
Example 9.3 
Given: 
T = 0.05 for a compressible clay deposit.' 
Required: 
Average degree of consolidation and the p~rcent consolidation at the centef and at z/H = 0.1. 
416 
Chapter 9; 
.. Time Rate of Consolidation · 
Solution: From Table 9.1 and Fig. 9.5, U avg = 26%.Therefore the clay is 26% consolidated, on average. 
From Fig. 9.3 you can see that the center of the layer is less than 0.5% consolidated, while at the "10%" 
depth (z/H = 0.1) the clay is 73% consolidated. But, on average throughout the layer, the clay is 26% 
consolidated. 
What does the average consolidation mean in terms of settlements? U avg can be expressed as 
s(t) 
Uavg = --
Sc 
(9.12) 
where s(t) is the settlement at any time, and sc is the final or ultimate consolidation (primary) settle-
ment at t. = oo; 
Example 9.4 
·Given: 
·:) 
)l) 
The data of Example 9.3. 
Required: :. 
Find the settlement when U avgis 26%, if the final consolidation settl~ment isl m. 
Solution: From Eq; (9.12), s(t) = U avg(sc).Therefore 
s(t) = 26%(1 m) = 0.26 m 
Example 9.5 
Given: 
The soil profile and properties of Examples 9.1 and 9.2. The stress increase in the clay layer is 
100 kPa. 
Required: 
Compute the time required for the clay layer to settle 0.25 m. 
Solution: To compute the average degree of consolidation,the final consolidation settlement sc, must 
be estimated as we did in Chapter 8. From Fig. Ex. 9.2, H o = 12m mid e
0 = 0.62. For Chicago clay, the 
value of Cc may be found using the last relationship in Table 8.3, Cc = 0.01 X ( Wn = 23.2%) = 0.23. 
Cc may also be found from the secorid expression, knowing the initial void ratio, solving for Cce and 
dividing by (1 + e0 ), giving Cc = 0.22, or about the same. Determine p for the soft clay and calculate 
a~0 at the middepth oflayerfrom Eqs. (6.14c) and (6.15):Assume the clay is normally consolidated. Use 
techniques from Chapter 2 to compute Pciay· So, 
a~o = PsandgZl + (Psand - Pw)gzz + (Pciay - Pw)gZ3 
a~0 = 1.8 Mg/m3 X 9.8 m/s2 X 1.5 m + (1.8- 1) Mg/m3 X 9.8 m!s2 X 3m. 
+ (2.02 - 1) Mg/m3 X 9.8 m/s2 X 6 m 
·= llOkPa 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
417 
·From Eq. (8.10), 
12 m · 
110 kPa + 100 kPa · · 
Sc = 0.23 1 + 0_62 log 
110 kPa 
= 0.48 m .. 
The average degree of consolidation Uavgwhen the clay layer settles 0.25 m is[Eq .. (9.12)]: 
s(t) 
0.25 m 
Uavg =- = -048 
= 0.52,or52% 
Sc 
• 
m 
To obtain Twe can use either Table 9.1 or Fig:9.s. Or, si~ce U avg < · 60%, we can use Eq. (9.10): 
T = ~(0.52? = 0.212 
Fr~m Eq. (9.5), t = TH~/cv, where Hctr: = 6 mfor ctou'ble drain~ge; or 
. 
. 0.212 X (6 m? 
t = -----;;:---;:;-------;;---
8 X 10 8 m2/s X 3.1536 X 107 s/yr 
= 3.0yr 
Example 9.6 
Given: 
The data of Examples 9.1 and 9.5. ' 
Required: 
How much time would be required for a settlement of 0.25 m to occurif the clay layer were 
singly drained? 
Solution: Use Eq. (9.5) directly 
Cv = 8 X 10-8 m2/s X 3.1536 X 107 s/yr = 2.523 m2/yr 
TH~r 
t=--
Cv 
· ·where H dr = ·12 m for single drainage 
0.212 X (12m? 
t = 
= 12.1 yr 
2.523 m2/yr 
' 
< 
,' 
.' 
• 
' 
' 
'. 
orfour_t!f1J._esas long as with double drainage. 
'·-
··~~-J 
Example 9.7 , 
Given: 
. 
A 10m thick clay layer with single drainage settles 9 em in 3.5 yr. The coefficient of consolidation 
. for this clay was found to be 0.544 X 10-2 cm2/s. 
; . · 
418 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
Required: 
Compute the ultimate consolidation settlement, and find out how long it will take to settle to 
90% of this amount. 
Solution: From Eq. (9.5) solve for T: 
tcv 
T=-
Hz 
3.5 yr (0.544 X 10-
2
) cm
2 
( 
1m2 
)( 
7 s ) 
= 
3.1536 X 10 -
(100m2) s 
10 000 cm2 
yr 
= 0.6 
From Table 9.1 we see that the average degree of consolidation is between 0.8 and 0.9. Therefore we 
can use either Eq. (9.11) or Fig. 9.5(a); or we can interpolate from Table 9.1. Using Eq. (9.11), we have 
0.6 = 1.781 - 0.933log(100 - U%) 
1.27 = log(100 - U%) 
or 
U = 81.56%, or 82% 
Thus if 9 em of settlement represents 82% of the total settlement, then the total consolidation settle-
ment is [Eq. (9.12)]: 
s(t) 
9 em . 
· 
s =--=--= 11cm 
c 
Uavg 
0.82 
· 
For the time for 90% settlement to occur, find T = 0.848 for U avg = 0.9,from Table 9.1. Using Eq. (9.5) 
and solving fcir t, we find that: 
· 
THar 
0.848 (10m? 
10 ooo cm2 
t = -- = -----=----:c----=--
Cv 
0.544 X 10-2 cm2/s 
m2 
,;, 1.559 X 108 s 
yr 
7 
3.1536 X 10 s 
= 4.94yr 
Example 9.8 
,.' 
Given: 
The data of Example 9.7. 
Required: 
Find the variation in the degree of consolidation throughout the layer when t = 3.5 yr~ 
Solution: When t = 3.5 yr, the corresponding time factor = 0.6, from Example 9.7. Find tlie curve for 
· · T = 0.6 in Fig. 9.3. (For a layer with single drainage, we use the top half or bottom half, depending on 
where the layer is drained. Assume for this problem that the layer is drained at the top.) The curve 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
419 . 
for T = 0.6 represents the degree of consolidation at any depth z. Using Eq. (9.5), we find that the 
~· .T = 0.6 isoch~o_n(;! shows. the variation of U z for t,=: }.5 yr. It can be seen that at the bottom of the 
layer, where ifH·= 1, Vz = 71 %.At midheight of the 10m thick layer, where z/H = 0.5, Vz = 79.5%. 
Thus the degree of consolidation.varies through the depth of the clay layer, but the average degree of 
consolidation for the entire layer is 82 o/o (Example>9.7). Another interesting point about Fig. 9.3 is that 
the area to the left of the curve T = 0.6 represents 82% of the area of the entire graph, 2H versus U z, 
whereas the area to the right of the curve T = · 0.6 represi.mts 18%, or the amount of consolidation yet 
to take place. (See also Fig. 9.4.) 
.· 
· 
. 
IlJ. the. event youhave a p-roblem with several compressible lay~rs with differelJ.t permeabilities 
and coefficients of consolidation, or if you find- intermediate drainage layers in the compressible 
stratum, then the average degree of consolidation of the entire stratum U Tis 
(9.13) 
• where U1, U2 , .•• ; U ,are the average degrees of consolidation of each layer, and sc1, sc2 , ..• , sen are 
the' consolidation settlements of each layer. The settlement sc is, of course, the consolidation settlement· 
of all the layers. 
· 
' 
. 
If two layers are next to each other, but they are both fine grained and have different permeability 
coefficients, thesituation is called fmpedeidrainage, because one layer might impede the dissipation of 
pore pressure of the second. The total settlement will be the same; but the time rate of consolidation will 
be different, and yciu need to calculate the time rate of consolidation using a method proposed by Gray 
(1945). This type of situation might fool you, for example, in cases where a preload is placed on the 
ground surface to precompress orpreconsolidate a compressible layer. Upon removal of the surcharge 
load, some of the soil nearest the true drainage layer will have been preconsolidated to a lower void ratio. 
As a result, its permeability will be lower as well, hence it will impede the drainage when the building 
load is placed on the ground. It is a concern only in tenris of how fastthe structure will settle. 
9.3.2 
Finite Difference Solution for the Terzaghi Consolidation Equation 
Finite differences is a numerical method for the solution to the Terzaghi consolidation equation 
(Harr, 1966).-f.lth~mgh the soluHon is only approximate, it is very useful for evaluating the time rate 
of consolidattmi, because the calculations are readily performed with a spreadsheet. Here we sum-
marize the elegant presentation b')!Perloff and Baron (1976). Refer to the original presentation for 
all the grizzly details. · 
. 
To start our discussion, refer to Fig. 9.6, which illustrates the reduction of excess pore pressure 
with time along with the simultaneous increase of effective stress with time. The pore water pressure is 
eventually transferred to the soil skeleton; At t = 0, !lu = tlu imd ilu' = 0. When t = oo, !lu = 0 
and ilu' = !lu. 
· 
'· 
". 
The !lu results from some loading on the sa'ii, as shown in Fig: 9.7{a);'a duplicate'of Fig. 9.1(b). It 
is convenient for the following discussion if we modify the initial distribution of'!lu(z) to that shown in 
Fig. 9.7(b ). Remember that !lu represents the excess pore water pressure that will dissipate with time. 
As the excess pore pressure reduces, there is a concurrent corresponding increase in effective stress . 
. Now consider just the excess pore pressure at timet = O;as shown in~Fig. 9.7(c) (the figure has simply 
been rotated to an isometric view). ~ 
. , . 
As time increases, the pore pressure will decrease with certain time increments of ilt. With time, 
the initial pore pressure distribution curve of Fig. 9.7( c)will create a surface, as shown in Fig. 9.8 in 3-D 
space. This surface is the solution to the one-dimensional consolidation equation [Eq. (9.2)]!. · 
420 
Chapter 9 · ' Time Rate of Consolidation ..• 
~~·:' 
I·· 
,; ' 
· FIGURE 9.6 
Stress transfer with · 
time (C. W. Lovell, personal com-
munication, '1 988). 
· 
;i ..• ' 
·' 
,;r 
' ! 
~ ' . ... 
'.!:'. 
FIGURE 9.7 Development of 
ilu or Ue, excess pore.water. 
pressure with depth: (a) initial .. 
conditions; (b) modification of 
, initial conditions; (c) isometric 
view of (b) showing excess pore 
pressure only. 
· ' 
., 
,· 
\ .\ 
rJl 
rJl 
' 
~ 
iii 
<1 
·', .· 
-
' 
/ 
' . >c: ; . 
,/., ~! 
... ,,~' i;, 
. 
.. .. 
-1~ 
. 
.... ... 
. 
~ 
,;"' 
.s= c. 
. Q). 
0 
J 
•t1 
Pressure~ 
•·· 
!Tvo 
·-
·-
.-
·-
~~ilu'(t) 
Pressure 
~ 
'"'. 
~ 
Q)• 
0 
! 
(c) 
Time 
--+-
A 
au 
Time 
The horizontal' plane is time at some elevation in the ground. The .vertical plane is depth within 
the compressible layer, while perpendicular to that is the excess pore pressure; u.(z, t). For any given 
· time and depth; there is a single Ue, and when all of these values are known, the solution surface results.· 
At any time, th u.(z) defines the surface, which is an isochrone. Tqe tangent to the isochrone is the 
partial derivative of u.(z, t) as shown in Fig. 9.9(a), 
· 
U8(Z, t) = Ur,j. 
z 
•., '. 
FIGURE 9.8 Surface representation of the solution for the one-dimensional 
consolidation equation (after Perloff and Baron,1976) . 
.. 
'.\ 
. ··,; 
iJU9 
· U9(Zi+ 1; ~) - U8(Z;, ~) 
az""' 
,J::..z 
(a) 
U
8(Z;, ~+ 1) ::_ U8(Z;, ~) 
at 
0 
;-
F;~URE·9:9 Definitions of part"ial d~rivatilles ~s finite diffe~e~ces: (a) secant 
. to th~ isochrone at time tj; (b) secant to the excess pore pressure function at 
· depth z; (after· Perloff and Baron, 1976). · 
· 
. · 
·. 
' ." 
' 
' · 
· · 
.• 
' 
• 1;. '.,<' 
• 
· 
'"" 
· 
:.1 
r 
-
':\ 
421 
422 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation · 
and is given by 
aue 
az. 
Ue(Z + .:lz, tj) - Ue(Z, tj) 
lim ------'-----
~z--+0 
.:lz . 
Approximating the partial derivative by a secant between tw~ points of the function, we obtain 
aue 
Ue(Z + .:lz, tj) - Ue(Z, tj) 
--;;;·::<J 
.:lz 
.. Ue( Zi+l, tj) -. Ue( Zj, tj) 
.:lz 
(9.14) 
(9.15) 
Note that Z; and Zi+l are ~Ile ~~o!depth~ separated by the distance ~z.Thisapproximation is known 
as a finite difference. We need to go one more step to obt~inthe left side ofEq: (9.2). We do that by noting 
. ~
2
ue 
a (aue) 
· .. ·· az2 .. = az iii 
(9.16) 
,-, ;'; 
Approximating the second partial derivative, we obtain 
a2ue 
Ue(Zi+l• tj) - 2ue(Z;, tj) + Ue(Zi-b tj)' 
az2 == 
.:lz2 
(9.17) 
Now consider the plane of ue(Z, t) as shown in Fig.9.9(b),where the excess pore pressure at any 
depth z changes with time. The tangent to this surface is the partial derivative au/atat some depth, z;. 
Approximating this derivative by a secant, we optain 
au 
-
== ---'---'-----
at 
(9.18) 
Substituting Eqs. (9.17) and (9.18) into Eq. (9.2), and being more concise, we obtain 
(ue,+1.J - 2ue,.i +. Ue,~1) 
Cv 
(ueiJ+l.-
Ue;J·)~ 
(9.19) 
.:lz2 
M 
; 
.. ' 
Rearranging as only mathematicians can do, we uncover the recurrence formula, 
Ue·· 1 = CXUe. 1 . + (1 - 2a)ue + CXUe 
1 . 
l,j+ 
..... 1+ ,J 
IJ 
; 
1-
,] 
(9.20) 
.in which 
a = 
Cv .:lt · ·. 
(.:lz? 
. 
(9.21) 
Perloff and Baron (1976) then go on to 'describe the boundary conditions for which. the recur-
rence formula will .. be stable . mathenuitically. When. a = 1h, the formulations are stable, and the 
approximate solution converges. to the exact solution when .:lz and M ·each approach zero. With 
a = l!z, the middle term of Eq. (9.20) drops out, and the excess pore pressure in the next time incre- · 
ment, j + 1, is merely the average of the adjacent points at time j. Review Fig. 9.10 to see this concept 
presented graphically. · · • · · ' 
• · 
: · 
· · 
· 
· 
. 
· 
· ·: 
. •· • 
. 
• 
: 
Notethai if you set a = 1/6,'a more accurate solution is obtained,one that can be readily pro-
grammed with a spreadsheet. The following example iliustnites use of this method. 
T 
i- 1• 
Example 9.9 
Given: 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
423 
Time, t 
FIGURE 9.10, Graphical represen- · 
tation of Eq. (9.20) with a "7 1/2 •. 
Granular material7 m thick overlies a soft compressible layer that is 14m thick. Below the com-
pressible material is a hard till. Figure Ex. 9.9a gives the soil profile, soil properties, and the distributions 
of total stress and static pore water pressure with depth. Figure Ex. 9.9b shows the effective stress with 
depth plus the excess pore pressure within the compressible layer due to the external loading (on top of 
the granular layer). The coefficient of consolidation ( cv) is 9.3 m2/min; obtained from a consolidation 
test on the soft material. 
Soft 
compressible 
material 
lmp~iVious 
till 
.. 
FIGURE Ex. 9.9a 
{~:WMi;~:~f\D}; P = 1.85 Mg/m3 . , . 
. Cti;'r:(\mfn: p =; 2.0 Mg/ma .. • 
,:::.:•,.:~::·::;.~:.::~··: 
+ _{ c( 
·:. ~; 
~ 1.5Mg/~3
' 
1 
· ·. 
+ 
+ 
424 
Chapter 9> 
,Time Rate of Consolidation.·· 
JWrJ~})Wf.J~ 
~r,~t~tl 
-
g 
FIGURE Ex. 9.9b 
Required: 
Effective stress (kPa) 
100 
200 
300 
\ 
r···~au, 
77 
68 
62 
I• 
u'(z) + U6 
400 
Evaluate the pore pressure dissipation with time until about 5 yr have passed. Plot the isochrones 
with depth. 
Solution: We start our solution by making an assumption for the number of layers or increments. We 
choose seven layers of compressible soil, or ~z = 2m per layer. Next, set a = 1/2 and solve for ~t 
using Eq. (9.21) with 2 mper increment of ~z. Solving for ~t, 
· 
· 
· 
a(~z? 
·~t=-­
Cv 
O.S(2 m)2 
m2 
min 
· 
hr 
9.3 X -. X 60-h X 24-d 
mm 
r 
a 
= 149.3 da ~ 150 da 
We use Table Ex. 9.9 for our computations. First, the depth increment number i is given in row A 
at the top. Next, row B gives the depth z; below the top of the compressible layer. The time increment 
number i is located in the left two columns below row 13. Time increases downward in the table of 
Table Ex. 9.9. The initial conditions, frorriFig. Ex. 9.9b, are shown in rowE, with depth to the right, ho,r-
izontal plane. (These initial values of ~u were obtained from the theoretical stress distril:nitions in the 
· compressible layer based on the surface loading. We will discuss how to do this in Chapter 10.) 
;• 
. 
' ·'-!:' 
9.3 Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
425 
·''"' 
TABLE Ex 9.9 
B 
c 
D 
E 
j = 1 
2 
3 
4, 
5 
6 
7 8. 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
·17 
18' 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23' 
24 
25 
26 
; 27 
28 
29 
30 
: 31 
32 
33 
34 
t (da) 
0 
150 
300 
450 
600 
750 
900 
1050 
1200 
1350 
1500 
1650 
.1800 
1950 
2100 
2250 
2400 
2550 
2700 
2850 
3000 
3150 
. 3300 
3450 
3600 
3750 
3900 
4050 
4200 
4350 
4500 
4650 
4800 
4950 
•, 
',_, 
i -->"" 
t (yr) 
o-
0 
0.4 
0.8 
1.2 
1.6 
2.1 
2.5 
2.9 
3.3 
. 3.7 
4.1 
4.5 
4.9 
5.3 
5.8 
6.2 
6.6 
' 7.0 
7.4 
7.8. 
8.2 
8.6 
9.0 '" 
9.5 
9.9 
10.3 
10.7 
11.1 
11.5 
11.9 
12.3 
12.7 
13.2 
13.6 
77 
38.5 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
o.o· 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
. 0.0 
0.0 
. '0.0 
0.0'" 
0.0 
0.0 . 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
.0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
. 68.0. 
50.3 
30.8 
26.4 
21.3 
19.2 
16:4. 
15.3 
'13.5 .· ' 
12.9 
11.6 
. 11.3 
10.3 
. 10.1 
9.3 
9.2 
8.6 
8.6 
8.0 . 
'8.0 
7.5 
7.5 
7.0. 
.7.1' 
6.6 
.. 6.7. 
6.3 
6.4 
6.0" 
6.0 
5.7 
5.7. 
5.4 
5.4 
• · Excess Pore Pressure u, (z, t) (kPa) 
Initial Conditions 
· 6Z:O · 
61.5 
52.9 
. 42.5 
38.3 
32.8 
c 
30~6 
27.0 
c 25.8 
23.2 
22.5 
20.5 
20.2 
18.6 
18.5 
17.1 
.17.1 
15.9 ' 
16.0 
14.9 
15.0 
14.1 
14.2 
13.3 
13.4 
i2~6 .. 
12.7 
11.9 ·. 
.. 12.1'' 
11.3 
11.5 
10.7. 
·10.9 
10.2 
. 49 . 
39 
. 55.0 
. 55.5 
. ' . 49.0 
39.0 
54.3 . 
. ,50.2 .·. 
44.4. 
42.0. 
37.6 
' .. 36.2 c 
. 32.9 
32.2 
29.5 
29.2 
26.9 c 
26.9 
-24.9 
25.0 
23.3 
23.4 
21.9 
22.1 .. 
20.7 
20.9 
19.5 
19.8 c. 
47.0 
39.5 
47.5 
38.5 
46.4. 
41.1 
·45.7 
• 40.3 
'42.4. 
' 41.8 
41:9 
,, 39.8 
• ' 38:7 
40.9 ' 
38.6 
38.6. 
35.8 
39.5 
35.8 
37.2 
33.3 
37.9 
33.5 
. 35.6 
31.3 
36.2 
31.5 
34.0 
29.5 
34.5 
29.8 
32.4 
27.9 
32.9 
28.2. 
30.9 
26.4 
31.3 
26.7 
29.4 
25.0 
29.8 
25.3 
28.0 ' 
23.7 
28.3 . 
24.1. 
. 26.6 
. '18.5 
18.7 
. 17.6 
17.8 
. . -; 22.5 
27.0 
··, 16.7 
16.9 
15.8 
16.0 
15.0 
15.2 
22.9 
' 25.3 
21.4 ' 
., 25.6 
21.7 
24.0 ', 
20.4 . 
24.4, 
20.6 ' . '\22.8 
19.3 
'23.2'. 
19.6 
. 21.7 
18.4 
22.0 
30 
30.0 
30.0 
34.8 
34.3 
37.9, 
37.3 
;. 
39.9 
38.6''·' 
40.4' 
38.6 
39.9 
37.9 
38.9 
36.7 
37.5 
35.4 
36.0 
33.9 
'34.5 
32.4 
''32.9 
30.9 
31.4 
29.4'· 
29.9 
\ 28.0 . 
28.4 
26.6 
27.0 
25.3 
25.7 
. ,24.1 
24.4 
22.9. 
.. 
21.0 
30.0 
30.0 
34.8 .... 
'34.3· 
37.9 
37.3 
. 39.9. 
38.6 ,, 
40.4 
38.6 
39.9 
37.9 
38.9 
36.7 
37.5 
'i·35:4 
36.0 
33.9 
. 34.5 
32.4 
'32.9 
30.9 
31.4 
29.4 
29.9 
28.0 
28.4 . 
26.6 
27.0 
25.3 
25.7 
24.1 
'24.4 
3o:o 
30.0 
34.8 
. 34.3 . 
37.9 
37.3 
39.9 
38.6 
40.4 
38.6 
39.9 
37.9 
38.9 
36.7 
37.5 
35.4 
36.0 
33.9 
34.5. 
32.4 
32.9 
30.9 
31.4 
29.4 
29.9 
28.0 
28.4 
26.6 
27.0 
25.3 
25.7 
24.1 
24.4 
22.9 
Making the assumption that t:.u. = t:.u,weputthe initial t:._u in the table()f Table Ex. 9.9 under 
the words "Initial Conditions" at timet = o- (row E). Next, we remind you that there is free drainage 
at the top of the compressible layer but not at the bottom of the layer. However, in the next line (j = 1 ), 
we show a difference in the initial conditions arid the boundary. conditions; This condition is taken 
care of by computing the average of tn~ initial~ and boundary-condition pore pressures to begin the 
·'\ i' 
., 
,; 
426 
Chapter 9 . Time Rate of Consolidation . 
recurrence formulation. (We do this because in the finite increments, there would be no gradient at 
the boundaries at t = 0 if the initial conditions were not modified as mentioned. The small erro~ 
introduced is minimal after a few increments of time.)A look at Table Ex. 9.9 at(= 0 shows that the 
initial flu is liz of 77 or 38.5 kPa. 
' 
: As an example to see how the computations progress, set z = 6 m (i = 3) and t·='450 da or 
1.2 yr (j = 3). The resulting flu is given by inserting a = 1/2 into Eq. (9.20) to obtain 
. Uei,ji-1 = 0.5(l_le,_!j_+ Uei+l) 
(9.22) 
Inserting the numerical values for this point 
.. 
flu3,3 = 0.5(52.9 + 47.5) kPa 
·= 50.2kPa 
Because the layer is only singly drained (at the top), the lower boundary requires a "mirror" of flu 
in order for us to proceed. Note that the mirror has a fictitious i parameter = 8. Then fori = 7, use 
Eq. (9.22) to calculate the nextj down. Having the mirror results in flu's initially higher than the 
original value, but with time, the values will revert to reality. Figure Ex. 9.9c provides a plot of how 
the pore water pressure decreases with time ~s a function of depth. Each of the curves is an 
isochrone. 
80.0 c-------------------.------------, 
til 
a.. 
~. 
~ 
::J 
Cll 
Cll 
~ 
a.. 
~ 
0 a.. 
60.0 1------1--- ' .. , ... 7"""--"-""""-.""·------ ''' ' - --------
-------1 
FIGURE Ex. 9.9c 
--t(O) 
-t(0.41 yr) 
-&- t (0.82 yr) 
~t(1.2 yr) 
~t(1.6 yr) 
~t(1.2yr) 
-+- t (2.5 yr) 
-t(2.9yr) 
--t(3.3yr) 
-<>- t (3.7 yr) 
I 
~t(4.1 yr) 
-&- t (4.5 yr) 
--+- t (4.9 yr) 
~t(5.3yr) 
16 
9.4 Determination of the Coefficient of Consolidation Cv 
427 
With the above information, you should be able to solve a problem with any initial pore water 
pressure distribution. Note that you can use superposition with any results you obtain from using the 
finite difference method. For any given time, you may add or subtracf resulting pressure distributions. 
It is a useful tool, especially if you set a problem up using a spreadsheet. 
9.4 
DETERMINATION OF THE COEFFICIENT OF CONSOLIDATION cv 
How do we obtain the coefficient of consolidation cv? This coefficient is the only part of the solution to 
the consolidation equation that takes into account the soil properties which govern the rate of consol-
idation. In Chapter 8 we described the prm:edure for performing incremental load consolidation tests 
to obtain the compressibility 'of the soil. We mentioned that each load increment usually remains on 
the test specimen an arbitrary length of time, until (we hope) essentially all of the excess pore pressure 
has dissipated. Deformation dial readings or converted transducer readings are obtained during this 
process, and the coefficient of consolidation cv is determined from the time versus deformation data. 
The curves of actual deformation readings versus real time for a given load increment often have 
shapes very similar to the theoretical U-T curves shown in Fig: 9.5. We shall take advantage of this 
observation to determine the cv by so-called curve-fitting methods developed by Casagrande and Taylor. 
These empirical procedures were developed to fit approximately the observed laboratory test data to 
the Terzaghi theory of consolidation. Many factors such as sample disturbance, load increment ratio 
(LIR), duration, temperature, and a host of test details have been found to strongly affect the value of Cv 
obtained by the curve-fitting procedures (Leonards and Ramiah, 1959; Leonards, 1962). But research by 
Leonards and Girault (1961) has shown that the Terzaghi theory is applicable to the laboratory test if 
large LIRs [Eq. (8.27)], usually around unity, are used. 
The curve-fitting procedures outlined in this section will enable you to determine values of the 
COefficient of consolidation Cv from laboratory test ·data. They also Will allow you to separate the sec-
ondary compression from the primary consolidation. 
· 
Probably the easiest way to illustrate the curve-fitting methods is to work with time-deformation 
data from an actual consolidation test. We will use the data for the load increment from 100 to 200 kPa for 
the test shown in Fig. 8.5. This data is shown in Table 9.2 and plotted in Figs. 9.11(a), (b), and (c). Note how 
similar the shapes of these curves are to the theoretical curves of Figs. 9.5(a), (b), and (c). 
TABLE 9.2 Time-Deformation Data for Load Increment 100 to 200 kPa (Fig. 8.5) 
Elapsed Time 
(min) 
· 
0 
0.1 
0.25 
0.5 
1 
2 
4 
8 
15 
30 
60• . ' 
120 
'
1 ,. 
-.240 
480 
1382 
Vt 
.(Vmin) 
0 
0.316 
0.5 
0.707 
. 1.0·· 
1.41 
2.0 
2.83 
3.87 
5.48 
7.75 
' 10.95 
15.5 
21.9 
37.2 
Dial or converted transducer 
reading, R ( mm) 
6.627. 
6.528 
6.480. 
. 6.421 
6.337 
6.218 
6.040 
5.812 
5.489. 
5.108 
4.775 
4.534 
4.356 
4.209. 
4.041 
Displacement 
(mm) 
o . 
. 0.099 
0.147 
0.206 
0.290 
0.409 
0.587 
0.815 
.1.138 
1.519 
''. 1.852 
·.. 
2.093 
2.271 
. 2.418 
2.586 · .. 
428 
Chapter 9 
00 
"E o.5 
E E' 1.o 
Q) 
~ 1.5 
~ 
g. 2.0 
i:5 
2.5 
0 0.1 
'·~ 
E 
E 
-::: 1.0 
C. 
Q) 
~ 1.5 
0 
ctl g. 2.0 
i:5 
) 2.5 
"E o.5 
E . 
E' 1.o 
Q) 
~ 1.5 
~ 
g. 2.0' 
i:5 
2.5 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
1400 
Log time (min) 
1.0 
10 
100 
1000 
(b) 
Vf(min1/2) 
20 
(c) 
FIGURE 9.11 
Deformation-time curves for data from Table 9.2: (a) arithmetic 
scale; (b) log time scale; (c) square root of time scale. 
9.4.1 
Casagrande's Logarithm of Time-Fitting Method · 
In this method, the deformation dial (or converted transducer) readings. are plotted versus the 
logarithm of time, as shown in Fig. 9.11(b) and to larger scale in Fig. 9.12. The idea is to find R50 and 
thus t50 , the time for 50% consolidation, by approximating R100 , the deformation reading corresponding 
to the time for 100% primary comolidation, t 100 or tP. Refer to Fig. 9.5(b), the theoretical U-Tcurve, 
9.4 Determination of the Coefficient of Consolidationcv 
429 
t50 = 13.6 min. 
Primary consolidation 
4. 0 '------''--J.......!--'-!....I..I...L.I.._--'---'--'-L..J...J..J..W:----'----'--'--'-'...I..J.I""'-:---'-:--'-.J.-L..l...J...L.J..L=>..J.-L--!-.J...J...J..Ll.J 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
' 100 
1000 
10000 
,; I· .. :c..' 
I 
Time (min) 
FIGURE'9:12': Oeterrriiri~ti'a~ 6t t50' by the b~~gr~nde me~hod; data tr<l~' T~ble 9:2.; 
'·· : 
. . 
; ' ~':: ' 
. 
. 
; . 
. 
curve for a mmri~nt. Note that th~; interse~tion' or the. tang~rii'aridth~ ~syinptote to the theoretical 
curve defines cJ avg = '100%. The time for ,100% coii~olidation,of course, occurs at t. ':"; oo. Casagrande 
(1938) suggested that R100 could be approximated rather arbitrarily by the intersection of the two cor-
responding tangents to the laboratory consolidation curve (Fig. 9.12). Later research (for example, 
Leonards and Girault, 1961) showed that this procedure defines to a good approximation the defor-
mation reading at which the excess pore water pressure approaches zero, especially when the LIR is 
large and the preconsolidation stress is exceeded by the applied load increment; After R100 is defined, 
the next step is to findR0 , the initial dial or converted transducer reading. 
How do we determine R0 , the reading corresponding to zero percent consolidation, on a semilog 
plot? Since Tis proportional to U avi up to U = 60% [Eq. (9.10)], the first part of the consolidation 
curve must be a parabola. To find R0 , choose any two times, t1 and t2 , in the ratio of 4 to 1; and note 
their corresponding deformation readings. Then mark off a distance above R1 equal to the difference 
R2 - R1; this defines the corrected zero point R0 • In equatimi form, 
~-1 ~' ' 
·, 
Several trials are usually advisablt: to obtai~ a good average value of R0 , or 
R; '== Rz.- (R3. _;;. -Rzf. 
and 
: ·'" 
(9.23a) 
(9.23b) ·, 
(9.23c) 
430 
Chapter 9 
. Time Rate of Consolidation 
''·· 
t\' 
; •: 
In Fig. 9.12, three different trials are shown for determining R0 from R1, R2 , R3 , and R4• The dis-
tances x, y, and z are marked off above the ordinates corresponding to times t2 , t3, and t4 , respectively. 
You should satisfy yourself that use of both the graphiCal procedure andEqs. (9.23a)2(c) indicate 
about the same value for R0 (6.62 mm in this case).· 
· · 
· 
· 
After the initial and 100% primary consolidation points have been determined, find 't50 by subdi-
viding the vertical distance between R0 and R100 [or R50 = lj2(R0 + R100)]. Then t50 is simply the time 
corresponding to· the deformation reading R50 • In Fig. 9.12, t50 = 13.6 min. To evaluate cv, we use 
Eq. (9.5) with T50 = 0.197(Table 9.1). We al~o need the average height of the specimen during the load 
increment. At the beginning of this increment; H o was 21.87 mm. From the data of Table 9.2, 
Ht =Ho- f:H = 21.87-2.59 = 19.28mm 
Thus the average height of specimen during the increment is 20.58 mm (2.06 em). Remember that in the 
standard consolidation test the specimen is doubly drained, so use H ctr = 2.06/2in Eq. (9.5). Thus we have 
THar 
TsoHar: " 
c =--=---
v 
t 
.· 
tso 
0.197(~Y cm
2 
.. 13 .. 6 min(6o~), 
mm 
';\ 
=·2.56 X 10_4 cm·
2
· (3.1536 X 107~.)( :U
2 
2 ) 
_ 
. 
. ... s . . .. . 
yr . 10 em 
. 
~· 0.81 m2/yr 
'' 
'· 
. 
'·· 
. 
Recall that the Casagrande fitting procedure found R50 and thus t50 by approximating R100 • This 
procedure did not firid two since the time foi any other degree of consolidation must be obtained from 
the c~assical consolidation th(!oryin whicht100 = oo. But the procedure does define at called tp (for 
· "primary"), which is a pn1cticaltime required to; obtain a good; usable value of R100 • Often; in practice, 
, , . t Pis c~ll~,d t{00 . The devi~ticm of the experime~tal curve from the theoretical curve is' shown in Fig. 9.13. 
t 
> 
" 
'" 
• 
" 
, 
' 
' 
-
' 
' 
'· 
r:x:: 
oi 
c: 
'5 
co· 
~ 
Cii 
i:5 
~
, . 
~ 
R1oo 
Experimental 
. ·'. 
fp '. 
Log time 
;t 
·' Primary 
t consolidation 
. . Secondary . : 
. compression . 
FIGURE 9.13 
Terzaghi consolidation theory and a typical experime~tal curve used to 
define tp. 
9.4 Determination ofthe Coefficient of Consolidation c~ 
431 
Differences in the curves are the result of secondary compression and other effects, such as the rate of 
.. · . 
· effective stress increase (Leonaids; 1977), not considered by the Terzaghi theory. 
- .. 
. ·. : ; 
' ' 
l '~ 
~ : 
. ) ~ . 
. . y: : ~ . 
9.4.2 , Taylor's Square RootofTime Fitting Method'""' 
. :; 
•.... ,.'i 
Taylor (1948) also ctt!~dl~p~d a procedure: for e~~~~ati~g ~v• ~sing. the ~qu~re ro~t of t'i~e. Like 
Casagrande's curve fitting method, Taylor's procedure is based 6n the similarity between the shapes of· 
the theoretical and experimental curves' when plotted versus the square root of T and t. Refer to 
Fig.9.5(c) and compare it with Fig. 9.11(c). Note tliat in Fig. 9.5(c) the theoretical curve is a straight line 
to at least U == 60%. or.greater.Taylor'obseiVed'thatthe abscissa of the curve at 90% consolidation 
was about 1.15 times the abscissa of the extension of th~straight line [Fig. 9.5(c)]. He thus could deter-
mine the' point of 90% consolidation on the laboratory time curve. . . 
/'' 
. 
We will use the same data as before (Table 9.2) to illustrate. the Vt•fitting'method. These data are 
plotted in Fig. 9.14. Usually a straight line can be drawn through the datapoirits iri the initial part of the 
compression curve. The line is projected backward to zero time to define Ro. The common point at Ro 
ma:y be slightly lower than the initial deformation reading (at zero time)"observed in the laboratory due 
' 
' 
• 
••. ;: 
' 
' 
) 
•.: 
I 
' 
90%U 
··;·, 
' ~ 
~ ' ; : 
d 
4.0 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
~(min
112 ) 
FIGURE 9.14 Determination of Cv, using Taylor's square root of time method; 
data from Table 9.2. 
··.; 
.t. 
432 
Chapter 9, 
~Time Rate ofConsolidation. , 
·:, · , to immediate compression of the specimen and apparatus. Draw a second line from R0 .with all abscissas 
1.15 times as large as corresponding values on the first line. The intersection of this second line and the 
laboratory curve defines R90 and is the point of 90% consolidation. Its time is, of course; t90 • 
The coefficient of consolidation is, as before, determined by using Eq: (9.5). From Tabhi 9.1; 
T 90 = 0.848. The average height of specimen is also used, as before. Therefore .. · · 
. 
'd'; < 
; 
':. 
-, 
; 
·.~_·'; 
·' ·.,; ,_,_ 
'1.",,'_,. 
'·;, 
~-.l 
. 
.·;.;',:·.·~··· 
i 
-
j 
•• 
1,:" t 
·,/_' 
; ; 
::. ' : 0.848(2.06/2?cm2 
; • '·· · 
"c = 
, .. 
v ; 52.6 min( 60 s/min) 
, , . 
-~ -. 
j .• ;. 
, :: 2.85. x w-4 cm2/s or 0.90 m2/yr 
'".' 
~. 
': ·' ' ; 
_!:' ,· 
1 ~ i 
This value is reasonably close to the one obtained using the Casagrande method. Because both fit-
ting methods are approximations of theory, you should not expect them .to agree exactly. Often Cv as 
determined by, the Vt method is slightly greater than cv by the log t fitting method, by, as much as a fac-
.torof1.5to2. 
_ 
., .; ,·, 
:· 
.,,, 
; You should also note that Cv is not a constant for a test on a given soil, but it depends greatly on 
the load increment ratio and whether the preconsolidation stress has been exceeded (L.eonards and 
Girault, 1961). For load increments less than the preconsolidation stress, consolid(ltion occurs quite 
rapidly, and Cv values can be rather high. However, determinations oft P for these increments are often 
difficult because the time-settlement curves do not have the "classical" shapes of Figs. 9.12 and 9.14. 
For undisturbed clays Cv is usually. a minimum for increments near the preconsolidation pressure 
(Taylor, 1948). For design, this minimum value is often used. However, for some situations it may be 
more appropriate to use the cv for the anticipated load increment in the field. 
· • · . 
An important advantage of the. Vt fitting method for incremental load tests is that you can 
determine t 90 without having1o maintain the current load much beyond tP. If displacement readings 
are plotted as you go during the test, then the next increment of load can be added as soon as t90 is 
reached. Not only is the time for testing significantly less than when the conventional24-h increments 
are used; but the contribution of secondary compression to thee versus log u' curve can be effectively 
minimized (see Leonards, 1976). ' · 
. 
· 
· 
. 
· 
· · , 
'. , 
'. 
· 
· 
. 
By now you should have 'noticed that the data do not exactly coincide with the initial starting 
point in either of Figs. 9.12 or 9.14;that is, Ro does not equal exactly the initial reading of Table 9.2. The 
difference between the initial laboratory defo'rmation reading and R0 , the "correctedodeformation 
reading" corresponding to 0% consolidation is due to several factors that ll1ay exist during laboratory 
consolidation testing. These may include: 
. 
· 
' .1 
~ 
,: 
. 
1. Vertical elastic compression of the soil specimen, porous stones., and apparatus.' 
. 
. 
2. Lateral expansion of the soil specimen if it is not trimmed exactly to the diameter of the ring. 
3. Deformation associated with lateral expansion of the consolidometer ring. 
\. 
., 
,I 
You will have the opportunity to use ihe two curve-fitting methods to determine Cv in the 
problems at the end of this chapter. 
9.5 
DETERMINATION OF THE COEFFICIENT OF PERMEABILITY· 
. 
. 
You may recall from Sec. 7.6 thai the coefficient of permeability or hydraulic conductivity, k, of the soil 
may also be obtained indirectly from the consolidation tesL If you take Eq. (9.3) and solve fork, you 
obtain 
· 
· 
· 
· · · · 
· 
·· 
· 
· .. · · 
· · 
k ,;,· Cvp;;;gav 
1 +eo 
The value of e0 is the. void ratio at the st~rt of the time-rate readings for a given lo~d-incr~nlent. 
(9.24) 
9.6 Typical Values of the Coefficient of Consolidation Cv 
433 
Example 9.10 
Given: 
The time-deformation data for the load increment 100 to 200 kPa of the test in Fig. 8.4. From 
Table 9.2 and Fig. 9.12, a cv value of 0.8lm2/yr (2.56 X 10-4 cm2/s) can be determined. 
Required: 
Compute the coefficient of permeability, assuming the temperature of the water is 20°C. 
Solution: It is first necessary to compute the coefficient of compressibility from Eq. (8.5) and using 
Fig. 8.4(b ): 
. 
. 
. 
From Eq. (9.24), 
e1 - ez 
2.12 -:- 1.76 
a = 
v 
a2 - ai 
(200 - 100) kPa 
m2 
= 0.0036/kPa = 3.6 x 10-6 N 
CvPwgav 
k = ....:;__.:::_::__..:. 
1 + e0 
, 
.·. 
~ cm2 
' 
kg . 
m ' 
. . .. 
-6 m2 
1 m 
2.56 X 10 
-
X 1000 - 3 X 9.81 2 X 3.6 X 10 
-N -100 
s 
m. 
s 
em 
= 2.9 x 10-6 em = 2.9 x 10-8 m 
-, ; . 
s 
s 
Note that the e used in the equation is the void ratio at the start of the load increment rather 
than the original or in situ void ratio. 
, 
: , 
9.6 
' TYPICAL VALUES OF THE COEFFICIENT OF CONSOLIDATION Cv 
'JYpical values of the coefficient of consolidation Cv for a variety ofsoils are listed in Table 9.3. Approx-
imate correlations of Cv with the liquid limit are presented in Fig. 9.15. 
TABLE 9.3 T)'pical Values of the Coefficient.of Consolidation Cv 
Soil 
Boston blue clay (CL) (Ladd ~nd Luscher, 1965) 
Organic silt (OH) (Lowe, Zaccheo and Feldman, 1964) 
Glacial lake clays (CL) (Wallace and Otto, 1964) 
Chicago silty clay (CL) (Terzaghi and Peck, 1967) . 
Swedish medium sensitive clays (CL-CH) (Holtz and Broms, 1972) 
' 1. laboratory 
' 2.field 
San Francisco Bay mud (CL) 
Mexico City clay (MH) (Leonards and Girault, 1961) 
40±20' 
2-10 
6.5-8.7 
8.5 
0.4-0.7 
; 0.7-3.0 
2-4 
0.9-1.5 
12 ± 6 
0.6-3 
2.0-2.7 
2.7 
0.1-0.2 
0.2-1.0 
0.6-1.2 
0.3-0.5 
434 
Chapter 9 < 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
(j) 
c;;--
E 
~ 
ti' 
c: 
0 
Undisturbed samples: 
Cv in range of virgin compression. 
50 
30 
20 
10 
~< 
:2 
0 
5.0 ~ 
1 
~ 10-3 
8 
0 c 
Q) 
"(3 
~ 
0 
(.) 
10-4 
Cv in range of recompression 
lies above this lower limit 
2.0 
1.0 
0.5 
0.3 
0.2 
4x1o-s~~~~L_~~~~_L~~~~~~~_L~__j 
20 
40 
60 
140 
80 
100 
120 
160 
J 0.1 
Liquid limit (LL) 
FIGURE 9.15 
Approximate correlations of the coefficient of consolidation Cv with 
the liquid limit (after U.S. Navy, 1986); 
9.7 .. 
IN SITU.DETER,MINATION OF CONSOLIDATION PROPERTIES. 
ti' 
It is possible to obtain the horizontal coefficient of consolidation (and the coefficient of permeability 
also) by means of field testing with the piezoconeand.the dilatometer (seeTable 11.1). Realize that 
water-deposited soil layers are quite variable, with seams, varves, and lenses, for example; laboratory 
evaluations inay be quite different than field determimitioris. 
For the piezocone test, the horizontal coefficient ofconsolidation, cvh is given by 
TR2 
Cvh = 
-. t . 
where Cvh = coefficient of horizontal consolidation, 
T = time factor, 
R = equivalent piezocone cavity radius, 
) . 
t = time it takes to achieve appropriate degree of consolidation. 
(9.25) 
See Jamiolkow~ki etal. (1985) for further information on the ~se of ~avity expansion theory and the 
rigidity index to obtain cvh. For test details, equipment, procedures, and typical results, see ASTM (2010) 
D5778. 
9.8 Evaluation of Secondary Settlement ·435 
Robertson et al. (1988) devised a procedure to do the same thing using the Marchetti dilatome-
ter. The equation for the horizontal coefficient of consolidation is 
TR; 
Cvh = -t-
(9.26) 
where Re = equivalent radius of the dilatometer blade. 
Further information on the dilatometer test may be obtained from Marchetti (1980) and ASTM 
(2010) D 6635. 
. 
, . 
. , 
. . 
. . . 
: .. 
Schmertmann (1993) presents a field test procedure that simulates full-scale prototype loading by 
means of a conical pile of soil fill. This type of small-scale lo~d test is both economical and easy to perform, 
and from the measurements, the magnitude and rate of consolidation are rapidly determined. The consol-
idation parameters of the subsoil are back-calculated from the measurements and settlement pattern. 
The conical test load (CfL) is performed by first placing a settlement plate at the center of the 
loaded area. Next a conical pile of soil is heaped at its angle of repose by a front-end loader. The pile can 
be up to 7 m high. After the soil pile is completed (usually within a day), settlement readings are taken with 
time. Depending upon the thickness of the compressible deposit under consideration, prediction of the 
prototype settlement and its time rate of consolidation is possible. Applying the CTL for a long enough 
period of time will permit the evaluation of secondary compression as well. Schmertmann (1993 and 1994) 
gives the details of this method, including equations, examples, and the effects of multiple layers. 
9.8 
EVALUATION OF SECONDARY SETTLEMENT 
Thus far we have discussed how to compute the consolidation or primary settlement s0 and how it 
varies with time. The other two components of total settlement in Eq. (8.1) were the immediate settle-
ment S; and secondary compression (settlement) s s. Immediate settlement is discussed in Sec. 10.4. 
Secondary compression is a2ontinuationof the volume change.that started during primary con-
solidation, only it usually occurs at a much slower rate. Secondary compression is different 'from pri-
mary consolidation'in that it takes place at a constant effective stress-that is, after essentially all the 
excess pore pressure has dissipated. This compi:ment of settlement seems to result from compression of 
the bonds between individual clay particles 'and domains, as well as other effects;on the microscale that 
are not yet clearly understood. Another compli~atin:g factor is that in the field it is often difficult to sep-
arate secondary compression fro hi primary. consolidation settlement. Both, types of settlements con-
tribute to the total surfacesettl~went, and sepa~ating the effects iriorder to predict the final surface 
settlement is not a simple ~fitte~, espedally in thicker ()f stratified deposits with variable properties. 
Also, conventional,.coilsolidation testing norma1ly does not provide much information about sec-
ondary compression.' In this section we present' a practical working hypothesis, acceptable for engi-
neering practice, for estimating secondary compression, and we shall show you how to make estimates 
of secondary settlement for some simple cases. 
. 
. 
There is, unfortunately, a lot of confusion in the geotechnical literature as. to the best way to 
describe the magnitudes and rates of secondary compression. In this section, we shall follow Raymond 
and Wahls (1976), Mesri and Godlewski (1977), and Terzaghi et al. (1996) who define the secondary 
compression index Ca as 
C=~ 
a 
.:llog t 
(9.27) 
where .:le = the change in void ratio along a part of the void ratio versus the logarithm of time curve 
between times t and t P, and , 
.:llog t = log t - log tP. 
436 
Chapter 9 . · Time Rate of Consolidation 
>.''> 
• .. ,·; 
'..; ", 
This definition is analogous, of course, to the primacy compression index Cc [Eq. (8.7)]. To determine 
the magnitude of secondary settlement under the final vertical effective stress a~1
, we use an equation 
patterned after Eq. (8.10), or 
:CCX . 
t 
Ss = -1--H 
0 log-
(9.28) 
., 
,j-,eo 
tp . 
. Thus, the secondary settle~eiit depends on ·c"''as well as on the ratio iltp:Equati~n(9.28) also assumes 
that Cais ap~roximately constant over the time interval t -
tP. . 
, . . . . 
. · 
_· .. · 
' 
:··we can also define themodifie1 se~ondary compression index C~~. analogous to Eq:_(~.9), as 
: Ca·t. 
.cote= 1 +eo 
·where Ca ;= the secondary compression index; Eq. (9.27), 
·eo·= the initial void ratio. 
(9.29) 
·:,· 
· Sometimes Cae is called thesecondarycoinpression strain index, thesecondary compression ratio, or 
the rate of secondary consolidation. As Ladd et al. (1977) note, C~e :; Lief lllog t. The equation for sec-
ondary settlement then becomes · 
· 
· 
t 
Ss ::;= ca,Ho log-
. 
tp 
(9.30) 
This equation is, of course, ~natog~us to'E:q.'(s:t2)forpi:imarys~ttlerli~rit. 
. . 
. .. , 
. 
. 
_The secondary compression index C"'';and themodified secondary compression index Cae• can 
' be determined from theslope of the straight lirie portionof the deformation (llR) versus log time 
''··curve, whic.h occurs after.primaryconsolidation is corrq)leteor after i; (see, for example,Fig. 9.12). 
Usually the LiR is determined over orie log cycle· of time. The corn!spondingchange in void ratio is 
· calCulated from the settlement equation [Eq. (8.3)], since you know ~o imdthe height of specimen for 
that increment. • · · 
· 
· · · 
· 
· · .. 
· 
' To provide a w~rking hypo~hesi~ far estimating ·~~condary settl~ments, we sh~llmake the fol-. 
lowingassumptions about the behavior of fine~grained soils in secondary compression [based on the 
work of Ladd (1971a) and others and summarized by Raymond and Wahls (1~76)]: 
. 
'.· 
. 
1 . . c"'isip.dep~nd6ntof time (ade~~t 'dJ~ing t~etim~ span of)nten:si). 
2. Ca is independe~t of the thickness of the soillayer: ., 
·. 3. C"' is independent of the LIR, as long as some primary consolidation occurs. 
4. The ratio CjCcis approximately constantfor many'geo:inaterials over the normal range of engi-
, neering stresses.: . 
. " 
' 
': 
' 
·.·.: 
.. :· 
:'-,·:, ···,· 
The working hypothesis is useful as a first approximation for estimating secondary settlements. 
However, you should expect some aberrations in the actual long-term settlement response of the 
foundation, because the assumptions are admittedly an oversimplification of real behavior. 1)'pical 
· · ·' 
deformation versus log time behavior. curvesillustrating these assumptions for a normally consoli-
dated clay are ~hown in Fig. 9.16. 
· ' 
· 
Although we assumed in No.1 that C"' is a constant, there is considerable evidence both in the 
laboratory (Mesri and Godlewski, 1977; Terzaghi et al., 1996) and in the field (Leonards, 1973) that it 
may change with time, especially if the time after the end of primary is long. Also, the duration and 
! 
·Log time, t ---• 
(a) 
Log time, t ---• 
(b) 
9.8 Evaluation of Secondary Settlement 
437 
au': 100-7100 kPa 
(LIR = 1) 
. *secondary cunles not,, 
necessarily parallel 
FIGURE 9.16 Typicai secondary compression behavior fro~ the working 
hypothesis by Raymond and Wahls (1976): (a) effect of drainage distance· 
' ' ' 
'and (b) effect of load increment ratio'and consolidation stress. ' 
' 
·' ' 
';.' 
therefore the magnitude of secondary settlement is a function of the time required for completion of 
primary consolidation (tp), and from earlier work in this chapter you know that the thicker the consol-
idating layer, the longer is the time required for primary consolidation. On the other hand, because in 
'practical problems the range of tit Pis small; often less than 100, you usually can assume ratio Ca is con-
stant for settlement analyses. More about this point later in this section. 
Assumption 2 seems to be valid, as shown in Fig. 9.16(a), because the strain at the end of primary 
consolidation for both thin and thick layers is about ·the same. Assumption 3, that Ca is independent of 
the LIR, is approximately correct, as verified by Leonards and Girault (1961) and Mesri and Godlewski 
(1977). Note that the load increment must go well beyond the preconsolidation stress. 
The fourth assumption, that the ratio CafCcis approximately a constant, has also been verified 
for a wide variety of natural soils by Prof. Mesri and his students, starting with Mesri and Godlewski 
438 
Chapter .9 ··· 
. Time.Rate of Consolidation 
TABLE 9.4 Values of Ca!Cc for Natural Geotechnical Materials. 
Material 
Granular soils inCluding rockfill 
Shale and mudstone 
Inorganic clays and silts 
Organic clays and silts 
: Peat and muskeg 
AfterTerzaghi eta!. (1996) .. 
Ca/Cc 
0.02 ± 0.01 
O.D3 ±.0.01 
0.04.± 0.01 
0.05 ± 0.01. 
(1977). This work is summarized in Table 9.4. For most geo~materials, the ratio C,iCc is between 0.01 
and 0.07, and the midpoint of the range is 0.04. This is also the most common value for inorganic silts 
and clays. Organic materiais'ai-e siightly.higher and granular soils somewhat lower. This ratio also is 
valid for any time, effective stress, and void ratio during secondary compression. The only exception, 
as shown by Leonards and Girault (1961; Fig. 3) seems to be the load increment that straddles the 
preconsolidation stress, u~. However,·Mesri ·and Castro· (1987) show that this discrepancy results 
from using an average Cc over an increment, rather than an instantaneous Cn to determine the 
Cm/Cc ratio. 
· 
. 
. 
· ·. :. 
· 
. · 
! .. 
If you do not want to or cannot determine Ca fromlaboratoiy test, data, you can use the C0/Cc 
data of Table 9.4 for similar soils, or simply use an average Cc/Cc value of 0.04 to 0.05, which is accept-
able for preliminary estimates of secondary settlement: Mesri (1973) has provided another method to 
obtain the secondary compression index, actually the modified secondary compression index, and it is 
shown in Fig. 9.17 Here theCae is plotted versus natural water content of the soil. 
We will illustr~te how to estimate secondary settlement in Examples 9.11 and 9.12. 
We mentioned earlier that tit P is ~lirely greater than 100. This is because the typical useful 
design life of most civil construction is 80-120 yr, and· the t Pin the field is months tC? a very few years. 
On the other hand, in laboratory tests tit P can be rather long, because with the typical laboratory sam-
ple heights, t P is usually quite short. Thus prediction of secondary properties from laboratory tests is 
somewhat problematiC. There are exceptions, of course, as noted by Terzaghi et al. (1996): clays with 
intermediate permeable layers, peats, certain residual soils with high initial permeabiiity, and sites 
where vertical drains h~ve ~e~n. ti~edt() (lCCelerate th~prim(lry co11:solidation:ln ~~~se. cases, tit P can 
be long because t Pis usually quite short. . • . 
. 
; ·, .. , ... · · 
.. ·: .. , 
From a practical point of view, howdciyoujudge when s5 is important (Holtz, 1991)?You need to 
be concerned when (1) the ratio of s,fsc > 1, and (2) in the field, the tP is short, and therefore tlie site 
will experience rapid sc (within a fe\V weeks or months). One or both these conditions maybe present at 
sites with' peats; organic silts and clays, or stratified or varved clays. Accurate predictions of secondary 
settlement atthese sites require more than silnple estimates.-": 
~· ; 
. 
. 
, .Ariother factor to consider isthat .although tit P may. be .less than 100,' secondary settlements 
occur over a very long time, and this fact may mean .long-term maintenance of some facilities--: for 
example, highway embankments on peat bogs. Because of the. high permeability of the peat, primary 
settlement occurs very quickly, and thus the embankment is soon undergoing secondary compression: 
·This meanscontinual settlements thatdistortthe roadway pavement or.rail bed. Maintenance crews 
frequently resurface • the roadway to keep. it a~ close. to, grade· as, possible.· In· some older roads,· the 
thickness of the grin;.el and asphalt under the .embankments can be as much as 80% of the thickness 
of the peat deposit. 
.. .. 
· 
. · · · · 
· · 
· 
'· 
:•,!i 
. ! 
9.8. · Evaluation of Secondary Settlement 
439 
;g 
!!.... . 
o" 
x 
Q) 
"0 10 
,s; 
c: 
0 
'Cii 
rJl 
~ 
c. 
E 8 
~ 
<1l 
"0 
c: 8 
Q) 
rJl 
"0· . 
Q) 
:;::: 
'a 
0 
::2: 
G}Wh§!ng~marino clay (Ne~land andAIIely, 1960) 
® Mexico City clay (Leonards and Girault, 1961) 
® Calcareous organic silt (Wahls, 1962) 
@ Ledaclay (Crawford, 1965) 
· 
:• 
® No~egian plastic clay (Bjerrum, '1967) 
@ Amorphous and fibrous peat (Lea and Brawner, 1963) 
// 
0 Canadian muskeg (Adams, 196S) 
/ 
® Organic marine deposits (Keane, 1964) 
// 
0 
0 
r--------,/ 
6 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
©. 
o 0 ® Bos;on blue cia~ (H~rn a~d Lambe, 1965); 
@ Chicago blue clay (Peck, personal files) 
([j) Organic silty clay (Jonas, 1964) . 
· // 
• o 
Org'ani~ silt, etc. (Moran et al., 19Ja) 
/ 
/ 
Natural water content(%) 
,' 
! 
FIGURE 9.17 
Modified sec~ndcuy compression' index versus natural water' c~ntent 
(after Mesri; 1973). 
· i .• 
• • · 
• 
. • 
. 
• 
• 
',.)I • 
··: 
",•,,' 
Example 9.11 
Given: 
,,',, 
A consolidometer.test on a specimen of San Francisco Bay mud gave the following time rate 
of consolidation data for the load increment of 400 to 800 kPa. This load increment represents the 
anticipated load in the field. Laboratory tests on trimlningsadjacent to th<;: speCimen indicated 
that the natural water content Wn = 105.7%, initial void ratio eo:= 2.855, LL = 88, PL = 43, and 
Ps = 2.7 Mg/m3• The initial height of the test specimen was 2S.4 mm; and the initial deformation 
reading was 12.700 mm. 
· 
· 
.. '· 
440 
Chapter 9 · · Time Rate of Consolidation 
(1) 
(3) 
Deformation Reading (mm) 
. Void Ratio 
11.224 
0 
'' 2.631 
11.151 
.::0.1' ; ·.·,, 
.2.620 
' 
; 
11.123 
0.25 
2.616 '·' 
11.082! 
0.5 
2.609. 
11.019 
1.0 
. '2.600 
10.942' 
' ~' '' . 
1.8 
2.588 
10.859 
3.0 ., '',: 
·., ':";.· 
2:s16 
10.711: 
6 
. 2.553 ' ; 
10.566 
10 
2.531 
10.401. 
16 
2.506 
10.180' 
30 
2.473 
9.919 . 
60 
2.433 
9.769 
100 
2.410 
9.614 
180 
2.387 
9.489 
300 
2.368 
9.373 
520 ·' 
2.350 
9.223 
1350 
2.327' 
9.172 
1800 
,\! 2.320 
9.116 
. 2850 
2.311 
9.053 
4290 
2.301 
Assume that the consolidation settlement sc is 30 em and that it occurs after 25 yr. The thickness of 
the compressible layer is 10 m. 
; : 
. 
. 
Required: 
Compute the amount of secondary compr~ssion that would occur from 25 to 50 yr after construction. 
, 
• 
' 
' 
J 
Solution: Assume that the time r~te of deformation forthe.load ra~ge in the test approximates that 
occurring in the field. 
· 
The solution to this problem'requires an evaluation of Ca [Eq. (9.27)]. So a void ratio versus log t 
curve must be plotted from the given data. We can readily calculate the void ratio at any height or 
thickness of the specimen during the consolidation test by using the follo\Ving method. By definition, 
e ;, V JV ,sllnd, for a constant specimen area, e = H J H s, which is the ratio of height of voids to the 
height of solids. Then, from the phase diagram (Fig. Ex. 9.11a), the void ratio at any deformation read-
ing R may be obtained from 
Hv 
H 0 .:..H;· Ho- (Ro- R) -Hs 
e = -
= 
= ____ 
___: _ ___:. 
' 
Hs . 
Hs 
Hs 
(Ho- Hs) .:.. (Ro -R) 
Hs 
· · wh6re H v = th6 height ~f voids at time t, 
' 
Hs =.theheightofsolids, 
· 
H o = the original height of specimen, 
Ro = the initial deformation reading, and 
R = deformation reading at time t. 
(9.31) 
9.8 Evaluation of Secondary Settlement 
441 
Height 
l 
H = consolidation 
1 
t 
j . 
sample height at 
H 
dial reading R 
s 
_L_t -----'---
FIGURE Ex. 9.11 a For initial 
· conditions, e = e~, H = H0 , 
and R = R0 • 
. 
From the phase diagram and the initial conditions of this problem, 
. Ho 
H=--· 
s 
1 +eo 
25.4 
1 + 2.855 = 6.589 mm 
For the load increl11ent 400 to 800< kPa, the initial defonriati;n readi~g i~ 1L224 mm; the deformation 
reading R0 at the beginning of the test (corresponding to specimen height H 0 ) is 12.700 mm. Thus, for 
the beginning of this load increment, efrom Eq. (9.31) is 
(25.4 -: 6.589) - (12.700 :- 1L224) 
.. 
. 
e = 
6589 
. = 2.631 
This value of e at R = 1L224 is shown in Column (3) of the given data. The remainder of Column (3) 
can be calculated by substituting the other values of R intoEq. (9.31). · 
. 
Next, plot the void ratio, Column (3), and the elapsed time, Column (2), on semilog paper or on 
a spreadsheet with the time axis on a log (base 10) scale, as shown in Fig. Ex. 9.11b. Ca is then found 
to be 0.052. Note that Ca = ~e when ~ log t covers one full log cycle. The corresponding modified 
secondary compression index Cae [Eq. (9.29)] is 0.052/(1 + e0 ) = 0.052/(1 + 2.855) = 0.0135. 
' 
·: 
, 
, : 
, 
' 
' , 
< 
, .: ~ 
r . ' 
, 
FIGURE Ex. 9.11b 
400 to 800 kPa 
Time {min) 
: · 
One 
· ... ·1· 
. 
f.-· cycle --J · · ·' 
~e 
= C,;=o.os2 
....... T·· 
. 
' 
. . . . . 
To calculate secondary settlement s8 , use either Eq. (9.28) or (9.30); Using Eq; (9.28), we obtain 
o.os2 ' · · ' 
·so 
Ss = 1 + 2.855 (10m) log25 
=' 0.054 'm ~ 5.4 em . 
442 
Chapter. 9 
·Time Rate of Consolidation 
Using Eq. (9.30), 
. 
50 
Ss = 0.0135 (10m) log 25 
. = 0.054 m, as before 
, Thus s .=:':Sc + ss .= 30 + 5 = 35 em in 50 years. This does not consider any immediate settlement si 
. that may also have occurred. 
· 
.·' 
··. 
. 
. 
Example 9:12 
Given: 
,· 
Data in Example 9.11 for San Francisc~ Bay mud: The initial water content of the specimen is 
105.7% and the Cc is 1.23. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
. 
' 
' 
. 
Required: 
From the data in Table 9.4 andFig. 9.17, estimate the (a) Ca and (b) Cas· (c) Compare with the 
values calculated in Example 9.11. 
''Solution: ·. 
PROBLEMS 
a. Use an average value of CaiCcofO.Q:l. Therefore 
Ca ~:0.04 (Cc) ~.o:o4 (1.23) = 0.05 
b. From Eq. (9.29), Cas.= Call + e0 • F~om Fig. E~. 9.11b; e
0 
; 2.855. Therefore 
O.O'i 
Cas= __ 
:_ 
1 + 2.855 = 0.013 
A second way to estimate the modified secondary compression index is to use Fig. 9.17, 
where Cas is plotted versus riaturalwater content. For our example, the initial water content 
was 105.7%.From Fig. 9.17, a value of CaB of about 0.01 (or higher) is obtained if you use the 
dashed line; 
c •. Compare with the calculated values. From Example 9.11, Ca = 0.052 and Cas = 0.0135. The 
agreement using the approximate values is acceptable for preliminary design estimates. 
9.1 The time factor for a clay layer undergoing consolidation is 0.15. What is the degree of consolidation 
(consolidation ratio) at the center and at the quarter points (that is, z/H = 0.25 and 0.75)? What is the 
average degree of consolidation for the layer? 
.. · 
9.2 If the final consolidation settlement for the clay layer of Problem 9.1 is expected to be 1.5 m, how much 
settlement has occurred when the time factor is (a) 0.3 and (b) 0.8? 
9.3 If the clay layer of Example 9.1 were singly drained, would there be any difference in the calculated U, 
values? If so, how much difference? 
9.4 Plot a graph of excess pore pressure versus depth, similar to Fig. Ex. 9.2, for the soil and loading conditions 
given in Example 9.2, but for the case of single drainage. Assume that under the clay there is impervious 
shale instead of a dense sand. 
Problems 
443 
9.5 For the soil and loading conditions of Examples 9.1 and 9.2, estimate how long it would take for 0.2, 0.35, and 
0.45 m of settlement to occur. Consider both single and double drainage. 
9.6 By evaluation of the series expression [Eq. (B.2.23) in Appendix B.2) for the solution to the consolidation 
equation, determine the average degree of consolidation U to the nearest 0.001 for time factors 0.15, 0.6, 0.8 
and infinity. Verify your computations by referring to Table 9.1 and Fig. 9.5(a).Also check by Eqs. (9.10) and 
(9.11). (After Taylor, 1948.) 
9.7 How much difference would there be in the (a) computed ultimate settlement and (b) the time required for 
90% consolidation for the soil conditions of Example 9.7 if the clay layer were doubly drained? 
9.8 A deposit of Swedish clay is 11 m thick? on the average, and apparently drained on the bottom. The coeffi-
cient of consolidation for the clay was estimated to be 1.7 X 10-4 cm2/s from laboratory tests. A settlement 
analysis based on consolidation tests predicted an ulti~ate consolidation settlement under the applied load 
in the field to be 0.95 m. (a) How long would it take for settlements of 40 and 70 em to occur? (b) How much 
. settlement would you expect to occur in 3 yr? 8 yr? 35 yr? (c) Ho~ long will it take for the ultimate settle-
. ment of 0.95 m to occur? · 
· 
· 
9.9 A conventional laboratory consolidation t~st on a 25 mm thick ~ample gave a time for 9o% consolidation 
equal to 9.5 min. Calculate ~v in Cf!!21s, m2/s, and ft2/d. 
· 
. 
· 
9.10 A doubly drained specimen, 2.54 em in height, is consolidated in the lab under an applied stress. The time for 
. 50% overall (or average) consolidation is 12 inin. · 
· 
· 
· 
(a) Compute the cv value for the lab specimen. 
(b) How long will it take for the specimen to consolidate to an average consolidation of 90%? 
(c) If the final consolidation settlement of the specimen is expected to be 0.43 em, how long will it take for 
0.18 em of settlement to occur? 
· 
(d) After 14 minutes, what percent consolidation has occurred at the middle of the specimen? 
9.11 The settlement analysis for a pr~posed structure indicates that the underlying clay layer will settle 7.5 em in 
3 yr, and that ultimately the total settlement will be about 32 em. However, this analysis is based on the clay 
layer being doubly drained. It is suspected that there may be no drainage at the bottom of the layer. Answer 
the following questions based on single drainage only, assuming cv = 1.5 X 10-4 cm2/sec for both single and 
double drainage. 
(a) How will the total settlement change from the double to the single drainage case? 
(b) How long will it take for 7.5 em of settlement to occur if there is only single drainage? 
9.12 List the assumptions of the Terzaghi one-dimensional consolidation theory. List them in the order of their 
importance in terms of (a) mathematical convenience and (b) practical engineering significance. 
9.13 The time rate of settlement data shown below is for the increment from 20 to 40 kPa from the test in Fig. 8.5 . 
. The initial sample height is 2.54 em, and there are porous stones on the top and at the bottom of the sample. 
Determine Cv by (a) the log time-fitting procedure and (b) the square root of time procedure. (c) Compare 
the results of (a) and (b). 
· 
Elapsed Time (min) 
0 
0.1 
0.25 
0.5 
1 
2 
4 
8 
15 
30 
60 
120 
240 
505 
1485 
Diill Reading (mm) 
3.951 
3.827 
3.789 
3.740 
3.667 
·3.560. 
3.405 
3.192 
2.945 
2.676 
. 2.460 
2.333 
2.186 
2.094. 
1.950 
444 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
9.14 A consolidation test (Taylor, 1948) was conducted on a sample of soft Chicago silty clay. The specimen had a 
dry weight of 343.57 g and a density of solids of 2.65 Mg/m3• The area of the ring was 93.31 cm2• A displacement 
; transducer was used; which has a precision of one ten-thousandth of an inch (1 X 10~
4 in.), and the incremen-
tal stresses applied to the specimen were recorded in kgf/cm2• Direct measurements of the thickness of the 
. specimen were as follows: . 
1.254 in. when under 1/8 kg/cm2 
1.238 in. when undei' 112 kg/cm2 
1.215 in. when under 1 kg/cm2 
-,t 
. Deformations to the nearest 10-4 in. recorded during the test are listed in Table P9.14. 
. 
·(a) Use a spreadsheet to plot the eversrislog u' and/or the e.versus logu' ~urve for this test. Determine the 
preconsolidation stress 'and the ~ppropriate compression index, . 
·,' . ' 
' . . ; 
(b) Use a spreadsheet to plot dial reading versus Vi for each increment and determine Cv·· Plot Cv versus log u'. 
(c) Same as part (b), only use the Casagrande log time~fittirig method ..... · 
. . 
(d) For two increments, one before and one after the preconsolidatiori stress, 'compare' the values of Cv as 
· 
determined by the two fitting procedures. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· TABLE P9.14 ·converted Transdu~er Deform~tion Readiri:gs in 10-4 in. 
,. 
•'• 
'. . 
. 
' 
' 
. 
Loading Increment (kg/cm2) 
. ·Elapsed Time (min) : 
1/s to 1/4 
1/4 to 1/z . 
. 1/z to 1 ·: ., 1 to 2 · 
2to4 
4to 8 
8 to 16 
0 
' 0 
47 
149 •· 
. 385. 
1343. 
0 
-2 
1/4 
9 
63 
179 
422 
1392 
53 
60 
·' .,. 
1 
14 
75 
.. 196. 
464 
:. 
1435 
101 
115 
21f4 
19 
82 
214 
506 
1489 
. 154 
169 
4 
23 
92 
233 
·' 555 
1539 
··204 
227 
61J4 
26 
101 
251 
604 
1595 
.·. 259 
278 
.9 
30 
108 
267. 
653 .• 
1646 
. 309 
332 
121J4 
32 
.. 114 
281 ,, 
701 
1700 
. 357 
372 
16 
34 
119 
290 
745 
1750. 
399 
410 
20 1/4 
35 
'123 
·.297 
799' 
1800. 
. 440 
442 
25 
36 
126 
303 
'830 
1844 
. 470 
464 
30 1/4 
37 
·, 128 
310 
874 
1887 
·. ; 498 
36 
38 
130 
314 
906 
1921' 
525 
498 
42 1/4 
39 
133 
-
938 
1951 
60' 
40 
134 
326 
1006 
2013 
575 
532 
100 
41 
137 
. 335. 
1103 .. 
2078 
604 
563 . 
200 
42 
141 
350 
1203 
2121 
629 
582 
400 
44 
144 
365 
1258 
2150 
654 
601 
1440 
47 
149 
385 
1343 
2201 
701 
632 
·(reset to) 
-
-
-
-
reset to 0 
-2 
-
After Taylor (1948). 
9.15 ·A consolidation test is performed ori the specimen with these characteristics: 
Height of specimen ~ 37.60 mm 
. 
Area .of specimen = 90.1 cm2 
·• 
Wet weight of specimen = 645,3 g 
Dry weight of specimen = 491.2 g 
Density of solids = 2.72 Mg/m3 ·. 
. Problems 
445 
The consolidation data (after A. Casagrande) are summarized in Table P9.15: 
· · ·: 
(a) Plot the effective stress versus void ratio curve for both arithmetic and semilogarithmic scales. 
(b) Estimate the preconsolidation pressure:·· 
•! 
' 
':·· 
(c) Compute the compression index for virgin consolidation. 
(d) Plot the time curve for the lm!d increment from 256 to 512 kg for both arithinetic and semilogarithmic scales. 
(e) Compute.the coefficient of compressibility a;,, the coefficient of permeability, and the coefficient of 
consolidation cv, for the load increment from 256 kg to 512 kg.· 
' · 
TABLE P9.15 
Consolidation Test Data 
Temp. CCC) 
23.0 
22.7 
22.6 
. 23.4 
22.8 
5/16/08 
'5/23/08 
5!24108 ' 
·' 5/24/08 
5/30/08 
617/08 
6/30/08 
Modified after A. Casagrande. 
,Time. 
1733' 
2240 
1055 . 
'1100 
Load (kg) 
0 
16 
32 
64 
128 '. 
256 
1024 
'1024 
512 
256' 
'. 
128 
Sudden 
0.10 
i.oo 
., ,foo 
io.oo· 
28-
·n,.... . 
182:_ 
480.:_ 
Deformation (mm) 
1 •• ' 
0 
'. 0.772 
1.161 
1.839 
2.881 
4.189 
4.290 
4.328 
4.445 
4.648 
4.875 
5.220 
5.466 
5.583 
5.654 
5.685 
5.715 
5.738 
7.351 
7.432 
7.224 
6.934 
6.597 
'5.863 
4.105 
3.678 
9.16 A' certain compressible layer has a thickness of 3.8 m. After 1.5 yr, when the clay is 50% consolidated, 7.3 em 
of settlement·has occurred. For a similar clay and loading conditions, how much settlement would occur at 
the end of 1.5 yr and 5 yr if the thickness of this new layer were 38 m ?. 
9.17 ·In a laboratory consolidation test on a representative sample of cohesive soil, the original height of a doubly 
, i 
drained sample was 25.4 mm. Based on the log time versus dial reading data, the. time for 50% consolidation 
·.was 8.5 min. The laboratory sample was taken from a soil layer which is 14m thick in the field, doubly drained, 
and is subjected to a similar loading. (a) How long will it take until the layer consolidates 50%? (b) If the final 
consolidation settlement is predicted to be 22 em; how long will it take for a settlement of 6 em to take place? 
9.18 A layer of normally consolidated clay 4.2 m thick has an average void ratio of 1.1. Its compression index is 
0.52 and its coefficient of consolidation is 0.8 m2/yr. When the existing vertical pressure on the clay layer is 
doubled, what change in thickness of the clay layer will result?· 
• , . 
·' ·. 
446 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
t 
~ I 
9.19 The settlement analysis for a proposed structure indicates that 6.5 em of settlement will occur in 3.4 yr and 
that the ultimate total settlement will be about 25 em. The analysis is based on the assumption that the com-
pressible clay layer is drained at both its top and bottom surfaces. However, it is suspected that there may not 
be drainage at the bottom surface. For the case of single drainage, estimate (a) the ultimate total settlement 
and (b) the time required for 6.5 em of settlement. (AfterTaylor, 1948.) : 
. 
. 
. 9.20 , The structure of Problem 9.19 was constructed and performed essentially as expected during the first 3.4 yr (that 
is, the settlement of the building was about 6.5 em). The owner decides to build a duplicate of the first structure 
nearby. During foundation investigations, it is discovered that the clay layer under the new building would be 
···about 25% thicker than under the first structure. Otherwise, the properties of the clay are the same. Estimate for 
the new structure (a) the ultimate total settlement, and (b) the settlement in 4.5 yi. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
9.21 
9.22 
9.23 
A certain doubly drained chiy layer has an expected ultimate settlement sc of 18 em. The clay layer, which is 
15m thick, has a coefficient of consolidation of 4.7 X 10-3 cm2/s. Plot the sc~time relationship to (a) an arith-
.. me tic time scale and (b) a: seriiilog time scale .. 
Given the same soil data as for Problem 9.2LAfter 2.5 yr, an identical load is placed, causing an additional 
12 em of consolidation settlement. Compute and plot the time rate of settlement under these conditions, 
assuming that the load causing consolidation settlement is placed instantaneously. 
,-; ; '~ 
Given the· samedaia as for Problem 9.21. The load causing the 18 ern ultimate settlement was placed 'over a 
period of 2 'yr. Although we haven't discussed how to handle this kind of problem, describe the approach you 
. would use to compute the time history of settlement. . 
·9.24 
;. ~ ' 
9.25 
9.26 
.-,· .. 
9.27 
9.28 
A specimeu' ofclay in a special consolidation device (with drainage at the top only) h~s a height of 2.065 em 
when fully consolidated under a pressure of 65 kPa.A pressure transducer is located at the base of the sample to 
m~asure the pore water pressure. (a) When another stress increment of 65 kPa is applied, what would you expect 
the initial reading on the transducer to be? (b) If, after 20 min has elapsed, the transducer records a pressure of 
30 kPa, what would you expect it to read 45 min later (total elapsed timeof 1.25 h)? (After G. A. Leonards.) 
The total consolidation settlement for a compressible layer 8.3 m thick is estimated to be about 35 em. After 
about 8 mo (240 d) ·apoint 2m below the top ofthe singly drained layer has a degree of consolidation of70%. 
(a) Compute the 'coefficient of consolidation of the material in m2/d. (b) Compute the settlement for 240 d. 
A 22 m thick normally consolidated clay layer has a load of 150 kPa applied to it over a large areal extent. 
The clay layer is located below a granular fill (p = t8 Mg!m3) 3.5 m thick. A dense' sandy gravel is found 
below the clay. The groundwater table is located at the top of the clay layer, and the submerged density of the 
soil is 0.95 Mg/m3• Consolidation tests performed 'on 2.20 em thick doubly drained samples indicate 
t50 = 10.5 min for a load increment close to that of the loaded clay layer. Compute the effective stress in the 
clay layer at a depth of 16m below the ground surface 3.5 yr after application of the load. 
Given the same data as for Pr~blem 9.26.At t_= 4 yr, what is the average degree of consolid~tion for the clay 
layer? 
· 
Again, given the same data as for Problem 9.26. If the clay layer were singly drained from the top only, compute 
the effective stress at a depth of 16m below the ground surface and 3.5 yr after placement of the external load. 
Comments? 
· 
., 
· 
, ·: . 
.. 
· 
.. -· 9.29 A doubly drained soil specimen is 3 em thick.' It is loaded from u~·='· 150 kPa to 300 kPa; leading to a change 
in void ratio from 1.30 to 1.18. Its original void ratio at the start of the test, e;; = 1.42. 
·' 
(a) If the time required for 50% consolidation is 20 min, what is the coefficient of consolidation, cv, of the 
soilincm2/sec?.·-·''',·· 
i 
·). ··-. 
.; 
(b) How rimch vertical strain occurs during the loading from 150 to 300 kPa? 
(c) What is the coefficient of permeability for this soil, in cm/s; based on these results? ·· .: · 
: ·: 9.30 'Figure P9.30 shows a 20m thick layer of normally consolidated clay ( y1 · =. 18.6 kN/m3) that is one~dimensionally 
loaded by auv = 60 kPa. The clay layer is below a 3m thick layer ofgranular fill (y1 ~ 19.6 kN/m3), and a 
dense, cmnpacted. glacialtill undei'lies the clay. The water: table is located at the top of the clay layer. A 1-D 
consolidation test is performed on a 2.20 em thick, doubly drained speeimen from the middle of the clay layer. 
When the stress conditions frorri'the field (including the au vo = 60 kPa) are applied to this specimen, it takes 
4 min for-90% average consolidation to occur., 
o 
',; 
'I'J 
·(a). From the lab test data, determine cv for. the soil.":i .' · · 
'' 
! 
0 
(b) Compute the pore pressure at depth 18m before and immediately after the 60 kPa stress is applied. 
·Problems 
447 
Field 
'• '.· ... ' 
:;Clay, Yt ~ ,18.6 kN/m~ 
; '" 
'J ,' 
/ 
Dense glacial till 
FIGURE P9.30 
(c) Compute the total vertical stress (uv) at depth 18m after the 60 kPa stress is applied in the field. 
(d) At depth 18m; compute the effective vertical stress ( u~) 5 years after the 60 kPa is applied. 
9.31 Figure P9.31 shows a soil profile at a certain site, including an 8.5 m thick stratum of saturated, normally 
consolidated clay overlying an impermeable rock formation. The groundwater location is not known; how-
ever, a pore pressure piezometer has been installed in the middle of the clay and reads 52 kPa. A settlement 
plate has also been installed at the original ground surface to measure vertical deformation. 
) 
\ 
(a) A 2.1 m deep layer of fill (unit weight 19.7 kN/m3) is placed on the ground surface. At 220 da after the fill 
is placed, the piezometer reads 77 kPa of pore pressure, and the settlement plate has moved downward 
· by 0.54'm. What is the cv for the chiy? 
. . · 
· 
· 
. 
· 
. 
(b) Based on these readings at 220 da,what total settlement c~n be expected at the end of consolidation? 
(c) Compute the modified compression index, Cc•• for.this loading increment. 
. . . 
. .. 
I 
" I 
.I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I T 
2.6m 
8.5m 
· i::>ense sand 
y1 = 19.2 kN/m3 
Saturated, normally : 
. consolidated clay,: 
· y1 := '18.3 kN/m3 
· 
• 1 ~: 
FIGURE P9.31 
' .. : 
448 
Chapter 9 
Time Rate of Consolidation 
9.32 Figure P9.32 shows a 
.20m thick layer ~f normally consolidated clay ( 'Y/ = 18.6 k~Im3 ) that is one-dimensionally 
loaded by f:..u v = 50 kPa. The clay layer is below a 3 m thick layer of granular fill ( 'Yt = 19.6 kN/m3), and a 
dense, compacted glacial till underlies the clay. The water table is located at the top of the clay layer. A 1-D 
consolidation test is performed on a 2.20 em thick, doubly drained specimen from the middle of the clay 
layer. When the stress conditions from the field (including the f:..u v = 50 kPa) are applied to this specimen, 
it takes 1 minute for 50% average consolidation to occur. 
(a) From the lab test data; determine Cv for the soil. 
(b) Compute effective stress at 18m depth 4 years after the f:..u vis applied to the clay layer. 
(c) Compute the average degree of consolidation 4 years after f:..u v application. 
(d) If the settlement after 4 years is 22 em, what is the estimated Cce for the clay? 
50kPa 
3m t S7 
, Granular fill, 'Yt = 19.6 kN/m3 
· Clay, 'Yt = 18.6 kN/m3 
Dense glacial till 
FIGURE P9.32 
'/ 
I : ~ ; 
9.33 Determine the average coefficient of permeability, corrected to 20°C, of ·a clay specimen for the following 
consolidation increment: 
u1. = 200 kPa, e1 = 1.24 · 
·:r2 "' 4o6 kPa, e2 "" 1.09 
Height of specimen = 25.4 mm 
Drainage at both top and bottom faces· 
Time required for 50% consolidation = 18 mi~ 
Test temperature = 23°C 
(After A. Casagrande.) 
9.34 The following data were obtained from a consolidation test on an undisturbed clay sample: 
u 1, ~, 140 kPa, 
u 2 = 280 kPa, 
' 
' 
e1 = 0.912 
ez = 0.749 
The average value of the coefficient of permeability of the clay in this pressure increment range is 
9.2 X 10-8 cm/s. Compute and plot the decrease in thickness with time for a 12 m layer of this clay which is 
drained (a) on the upper surface 'only and (b) on the upper surface, and at a depth of 2.5 m by a thin hori-
zontal sand layer that provides free drainage. (After A. Casagrande.) 
9.35 Refer to Example 9.9. Suppose that the lower boundary~as free draining just like the top. The initial condi-
tions att = 0 -
would remain the same but att = 0 (the next line' below), u •. ; = 7 would equal one-half that 
value, or 10.5. Using a spreadsheet, generate a table and plot similar to those created for the single drainage 
boundary case in the example. 
Problems 
449 
9.36 Given the data of Problem 9.13. Evaluate (a) the ·secondary compression index and (b) the modified sec-
ondary compression index if 
9.37 
9.38 
9.39 
eo'= 2.45 
H 0 = 2.54cm 
Ps = 2.69 Mg/m3 
Att = 0, e = 1.67,: H = 1.872cm 
Att = 1485 min, e = 1.387, H = 1.646 em 
Weight of technician = 7 stone; moon phase = full 
• 
Ca 
~e . 
. 
Show that ca. = -1-- = .-I 
IS vahd. 
+ep 
u ogt 
Ca 
Showthats, = 1 + ep (H0 )~Jogtistrue. 
. 
.· . 
.·. 
Estimate the secondary compression per Jog cycle of time for Problem 9.26. 
9.40 A consolidation test was performed on a specimen of inorganic clay 2.3 em thick (doubly drained) and gave 
the following results: 
c,. = 0.043 
c,. = 0.265 
u~ = 75 kPa 
The typical t10o in the recompression range was8.4 min, and in the virgin compression range it was 32.5 min. 
(a) If each increment is left on for 24 hours, determine the amount of secondary compression strain that will 
occur in both the recoin pression and the "virgin coin pression ranges.; •.;; 
. 
. 
(b) One increment was left on at u~·.;,., 95 kPa for two weeks. What overconsolidation ratio resulted? 
. 9.41 Th~ liquid limit of a soil is 68: Estimate the value of th~ ~odifled s~~ondary coro'pressi~n lndex. 
' 
' . ' ' 
' 
' 
' . 
. 
' 
- ~ 
' ' ' . 
. 
. 
. 
;_;' 
·. 
'· 
CHAPTER 
1 0 
Stress Distribution 
and Settl_ement An,alysis 
10.1 
INTRODUCTION 
.. When you study foundation-design, you.wili learn that the vast majority of all structures are supported 
. on shallow foundations, and that settlement, not stability, controls most of those designs. This basically 
is why we spent so much time discussing compressibility and time rate of consolidation in Chapters 8 
and 9, because they are such an important aspect of shallow foundation design. 
· 
In this chapter we first review the steps necessary for estimating the magnitude and rate of 
settlement of shallow foundations on clays. A key piece of information needed for these estimates 
is the change of stress, t:.u, with depth in the soil due to boundary or surface loads, and we show you 
how engineers estimate this stress increase for use in the settlement equations. Next we briefly 
describe how to estimate the immediate settlement of shallow foundations on cohesive soils. Then 
we discuss four typical examples of how to use this information in settlement analyses of sites with 
both normally consolidated and overconsolidated clays. We conclude with some comprehensive 
examples of settlement calculations under various conditions. 
The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol 
B 
I 
Is 
L 
m,n· 
Ns 
Nw 
p 
Q 
450 
Dimension 
L 
L 
MT-2 
MLT-2 
Unit 
m 
m 
kN/m 
kN 
Definition 
Width of footing- Eq. (10.1) or characteristic dimension-
Eq. (10.14) 
Influence factor- Eq. (10.9) 
Influence and shape factor- Eq. (10.14) 
Length of foundation - Eq. (10.2) 
Ratios of foundation width to depth - Eqs. (10.7) and (10.8) 
Boussinesq influence factor- Eq. (10.4) 
Westergaard influence factor- Eq. (10.13) 
Line load- Eq. (10.5) 
Point force or load- Eq. (10.3) 
.( 
(Continued) 
10.2 
syniboi 
Dimension 
0 
Unit 
kPa 
m 
(%)' 
kPa 
.10.2 Settlement Analysis of Shallow Foundations 
451 
Definition 
Surface or contact stress~ Eq. (10.6) 
Horizontal distance from load to a point c Eq. (10.3) 
Horizontal strain- Eq. (10.12) 
Poisson's ratio- Eq. (10.12) 
Final vertical effective stress , 
Vertical stress at depth z- Eq. (10.1) _ .. 
SETTLEMENT ANALYSIS OF SHALLOW FOUNDATIONS 
10:2.1 . co'm'~onents of SettiE7ment .... 
Before going on, go back and reread Sec. 8.2. There we discuss the components of settlement. You will 
·recall that the total settlement, s1 , is the sum of three components, or 
where si = the immediate, distortion, or elastic settlement, 
Sc :: the consolidation (time-dep~ndent, or primary) settlement, and 
Ss = the secondary compression (also time dependent). 
These three components are illustrated schematically in Fig.lO.l. 
(8.1) 
The immediate settlement si occurs essentially as the load is applied; primarily because of distor-
tion (change of shape, not change of volume) in the foundation soils: From Sec. 8.2; yo'u know that most 
of the settlement of granular soils is immediate, because these soils. typically have a high permeability. 
On the other hand, for foundations on clay soils, the distortion settlement is not elastic, although si is 
often estimated using elastic theory. 
· 
· 
· · ' · · 
· 
· 
Immediate settlements must be considered in the design of shallow foundations, especially for 
structures that are sensitive to rapid settlements. A brief introduction to estimating the immediate 
FIGURE 10.1 
Schematic of the 
settlement-time history of a 
shallow .foundation (after Perloff, 
1975; Holtz, 1991). 
452 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
. settlement of shallow foundations on day soils is given in Sec. lOA. For shallow foundations on gran-
ular soils, we use empirical methods, and these are explained in books on foundation engineering 
(e.g., Holtz,J99l;Terzaghi et al., 1996). 
··The 'other two components of settlement, sc and s., in Fig. 10.1 occur because of the gradual 
expulsion of water from the voids and the concurrent compression of the soil skeleton. The distinction 
between consolidation settlement and secondary compression is based on the different physical 
processes that control the time rate of settl<!ment. We explained these processes in Chapters 8 and 9. 
You will recall that the time rate of consolidation or primary settlement is controlled by the hydraulic 
conductivity of the soil, whereas the secondary compression is controlled by the rate at which the soil 
skeleton itself yields and creeps after the excess pore pressure is essentially zero and the effective 
stress is constant. The time at which this occurs is called tp, the end of primary or the time of 100% 
consolidation, and this is shown in Fig. 10.1. 
· 
· • 
· ' 
· 
· 
Because the response of soils to applied loads is not linear, the superposition in Eq. (8.1) is not 
strictly valid. However, no practical alternate approach exists and experience indicates that this 
' approach yields reasonable. predictions of. settlements for many soils types~ Also note that the 
time-settlement relationship shown in Fig.lO.l is applicable to all soils, but the time scale and relative 
magnitudes of the three components may be different by orders of magnitude for different soil types. 
10.2.2 Steps in Settlement Analysis 
In order to predict the settlement of ashallow foundation on clay, the following steps are generally 
required: 
· · · · ' 
' · ' '· . 
. 
· · · 
· .· 
' · .' , 
. · 
Step 1. Determine the initial conditions 
Step 2. 
CJ. 
~oil profile: 
• cr vo, existing vertical total stress 
• u0 , existing pore water pressure 
• 
(T~~' existing vertical effective stress 
CJ Soil properties: 
~ .( 
1 ' ' 
• . cr~, preconsolidation pressure · 
• Cc or Cc., compression index or modified compression index 
• C, or C,8 , recompression index or modified recompression index 
• 
Cv, coefficient of consolidation 
• Ca or Cas• secondary compression index or modified secondary compression index 
From the soil exploration program and boring logs, determine the soil profile and the loca-
tion of the groundwater table. Determine the existing vertical total overburden stress, pore 
water pressure, and vertical effective stress with depth (Sec. 6.10). Decide which soil layers or 
strata are compressible. The soil properties are found from laboratory testing on undisturbed 
samples. The classification properties were·· discussed in Chapter 2 and the consolidation 
properties in Chapters 8 and 9. After all these test results are available, you will have a pretty 
good idea of what is compressible. 
Determine the geometry and magnitude of loads on the foundation 
For buildings, the footprint and column locations are provided by the architect. For 
bridges, the size and location of the foundation elements are determined by the bridge engi-
. neer. Tank diameters and locations depend on the type of project and location; similarly, 
embankment dimensions ·are determined by the project layout. 
,, 
10.2 · Settlement Analysis of Shallow Foundations 
453 
Estimate the magnitude and rate of load application to the foundation, during both con-
struction and the service life of the project, The unfactored loads should be used for settlement 
analysis'; otherwise 'a factor of safety will be contained in the settlt!ment analysis: For conven-
.tional strudures•such as buildings and'bridges,'the struCtural engineer usuallyprovides the 
anticipated loads for column, wall, pier: abutment, arid so. on'. For embankments arid tanks, the 
foundation engineer often estimates the loads: 
... 
. j 
: 
• . 
. 
· Step3 .. ~sti~uit~. thc; change ,fnst;~ss ci~'(in)th.ecompressible layer 
, . 
· · · 
: o. If one~dimensionalloading: ~~v = % . 
o If three-dimensionalloading,use:. · 
•I. Theory of elasticity :' .· 
: · 1 
• 2lrmethod 
· 
·'J ,; .. , 
• Probabilistic method (Harr, 1977;Holtz, 1991) 
Ifthe loading is one-dimensional in mituie (that is, if the width of the loaded area i~ significa~tly 
great~rtha,n. the thickil,ess of the 'compressi~le layer),. the# on¥~diinen~ionall6ading may be 
assumed. In this case,the'changein stress with depth equals the stress applied at the surface. 
:. :. 
'. If, on the' other han(the width of the loaded area is equal to or less than' the thickness 
. of the compressible'layer, the loading is three-dimensional'and the applied surface stresses 
. dissipate"withdepth. Elastic theory ofthe i!1'method'is commonly used''tci'estimatethe 
. ' ch~nge in stress with depth; but probabilistic methods ar~ 'available 'that could also be used to 
make this estimate. Stress distribution is discussed in Sec. 10.3 .. 
Step 4. Estimate the preconsolidation pres~ure 
. . 
. 
Estimate the preconsolidation pressure u~ Or the. overconsolidation ratio (OCR) using 
methods in ChapterS. Compare with the effective stress profile computed in Step 1, and 
determine whethe(the soilis normally' consolidated or overconsolidated:Note that in many 
dep'osits, p1utof the 'compressible layer is overcons6lidated and part is normally consolidated. 
See Sec. 8.11 for examples. 
Step 5. Calculate theconsolidation settlenients, sc 
Use procedures discussed in Sec. 8.7 to make these calculation.s. Which equation to use 
depends on the soil properties determined in. Step: 1 aria the OCR ' ' :' ·: . f •' ·: '· ·· • • 
' 
Step 6. Estimate the time rate of consolidation settlement 
Be very conservative in your estimates of the time rate of consolidation. As discussed in 
Chapter 9, the accuracy of your predictions depends on how well you know the boundary and 
intermediate drainage conditions of the compressible layers, and that knowledge depends on 
the quality of the subsurface investigation program. ' 
•. •'' . ' ' 
.· .• ··., 
Step 7. Estimate the magnitude and rate of secondary compression, s8 
Use procedures described in Sec. 9.8. 
Step 8. Estimate the immediate. or distortion settlement, s; 
• Ifthe site i~ ~ohesive, use elastic theory. See Sec: 10.4 1 • 
• If granular, use empirical meth~ds described in foundation enginee~ing books' 
' ; 
You already know ho~ to do all of the above steps e~cept'3 and 8. ~efore.goin~ ~n to show you 
:how how to estimate the changes in stress with depth (Step 3),.we review effective stress profiles and 
discuss how the vertical effective overburden and preconsolidation stress profiles influence how you 
make settlement calculations. Then in Sec. 10.4we discuss how to estimate the immediate settlement, 
Step 8, for shallow foundations on cohesive soils. We end the chapter with a number of comprehensive 
examples of settlement analyses. 
454 
Chapter 10 · ·Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
10.3 
STRESS DISTRIBUTION· 
. Suppose a very large area such as a subdi~ision or shopping mall isto be fill~d with several metres of 
select compacted material, often called an areai fill: In this instance, the loading {s' o~e-dimensional, and 
the stress increase felt at depth would be 100% of the· applied stress at the surface. Another way of 
looking at one-dimensional loading was mentioned in Step 3 abovei that' is, if the width of the loaded 
area is signifiCantly greater than the thickness of the c~inpressiblelayer, then one~dimensionalloading 
may be assumed. However, near the edge or end of the filled area you might'exp'ect a certain amount 
of attenuation of stress with depth, because no stress is applied beyond the edge. Likewise, with a footing 
of limited size, the applied stress would dissipate nither rapidly with depth because the loading is three-
dimensional. Loading is three-dimensional and the applied surface stresses dissipate with depth when the 
width of the loaded area is equal to or less than the thickness of the comp!e~s}ble layer. 
10.3.1 2:1 Method . 
>;'• 
1 
" 
• 
• 
., 
>' 
' 
• 
.. 
• . . . . 1 • · ., . . . . r . 
~ . . 
_. . 
· . 
. 
_ . 
~ ._ • \ . . , . ; . . -
_. r , , : 
, . 1 ._ 
. . . • 
~ 
, : : , 
: 
• 
' One. of the simplest methodsto compute the distribution of stress with depth for a loaded area is to use 
tli~ 2 to 1 (2~:1) method. This is an empiri~alapproach based on the assumption that the area over which 
• ' . the )oa<f acts increases in' a systematic way ,with d~pth., ~ince)hesap:Ie,vertic~l force is spread over an 
:incr,easingly l~rger area, the u~it stress d~cre~ses \'vith depth; ~s sh~"':i:linFig)0.2.In Fig.10.2( a), a strip 
or continuous footing is seen inelev'ati6n'view.At a depth z, the enlarged area of the footing increases 
.by z/ion .each'side; The width at dept~ z isth'enB.+ z, ~I1d,the ~t~ess u~· at thatdepth is 
• 
• 
-
1 
• "' 
. 
•• 
' 
,,, 
,' 
: •• "''' 
.,-,J 
iload> 
q0 (B X 1). ·,. 
u = 
. 
= -:---'--:---'-
z 
. (B + z) x·1 
(B + z) x 1. 
" 
J 
'': ~! 
I < ~ ' 
(10.1) 
'· . 
~ \ 
, where ~o i~ the s~rface or c~ntact str~ss;:q~ .7' Pi(B:.~ L). 
., 
··, . . 
. .. , 
:. , . By imalogy,a rectangularfooting'C>fWidth.B and length L would have an area of (B + z) • (L + z) 
at a de.pth z, as shown in Fig.10.2(b). The corresponding stress at depth z would.be 
l '. 
• ' 
' . • , 
! ' 
~ 
1 
' 
: 
, ' 
I • ' 
< _ • , , 
• • 
> : • 
• • 
• J 
' 
" 
, 
' • 
\ 
I, BL 
' 
= 
.load 
= 
qo 
· 
(102) 
Uz 
(B + z)(V+ z)' 
(B + z)(L+·z): 
.. 
'l; 
. '.. 
. 
! ·~'. 
< \' >. ', 
' 
• > 
Example 10.2 illustrates the use of t!J.e 2:1 method. 
. 
p 
Stress on this plane, qo = BL 
'·; {" 
I f 
1i 
sv' 
l '----------,---~ ---T--
t-~~::F~ ·aq'~
2~ · ax 1 
. , .. Stress on this plane, u z = (B q~. z) x 1 i 
, , ! ~ 
' 
I · ~ 
' 
' ' 
' 
' 
I 
. . .. 
. , (a) . 
. ... 
K---- B + z---~ 
c. · ,-, · · , " . 
· · 
q
0 BL 
Stress on this plane at dept~ z, u~ = (B + z) (L + z) 
' 
! •.(b) '. 
~ I > 
FIGURE 10.2.,·The 2:1 approximation for the distribution of vertical stress with depth: (a) strip footing • 
and (b) rectangular footing. 
J, 
10:3 
Stress Distribution 
455 
Example 10.1 
Given: 
Two metres of fill (p = 2.04 Mg/m3) are compacted over a large area. Placed on tbp of the com-
pacted fill is a 3 X 4 m spread footing loaded with 1200 kN. Assume that the average density of the soil 
prior to placement of the fill is 1.68 Mg/m3. The ~ater table is very deep. 
Required: 
a. Compute and plot the effective vertical stress profile with depth prior to fill placement. 
b. Compute and plot the added stress, du, due to the fill.. - . 
c. 
Compute the additional stress with depth due to the 3 'x 4 m footing when the footing base is 
placed 1 m below the top of the filled ground surface. Use the 2:1 method. (Assume weight' of 
footing plus ba~kfill equa~s weight?f_soil remove_d,so~hat_the contact load is 1200 kN.) 
Solution: 
a. Just as in' Chapter. 6rthe initial effective stress distribution is calculated and plotted in 
Fig. Ex.10.1a. The stress is zero at zero depth and 330 kPa at a depth of 26m (pgz = 
.1.68 Mg/m3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 20m := 330 kPa),. 
.: 
. ' 
·. 
· 
. 
b. ·.The added stress due to the 2 mfill is2 .·X 2.04 X 9.81.= 40 kPa. This is shown in Fig. Ex. 10.1a 
by the line parallel to the in situ vert~cal effective stress line. Notice th<1t, at any depth, the addi-
tional stress due to the fill is a constant 40 kPa; because the fill is large in areal extei:J.t. Thus the 
loading is one-dimensional and 100% of its influence is felt throughout. 
·' 
· 
; 
''' ~ 
' 
\ 
' .. 
c; The contact stress q0 ·between thefooting and the. soil equals the-column load, 1200 kN, 
divided by the footing area, 3 X 4 m, or 12m2, or 
; ; · 
_ load ~- 1200 kN _ 10 .. 0: kN/ 2 
kP , 
q -
-
-
m or 
a-
o 
area ,· ·: 12m2 
456 
Chapter 10 
. ·Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
;,; 
,"! 
,· __ .; 
I! 
(1). 
0 
1 
2. 
3 
4 
5, 
6 
7' 
8 
9 
. 10 
.... 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15. 
(2) 
' (3) •1 I;; 
' (L + z) . 
·(m) ,. 
3 
4 
4 
5 
5 
.; 
6 
:1 .. 
6 
7 
7 
8. 
.8 
'i ·: 
9 .. 
! 9' 
10' 
. ·.10 
!. , 11' 
l1 
12' 
12 
.. '13. 
13 
. 14' 
14 
15 
15 
16 
16 
I 171 
17 
18 
18 
19 
Footing with 
load = 1200 kN; 
area=3X4m 
;; 1 (4) \ 
Area 
.. . . . (mz) 
12 
100 
20 
60 
30 •, 
\' 
•' 
40, 
42 
• 
j__.·, ; ,29 
56 
21 
;-'; 
72 .. 
17 
90 
13 
.·: 110' 
. ,:· 
< 
•• '·.· 
,11 
132. 
'9 
156 
8 ;,, 
. .; 182 
T " 
210' 
·'6: 
240 
5 
272 
4 
306 
4 
342 
4 
I 
FIGURE Ex. 10.1b 
Using the 2:1 method, a tabulation of how the stress changes with depth z is shown in Fig. Ex. 10.1b. 
The change in stress, Llu(z), in Column (5) is added to the change in stress due to the fill in Fig. Ex. 10.1a. It 
can be seen that the stress due to the footing diminishes quite rapidly with depth. 
: , ; 
It is important to realize that with the 2:11llethod, the computed stress is an average stress. The 
actual distribution of contact stress beneath a footing depends on its relative rigidity and whether 
the soils are predominately cohesive or granular. We discuss this further in Sec. 10.4. In the mean-
time, we will compare the differences using the theory of elasticity in Example 10.2. The 2:1 method 
is popular because it is simple, quick, and easy to use. You could use your mobile phone calculator to 
the compute stress changes. Also the 2:1 method gives estimates of stress changes that are not very 
different from elastic theory, at least for simple cases of vertical loading. 
··' 
10.3.2 BoussiriesqTheory 
The theory of elasticity is also used by foundati~n ~ngineers io estimate stresses within soil masses. The 
soil need not be elastic for the theory to work, at least for vertical stresses; only the ratio of stress to 
strain should be constant. As long as the added stresses are well below failure; we can assume that the 
strains are still approximately proportional to stresses. 
v 
r' 
;. 10.3 ··Stress Distribution 
457 
~ 
In 1885, Boussinesq developed equations for the state of stress within a homogeneous, isotropic, 
· 
linearly elastic half-space for a point load acting perpendicular to the surface. The value of the vertical 
z 
stress u z, is·, 
· ··· 
~ 
(10.3) 
(10.4) 
where N Bis an influence factor which combines the constant terms in Eq. (10.3) and is a function of r/z. 
These terms are_ illustrated in Fig~l0.3(a); valuesof N~yersus riiare shown in Fig. 10.3(b) . 
. Boussinesq also derived equations for' the radial, tangential, and shear stress; these can be found in 
most advanced textbooks on soil mechanics. Note that the equation for u z is independent of the mate-
rial; the modulus does not enter into the equation at all. 
By integrating the point~load equation along a' line, the stress due .to a line load (:force per unit 
length) may be found. In this case, the value of the vertical stress is · .· 
. 
2P z3 • 
u = --
(10.5) 
z . 
11' x4 
where P = line load, and 
X: ~jz
2+ ?)112 [se~Fig.10.3(a)l-:. 
Q 
0.4 
0.3 
N 
X .. .. 
0.2 
1 
0.1 
00 
I· 
r 
0.5 
1.0 
·(a) 
1.5 
r/z 
(b) 
2.0 
2.5 
. 
. 
FIGURE 10.3 . (a) Definition of terms used in Eqs. (10.4) and (10.5); (b) relationship between N8, Nw. and rlz for a 
point load (after Taylor, 1948). 
3.0 
458 
Chapter10. 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
Equations for the horizontal and shear stress are also available. 
Now, in practice we rarely have loads that can be accurately modeled as either a point or a line 
load, but instead engineering loads act on areas not points or lines. So the next logical step is to integrate 
a line load over a finite area, and all the following solutions for different loaded areas were developed 
from Bousinesq's original point-load solution! 
Newmark (1935) performed the integration of Eq. (10.5) and derived an equation for the vertical 
stress under the corner of a uniformly loaded rectangular area. The equation was slightly modified by 
Holl (1940) (H. E. Stewart, personal communication, 1993) and is given by · 
• · qo [ 
mn 
( 
1 
. . 
1 , )· . 
_1 . 
mn 
J 
··u =-
---+---
+tan 
, z 
2'IT V m2 + n3 + 1 m2 + 1 
n2 + 1 
V m2 + n2 + 1 
where q0 = surface or contact stress, 
m = xlz, 
n = ylz 
(10.6) 
(10.7) 
(10.8) 
where x, y = length and width of the. uniformly loaded area, respectively. 
The parameters m imd n are interchangeable. Fortunately, Eq. (10.6) may be rewritten as 
'" 
I 
•, 
'' 
" 
, 
' 
Uz = qoi 
where I = an influence value which depends on m and n. 
·. Values of I for .various values of m and n are shown in Fig. lOA. 
Example 10.2 
Given: 
The 3 X 4 m rectangular footing of Example 10.1 is loaded uniformly by 100 kPa. 
Required:. 
a. Find the vertical stress under the corner of the footing at a depth of 2 m. 
b. Find the vertical stress under the center of the footing at a depth of 2m. 
c. Compare results with Fig. Ex. 10.1a: 
Solution: 
a. 
x=3m 
y=4m 
z = 2m; therefore, from Eqs. (10.7) and (10.8), 
X 
3 
m = ~ = 2 = 1.5 
y 
4 
. 
n=-=-=2 
z 
2 
From Fig. 10.4, find I = 0.223. From Eq .. (10.9), 
Uz = qoi 
= 100 X 0.223 
= 22kPa 
(10.9) 
~ 
: •· ' -~ ' 
. 
· 10.3 · Stress Distribution 
459 
0.6 
1 
2 
3 
4 
. 6 
8 10 
,, ';:, 
0.28 
y~ 
: 
•' ,· 
" 
,. 
.. 
,, 
>/ 
X 
0.26 
t~ 
m=2.< 
I 
rT: 
I 1.8 
..... 
l 
'' 
0.24 
Load q0 per unit of area 
~ 
z 
m=~;n=~ 
0.22 
f~ 
m and n are interchangeable 
,, 
lff/: 
U'z = qof 
~r/ 
0.20 
:// 
0.18 
1/. 'tl//'' 
0 .01 
0.02 
0.04 
0.1 
0.2 0.3 
0.5 ~ V/ 
0.16 
0.14 
0.12 
-
ai 0.10 
:l 
~ 
Q) 
0 
li5 0.08 
:l 
~· 
0.06 
0.04 
0.02 
0 
' 
m=O 
lm=O.O 
~ 
,, 
-
:5, 
.~·P 
\ 
~~~ 
~ 
r-
....,:;;..-
....... 
':· 
I 
' 
i 
= 1.0 
I 
I , 2.0--IJ 
I~ 
11/J. 
111/h 
1///IIJ 
~rJJ 
v; 
~~: ~v/ 
~ .... ; 
.;,.., ~ 
..... 
.... 
i i ~ 
I 
'/1!/ / 
~I 1/ 
' 
/ 
V. ~VI / 
~ IV 
I 
/ 
~ 
rL ~~~,/ 
fl. 
l 1!1: 
: 
., ...-
'I/•• 
!!J /J (// / 
I' 
rJ //) 
(' 
V/1/1, I .v-
rll 1/ I 
' \ 
I 
. ,. 
'If I/ I 
'I 
/''. ..,.--
j 
/ 
/~ 
/ 
II' 
... ~ "'I -
~ 
...... 
I 
· m
1 2.:> 
'\. 
1\ 
......:::: 
~ 
'II 
~ 
$ 
~ 
-
m:;1;2 
/ 
rnl (o 
~ 
-
i 
·. ·=n'q .. 
~ ~~ 0~8 
-
0.7 
I I 
01
6 
'. -
~ 
1 o;5 
-
' 
rn o;4 
. 
.. 
rn 
o;3 
: 
.. 
rn;; o;2 
.. 
{17=c0:1 
I 
rn '7 o;o 
! 
0.28 
0.26 
...,.----m= oo 
-m=3.0 
0.24 
-m=1.6 
--m= 1.4 
0.22 
0.20 
0.18 
0.16 
0.14 
0.12 ' 
0.10. 
0.08 
0.06 ' 
0.04 
0.02 
0 
0.01 
0.02 
0.04 
0.1 
0.2 0.3 
0.5 
0.8 1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
8 .10 
Value· of n 
FIGURE 10:4· influence value for vertical stress under corner~f a uniformly loaded rectangular area (after 
Fadum, 1948). 
· ' · · 
· 
460 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
b. To compute the stress under the center, it is necessary to divide the 3 X 4 m rectangular 
footing into four 1.5 X 2 m sections. Find the stress under one corner and multiply this value 
by four to take into account the four quadrants of the uniformly loaded area. We can do this 
because, for an elastic material, superposition is valid. 
x = 1.5 m 
y =2m' 
z =2m; then· 
X 
1.5 
m = ~ = T = 0.75 
y 
2 
n=-=-=1 
z 
2 
The corresponding value of I from Fig. 10.4 is 0.159. From Eq. (10.9), 
' 
' 
az =4q01= 4 X 100 X 0.159 = 64kPa 
Thus the vertical stress under the 'center for this case is about three times that under the corner. 
This seems reasonable, since the center is loaded from all sides but under the corner it is not. 
c. At a depth of 2 m below the 3 X 4 m footing, the vertical stress according to ,the 2:1 theory is 
40 kPa (see Fig. Ex. lO.lb ). This value represents the average stress beneath the footing at 
-2m. The average of the corner and center stress by elastic theory is (22 + 64 )/2 = 43 kPa. 
Thus the 2:1 method underestimates the vertical stress at the center but overestimates az at 
the corners! 
A spreadsheet solution from Wolff (1995) and another computer-based solution from Christian and 
Urzua (1996) both give comparable results. As with any computer program, you should check the 
results with a hand calculation. This example shows that the solution by means of Fig: 10.3 is adequate 
for computations, but computer programs, with correct data entry, usually don't make mistakes and are 
veryfast! 
. 
· · Suppose we want to find the vertical stress at some depth z outside the loaded area. Under these 
conditions we merely fabricate other uniformly loaded rectangles, all with corners above the point 
where the. vertical stress is desired, and 'subtract and· add their stress contributions as necessary. We 
illustrate this procedure in Example 10.3. ·. 
Example 10.3 
Given: 
A 5 X 10 m area uniformly loaded with an applied stress ~f 100 kPa. 
Required: 
a. Find the stress at a depth of 5 m under point A in Fig. Ex. 10.3. 
' 
. 
b. Find what the stress would be at point A if the right half of the 5 X 10m, area were loaded 
with an additionallMPa. 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
.· 
' ' 
, .. 
" 
···, 
:·.10.3 
Stress DistributiOn 
461 
/Find stress under point A · 
'A · . 5 . 
·: 1 
•. t--:-:--:~---::--:---: .. ::r ... 
. 
I 
, 
1 
. 
I 
I 
, 5 
. 
, 
.. 
: ·. 
81_ 
lg 
. 
I _l 
. 
. 
. ·. 
T4~----:::-_:·,. . -
.·. '' .· _ls l · .. · 
. 
. Loaded area (8627) 
. . . 
I 
. 
... 
1--~: 
. 
. . ··3 
7·. 
10 
2. 
'-F-5 + '10~ 
FIGURE Ex. 10.3 
Solution: 
a; Refer to Fig. Ex.10.3 and the n~mbered points.as shown. Add then!ctangles iri the following 
manner (+for loaded areas, - for unloaded areas~ and A plus the numbers denote the 
boundary points for each shape); + A123 - A164 ,-- A573 + A584 result iri the loaded rec-
'tangle we want, 8627. Fi~dfour separat~influence values from Fig.10A for each rectangle at 
.a depth of 5 m, then add and subtract the computed stresses. Note that it is necessary to add 
~ectangle A584 because it was subtr'acted twice as' part of rectanglesA164 and A573. 
·· 
The computations are shown in the following table. · 
' 
· 
. 
Item 
+A123 
x· 
15 
•. 15 
y 
10 
\,_ 5 
'Z 
.5 
5 
m = xlz 
·3 
3 
<) ~: 
.. .. .n = y/z 
'•'. 2 . .. 
:1 
I 
0.238 
0.209 
Uz, 
23.8 . 
-20:9 
Total uz = 23.8 - 20.9 - 20.6 + 18.0 = 0.3 kPa 
i+A584 
5 
5 
.5 
-·1. 
1: 
0.180 
:1-18.0 
A computer solution by Christian and Urzua (1996) ·gives an answer of about l kPa. Our 
answer is somewhat lower, but both are quite small stress increases under point A. This shows 
. that even a rather crude chart will give" a reasonable solution from an engineering point of view. 
b. When rectangle 78910 is loaded with 100 kPa and rectangle 96210 is loaded with 200 kPa, 
· repeat part a above to obtain the stress under point A at 5 m depth for the entire rectangle 
· · .. · 
8627 loaded with 100 kPa': Next; a' second set of four rectangles would have to be calculated 
just as for part a, but only rectangle 96210 would be loaded with+ 100 kPa; the others would . 
be -100 kPa. The total u z equals 0.3 kPa from part a plus 238 - 210 - 232 + 206 = 5 kPa. 
Thus it is possible to find the stress at any depth z, in or around a uniformly loaded area, or even 
under a step-loaded area; by using the procedures outlined in Examples 10.2 and 10.3. Remember that 
a new set of calculations is required for each depth where u z is desired. 
Similar procedures 'are available for vertical stresses under uniformly loaded circular areas. Use 
Fig. 10.5 to obtain influence values in ter:ms of xlr and z/r, where z = depth, r = radius of uniformly 
loaded area, X = horizontal Oistance from the center of the circular area, and q0 = SUrface contact 
pressure, in kPa. 
462 
Chapter;10" , Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
/, stress in percent of surface contact pressure 
0.1 
0 
0.2 
0.3 0.4 
0.6 0.81:0. 
2 
3 
4 5 6 
8 10 
20 
30 40 50 60 80 100 
'I; Jlllilll I 
I 
Q T 17 
)I £RIB 
1 
I 
. 
I 
1.25 
1.0 
;, 
I 
';;; 
.. ~ <IJ 
~t ~:2::~-
;:-~\0, ~~ I -~L-
... 1:~--~rt)~~~,~t~-
2 ~ ...... -~~" ~ 0- 4.0 
''! I'-···~ --jii'K ---t ~- -!_)={~ -- ~~ 
~~~~-t--;J---- ··-
~-----Ntr ---T.J ~~zsJ-~rm 
3 
...... 
.\ 
' 
I V./A' 
\0. 75;1 
b., 
"Y'~ 6.0 
1J 
W. 
~I 
....._ 
7.D_)_'-~ 
I 
., 
' 
I 
1..1 I 
'0 4 
I'.. 
1\ 
1\ 
1- Note: Numbers on curves 
~. 
1 
·"'-. 
. 
"'K \ ·. 
· 
.1·· !4,. IL~. , 
.·.·. , !ndica.~e offs_ .. et ~istances 
:C 
.•'i\. (8.0). \ 
, fb ·.f; 
. 1nradu,x/r... 
1 
f.s,l \.~?1\ i\ 
:/+jtJ~ 
... - ., ., ; 
:.!::~·R 
· 
~ 
·' 
1 
• 
· ·2r 
.-.~ 6 -~--~~-::-\---
--
---1--4LV~---
.; .. ~ 
W1o.o~ 
1 LJ 1/Ui: 
· · I.'<:__;) 
7 ---~-[:=\ ---1\-- \ -- -- -- - --- --- 'hi]J -+ -- -+-""~"-
------ ----~-~--\ - -:I - . . . 
---- l-- . 
-1~--~-l-- -• j .... , 
.. ,, 
H-· ·--·-- ...... _ .. --·--
... ·-
-
--- --~- +------l 
------ ---- -- - -- -I -
~- --- ' 
--~-- -- ---
--f--· 
9 1--t--- ·- -- ·- _. 
--
-
-
1--- ---1\- --- -
-~ 
--
--- ---}-t- : ---tillll 
10 
, 
-~-
.
.. --.qo. 
. . .. r 
. Z 
, 
Uz 
X, 
I X qo 
Uz~ 100 
'l 
. 
' 
. 
. 
FIGURE 10.5 
Influence values, expressed in percentage of surface contact pressure q0 , for vertical stress· 
under uniformly loaded drcu~ar area (after Foster and Alvin, 1954, and U.S. Navy, 1986). 
·. 
· 
Example 10.4 
:Given: 
h 
. A circular tank 3.9l min dlameter,i~ ~niformly loaded with 100 kPa .. 
;.,,' 
R~quired:. 
' J l . ' ~ 
_;.,, 
a. Compute the stress under the center of the. tank at a depth of 2 m below the tank. 
b. Compute the stress under the edge of the tank, also a depth of 2 m . 
·: 
~;: 
·.,, 
. ,·.',; 
Solution: 
, a •. Refer to Fig.10.5. 
'..:' 
1z'= zm, 
', ~ 3.91/i ';" i.95 m 
'1 ,· 
•x ,;, 0; 
1 tl1ell 
' . 
, .~ ' 
' . 
. 
, zlr =. 2/1.95 = 1.02 .. 
xlr = 0/1.95 = 0 
· . 
. ,. 
', 10.3 Stress Distribution 
463 
Find I = 0.63. Using Eq. (10.9), we obtain, 
CTz. = q0I = 100 X 0.63 = 63 kPa 
(This compares almost exactly with CTz = 64 kPa at the center for a 3_ X 4 in rectangul11r area 
in Example 10.2. In both cases, tliearea is 12m2.) 
. • .• . 
· .. · 
' 
. . . . .. 
·b. Again, ref~r to Fig.10.5. Forth~ edg~ ~f th~ circularloadt~darea: 
z =2m· 
" · r = 1.95 m 
x = r = 1.95 m 
· zlr = 2/1.95 = 1.02 
xlr = 1.0·: 
Find I = 0.33; then, using Eq. (10.9), 
. Uz = q0I = 100 X 0.33 = 33 kP,a 
(This compares with CT z = 26 kPa at a corner for a 3' X 4 m uniformly loaded rectan-
. gular area. In each case, the area loaded is the same.) Spreadsheet answers are 74 and 38. 
Notice we dropped the, decimal places. Remember, we are using the theory .of elasticity, 
which only approximates reality. 
· 
. 
' 
. • Another useful integration of the Boussil1esq equations is the tnipezoidal loadihg shown in 
Fig. io.6, which models the loading caused by a long embankment. Influence values are in terms of the 
dimensions a and b, as shown in the figure. If the embankment is not infinitely long, then use Fig.10.7 
together with Fig.10.4torepre~ent different load configurations .. 
Example 10.5 
Given: .. 
A highway embankment, as shown in Fig. Ex.lO.S.Assume the average density of the material in 
the einbankment is 2.0 Mg/m3• 
· ·· 
Require~: > • . · 
. Compute the vertical stress under the centerline at depths of 3 and 6 m. 
<t 
~ 
5 ~· 
!~+-• -5-:--::J 
! 
-~2 
1'' --.-:-_. 
3m, 
I 
.• 
· 
t · 
. 
' 
3m 1· ti 
_i_t 
.-j' 
FIGURE Ex. 10.5 
464 
Chapter·10: 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
'-t· 
' 
:;_; 
a/z-
. ,· 
.. , 
,·\ 
0.01 
0.50 
0.45 I 
l 
0.02 
0.04 0.06 
0.1 
0.2. ' 0.4 0.6 ~
0
6°50 
.
. > 
·-----~-·-·:······.!_. .... 
! 
_· 
. 
. 
-~···· 
--~· ~--··: 
........ 
··.-· 
:. 
~-
-· ,-- :· 
·-
E:e; 
n-~~A·3f3F·-~-·-
·-··· -··· /'Yl-t-r-1 0.45 
Pf"'""J,;f1W7JI 
__ _.~ -
.. ··--
-- -- :A-+ 
. 
! 
I 
' 
~~-;f;/t/#1 
ru.r~ 
~ 
TTlfl 
o.
35
1-111111·1 mno~~YA 
111111Mt1°·
35 
gf -
-t-!1--I-'T -----1-- t· 
lt'~l-- 17 -r~-
c··· . 111 t1111111 
(ij 
-- ---f--· ---- - -- -- -t-f -0.4-:.,.r-
-- --1/- -~ [-
j 0.25 =--===~-=~~~~~ -- / i v-'y _;-~=v~;~-1--- -=~~-~70~-~~=c~-. 0.25 
-
0.31/ I 
II 
If 
1 
, £ , ~:20 -=---- -=,=--= = = = ~= ~ _: ;- ~ ~:q= 
-~l2 ~ -=~ :::tfl I I · I 
I 
1 I I I · I I I I I I 0.20 
~. j_j_ - ---~1/ -----1-- -~-~~-1 . 
2 
3 
4 5 6 
8 10.0 
·~·-......-
If 
I 
r·o.2-J7 
·--.71 
0·
15 1 I l I I II U*11/ lllftt/V++-H4 
1----t----1-+--1--H-:H-+-+-+t o.1 -:lTrrr--17 .. 
?1""'""1 TlTr---~T-T7 
o.o51 
1 1 11 1 1 1 1 bli=o:--Ej !1 
''·. '''1'"7 
]7 I' 
... 
0.05 
:-P 
0 I 
I 
IT I I 
I I I Ill 
I 
I 
I I I 
I I Ill __ , 
0~1 
0 
0.2! -
0.4 0.6 ' 1.0 . 
0.02 - • 0.04 0.06 
0.1 
Value of a/; 
q0 = unit load of " 
embankment 
Uz= I X q0 
z ll 
FIGURE 10.6 Influence values for vertical stress under a very long embankment; length = oo 
(from U.S. Navy, 1986, after Osterberg, 1957).• 
· 
· 
! · 
· 
0.1 
0.25 
,::. 
10.3. Stress Distribution 
465 
Value of m 
:. ·· 
FIGURE 10.7 
Influence values for vertical stress under the corners of a triangular 
.load of lirnit~d lengt~ (after U.S. Navy, 1986). 
. 
466 
Chapter; 10 
. Stress. Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
Solution: First, calculate the applied surface stress q0 and the dimensions of the embankment in terms 
of a and b. 
qo ='pgh;. 2.0Mgl~3 X 9.81 m/s2 X 3 n,' = 59kPa 
From Fig. 10.6, and Fig. Ex. 10.5, 
b=5m 
a=2X3m=6m 
Next, calculate the vertical stress for z = 3 m. 
From Fig. 10.6, I = 0.49, 
alz = 6/3 = 2 
biz = 5/3 = 1.67 
cTz ,;,. q0I = 59 kPa :>< 0.49 = 29 kPa 
for one-half ~f the embankment, or 58 kPa for theentire embankment. Thus, at this shallow depth a z is 
almost the same as the contact stress. 
· 
Finally, calculate the vertical stress for z = 6 m .. 
From Fig. 10.6, I = 0.44, 
alz = 6/6= 1 
biz =· 516 = 0.83 
az = q0I = 59kPa X 0.44 X 2 = 52kPa 
,' 
Now and then it becomes necessary to compute the ·vertical stress due to an irregularly shaped 
loaded area at various points inside and/or outside an area. To facilitate computations, Newmark (1942) 
developed influence charts fromwhich the verticat'stress (and eventhe horizontal and shear stresses) 
may be computed. These influence charts are based on Boussinesq's theory, although similar charts 
have been prepared for the Westergaard theory, to be discussed shortly. Examples of influence charts 
may be found in foundation engineering textbooks-for example, Leonards (1962), Peck et al. (1974) 
and Poulos and Davis (1974). Figure 10.8 shows the Newmark influence chart for the computation of 
vertical stresses due to a loaded area. Think of the chart as a contour map that shows a volcanic cone, 
th~ top of which is located at the center ( 0) of the influence chart. If it were possible to look normal to 
a three-dimensional su~face of the chart, you would see that each of the "areas" or "blocks" has the 
same surface area. We see only the projection on the contour map; the blocks grow smaller as the cen-
ter is approached. 
. 
, . . . . 
.. 
.. 
. .. ··.· 
. 
· 
The charts are scaled with respect to depth so that they niay be used for a structure of any size, 
in the following manner:on the chart is the liiie•OQ. This line represents the distance below the 
ground surface z for which the vertical stress a v is' desired, and this distance is used as the scale for a 
drawing of the loaded area. The point at which the vertical stress is desired is placed over the center of 
the chart The vertical stress at that point is computed by merely counting the number of areas or 
blocks on the chart; within the boundary of the loaded area that is d~ll;Wn to the 'proper scale on the 
chart. That number multiplied by an influence value I, speCified on the chart,' imd by the contact pres-
sure is used to obtain the vertical stress at the desired depth. Example 10.6 illustrates the use of the 
Newmark influence chart. 
·· 
Example 10.6 
Given: 
Scale of distance OQ = 
depth z at which stress is computed 
10.3 
Stress Distribution 
467 
FIGURE 10.8 Influence chart 
for vertical stress on horizontal 
planes (after Newmark, 1942). 
A uniform stress of 250 kPa is applied to the loaded area shown in Fig. Ex. 10.6a. 
Required: 
Compute the stress at a depth of 80 m belmv the ground surface due to the loaded area under 
point O'. 
· 
· 
468 
Chapter 10, 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
A 
o;r r 
40 
]I 
.r:. !--
c.. 
Ql 
0 
Q' 
(Dimensions in metres) 
B 
. Uniform load, 250 kPa 
40 .1. ·,·· ~0~ 
(a) 
. '·. (b) 
-
·, 
. 
'· 
.·"' 
\ 
\ 
"0 
Ql -sTo 
.r:.C. 
oE 
·- 0 
.r:.o 
3::1/) 
ca·-
t-.j £1! 
.r:.~ 
0..111 
a>£!! 
0 C..LQ 
FIGURE Ex. 10.6a After Newmark (1942). 
FIGURE Ex. 10.6b 
Aft~r Newmark (1942). 
' \. 
Solution: Draw the loade'd areas~ch that the length of the line OQ is scaled to 80 m. For example, the 
distance AB in Fig. Ex.10.6a is 1.5 timesthe distance OQ · OQ :::: 80 m· and AB = 120m. Next, place 
point 0', the point where the stress isrequired, over the center oftheinfluence chart (as.shown in 
Fig. Ex.10.6b to a slightly smaller scale). The number of blocks (and partial blocks) are counted under 
the loaded area. In this case, about eight blocks are found. The vertical ~tress at so' m is then'indicated by 
u~' = qal X number ofbl~~ks 
. 
(10.10) 
where q0 = surface or contact stress, arid 
. 
, 
~ 
' 
' 
•• < 
• 
' 
-
I = influence value per block (0.02 in Fig. Ex.J0.6b ). 
Therefore, 
u v = 250 kPa X 0.02 X 8 blocks =:= 40 kPa · 
'To compute the stress at ~ther depths, the. process is repeated by making other drawings for the different 
·.·depths, changing the scale each time to correspond to the distance on the influence chart, Fig. Ex. 10.6b. 
-. 
' 
• 
' 
' 
• 
' 
~' •• ' 
• 
J 
' 
' 
'' 
'. 
· -· The Newmark chart was developed for the case of uniform surface loading ami-any arbitrary 
surface geometry. If you have an arbitrary load intensity as well as an arbitrary surface geometry, you 
can use one of the finite element stress distribution programs (e.g., Christian and Urzua, 1996) or a 
method pwposed by Thompson et al. (1987). 
· 
· 
10.3.3 Westergaard Method 
All of the preceding stress distribution solutions were integrations of the original Boussinesq equa-
, tions for vertical stress i!J. a homogeneous isotwpic linearly elastic half~space. Natural soil deposits do 
not approach these ideal material conditions. In fact, many important sedimentary soil deposits were 
10:3 Stress Distribution 
469 
formed by the aggradation of alternate horizontal layers of silts and clays. These deposits are called 
varved clays (Sees. 3.3.4 and 3.3.5), and the solution for stresses at a point developed by Westergaard 
(1938) may be more applicable. In this theory, an elastic soil is interspersed with infinitely thin but 
perfectly rigid layers that allow only vertical movement but no lateral movement. Westergaard's 
solution for the vertical stress for a point load (for Poisson's ratio v = 0) is 
(10.11) 
where the terms were defined in Fig.10.2 and Eq. (10.3). Poisson's ratio, v, is defined as the the ratio of 
·the horizontal strain, eh, to the vertical strain, ev, or 
~ 
' 
(10.12) 
(10.13) 
·;' 
' 
' 
) 
; 
where Nwis an influ~rice factor combining terins in;Eq, (10.11) and is a function ~f r!z. Values of Nw 
are plotted in Fig.10.3(b). 
· 
, 
·. 
·. 
· 
' 
·. 
. 
.. The Boussinesq and Westergaard theories are compared in Fig. 10.3(b). For r/z less than 1.5, 
Boussinesq indicates values larger than Westergaard. :When rlz ~ 1.5, both theories provide about the 
same results. Which theory should you use? From a philosophical point of view, both theories are based 
. on assumptions which are far from reality. It often boils down to a matter of personal preference, even 
though the assumptions of the Westergaard 'theory probably are closer to reality for a layered soil 
deposit. The 2:1 method, crude as it may be, is probably used about as often in practice as the solutions 
from the theory of elasticity for estimating vertical stresses. 
· 
A graph similar to Fig. 10.4 for influence values for vertical stress under a corner of a uniformly 
loaded rectangular area has been prepared for the Westergaard case (for Poisson's ratio, v .= 0) and is 
shown as Fig. 10.9. You use it as you would use Fig. 10.4. 
Tables 10.1 through 10.3 present the influence. values for vertical stress under the 'center of a 
square load, under the center of an infinitely long strip load, and under the corner of a uniformly loaded 
. rectangular area, respectively. These tables present influence coefficients for both the Boussinesq and 
Westergaard assumptions. You may find these charts usefufin engineering practice. 
It must be pointed out that once you have found the vertical. stresses from the. equations and 
charts provided in this section, they must be added to the existing in situ overburden effective stress, as 
was done in Example 10.1. This procedure is necessary because the elastic solutions consider the half-
space to be weightless, and only the stress due to an external loading is considered. Further, for sites 
where a layered subsoil exists-that is, where there are large variations in the modulus of elasticity-
. other solutions must be used to take into account the relative stiffnesses of the layers. Solutions to these 
kinds of stress distributions may be found in Harr (1966) and Poulos and Davis (1974). These references 
also supply equations and charts for esti~ating the horizontal and shear stresses in elastic media. 
470 
Chapter 10' , .Stress" Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
'(, 
'· f 
.;; ' 
~- ' 
\ 
"- ' ~ 
. \ 
~' ">t 
~ 
: 
~ r 
~ ; : . 
Notes: 
m =Biz, n =·Uz 
m and n are interchangeable 
·uz =· qolu 
Poisson's ratio = 0 
,-. 
·;. ,, 
·>; 
:, ' 
. '' 
,;·\ 
.1.0· 
.--
.i 
:: 
~ l '\ 
0.24 1------:---f------f---i---~--J-----f-f-fl 
. 0.22 1---------+-----1---~ 
.! 
, ' 
._.·· : ; ; .~ ~ ' 
,._. · .i:: 
,,_ 
---n. 
)·. 
' 
' FIGURE 10.9 influence values fo~ ~e-rtical stress undercorners'ofa uniformly l~iid~d rectangular area 
, for the Westergaard't_tieory (after Duncan and Buchignani;1976). 
- . . 
": ;, ''-'- . 
,., 
~-
~ 
_; . •. ,, 
t; 
TABLE 10.1 
Influence Values for Vertical Stress Under." 
the Center of a Square Uniformly Loaded 
Area (Poisson's Ratio, v = · 0.0) ·· 
a/z 
00 
20 
16 
. 12 
10 
8 
6 
5 
:4 
; ·-3.6 
3.2 
2.8 
r2.4 
2.0 .... 
1.8 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
. 0.4 
'o:2 
.0' 
Boussinesq 
1.0000 
0.9992 
0.9984 
0.9968 
0.9944 
0.9892. 
0.9756 
0.9604 
0.9300 
0.9096 
0.8812 ·. 
0.8408 
0.7832 
. 0.7008 
0.6476 
0.5844 
0.5108 
0.4276 .. 
0.3360 
. ' 0.2410 
'0.1494 .. 
0.0716 . 
0.0188 
·o.oooo 
'>-, 
1.0000 
0.9365 
. 0.9199 . 
0.8944 
0.8734 
0.8435 
.. 0.7926 
0.7525 
0.6971 
0.6659 
0.6309 
0.5863 
0.5328 
0.4647 
0.4246 
0.3794 
0.3291 
0.2858 
0.2165 
0.1560 
0.0999 
. ; t 
0.0477 
'.0,0127 
0.0000 .. 
: . . 
· .: 10.3 
Stress Distribution 
471 
TABLE 10.2 .' Influence Values for Vertical Stress Under 
the Center of an Infinitely Long Strip Load 
· 'li!z 
. · ~ Boussinesq 
00 
1.000 
100 
1.000 
10 
.. 0.997. 
9 
0.996 
8 
0.994 
. 7' 
' 0.991 
6.5 
: 0.989 
. 6.0 
' ' 0.986 
5.5 
i ' 0.983 
5.0 
0.977 
'4.5 
0.970 
'4.0 
0.960 
3.5 
' ' . 0.943 
. 3.0 .. 
0.920 
2.5 
' 
0.889 
2.0 
0.817 
1.5 
0.716 
1.2 
0.624 
1j) __ ~~~ -0.550 
., 0.8 
0.462 
: 0:5 ' 
' 0.306 . ' 
0.2 
0.127 
0.1 
0.064 
0. 
0.000 ,, 
AfterDuncan ~ndBuchlgnani (1976).· 
-Westergaard 
1.000 
0.990 
0.910 
0.901 
0.888 
0.874 
0.864 
0.853 
0.835 
0.824 
0.807 
0.784 
0.756 
0.719 
0.672 
0.608 
0.519 
0.448 
~o.-392-
0.328 
0.216 
0.089 
0.045 
.. 0.000 
472 
Chapter;1Q, -'Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
TABLE 10.3 Influence Values for Vertical Stress Under Corner of a Uniformly Loaded Rectangular Area 
,,1,, 
Boussinesq Case 
Liz 
~-
Biz 
0.1 
0.2 
. 0.4 
~ .• 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 ') 
2.0 
00 
0.1 
0.005. 
0.009 
.. 0.017: 
0.022 
0.026 
0.028 ~ 
0.031 
0.032 
0.2 
0.009 
0.018 
0.033 
0.043 
0.050 . 
0.055:<. 
0.061 
0.062 
0.4 
0.017 
0.033 •• , 
,,,0.060 
0.080 
0.093 
0.101 
0.113 
0.115 
0.6 
0.022 
0.043 
0.080' 
0.107 
0.125 
0.136 . 
0.153 
0.156 
0.8 
0.026 
0.050 
0.093' 
0.125 
0.146 
0.160 
0.181 
0.185 
1.0' 
0.028 
0.055 
·o.101 
0.136'. 
~ 0.160 
0.175 
0.200 
0.205 
2.0 
0.031 
0.061 
0.113 
0.153 
0.181 
0.200 
0.232 
0.240 
0.032 
0.062 
0.115 
0.156 
0.185 
0.205 
0.240 
0.250 
Westergaard Case 
Liz 
'Biz 
0.1 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
2.0 
00 
0.1 
0.003 
· .. '0.006 
0.011 
0.014 
0.017 
0.018 
. 
I 
0.021 
0.022 
':"0.2 
0.006 
0.012 
0.021 
0.028 
0.033 
0.036· 
0.041 
0.044 
( :'0.4 
0.011 
0.021 
j 0.039 
0.052 
. ~ 0.060 
0.066 i 
0.077 
. 0.082 
0.6 
0.014 
0.028 
'0.052. 
0.069 
0.081 
0.089' . 
0.104 
. 0.112 
0.8 
0.017 
0.033 
0.060 
0.081 
0.095 
0.105 
0.125 
0.135 
1.0 
0.018 
0.036 
•0.066 
0.089 
0.105 
0.116 
0.140 
. 0.152 
2.0 
0.021 
' 
0.041 
0.077 
0.104 
0.125 
~ 
0.140 
0.174 
.. 0.196 
00 
0.022 
0.044 
0.082 
0.112 
'0.135 
0.152 
0.196 
0.250 
After Duncan and Buchignani (1976). 
" 
':J, 
10.4. , 'JI\I!MEDIATE SETTLEMENT 
.,: :' 
• .When we discussed the components of settlement in Sec.10.2.1, we mentioned that the immediate set-
', tiement S; O~CUrS essentially as the load is applied, primarilY because of distortion (change of shape, not 
· change of volume) in the foundation soils. We mentioned that most of the setth!ment of granular soils 
is immediate because these soils typically have a high perm~ability. On the otlie~ hand, for. foundations 
, Oil. clay soils, the distortion setti~ment' iSilOt elastic; although S; is Often e~timated USing elastic theory. 
Immediate settlements must be considered in the design of shallow foundations, especially f~r ~true~ 
tures that are sensitive to rapid settlements. 
:,' 
Sands 
Soil type 
Settlement· 
Contact 
stresses 
(a) 
Settlement 
\ .:! 
Contact stresses 
(b) 
Clays 
1 
FIGURE 10.10 Distribution of settlement and contact stresses for 
10.4·· •. 1mmediate Settlement 
473 
(a) rigid, and (b) flexible loaded areas on cohesive and granular soils. 
The change in shape of the loaded area depends on whether the foundation is relatively rigid or 
flexible and whether the foundation soil is cohesive or granular. Figure 10.10 shows the possibilities. 
The stress distribution under a rigid footing on cohesive soil is theoretically infinite at the edges and 
much lower in the interior of the footing. Of course, in real soils the contact stress is much less than 
infinity at the edges, and in fact is limited by the shear strength of the soil r1 (Chapters 11, 12, and 13), 
as shown in Fig.lO.lO(a).Naturally, with a rigid footing, the settlement pattern is uniform. On the other 
hand, with a flexible foundation, the contact stress is uniform but the displacement under the footing is 
least at the edges and a maximum at the center of the footing. 
· 
474 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
When it comes to granular soils, the stress distribution under a rigid footing is a maximum at the 
center and much lower at the edges [Fig~ 10.10(a)]. Why is it much lower near the edges of the footing? 
The reason is the lack of confinement at the edges; in fact, the contact stress is zero at the edge (no 
footing, no stress). The resulting settlement pattern is, of course, uniform. However, with a flexible foot-
ing on granular material, the contact stress is uniform, but the settlement pattern is concave upward 
[Fig.10.10(b)] with the maximum settlement at the edges and not in the center as in cohesive soils. The 
reason, of course, is that there is inore confinement in the center of the footing than at the edges. For 
estimating immediate settlements on granular soils, linear elastic theory doesn't work, and we don't 
have any other good theory to use, so we rely on empirical methods using in situ test results to estimate 
settlements (e.g., Holtz, 1991; Terzaghi et al., 1996). 
If you can assume that elastic theory is appropriate for your project, then the basic equation for 
elastic settlement s; due to a uniform applied stress q0 is given by · 
~ qoB 
2 
S; - E(1 - v )I._ 
u 
. 
. 
where B = characteristic dimension of the loaded area (Fig. 10.11), 
v = Poisson's ratio [Eq. (10.12)], 
Eu = undrained Young's modulus (Chapter 13), 
Is = a shape and rigidity factor. 
. 
. 
. 
' 
. 
(10.14) 
The coefficient Is accounts for the shape andrigidity of the loaded area and depe~ds on the loca-
tion of the influence point for which the immediate settlement is desired. Values of Is are given in 
Table 10.4. Two cases are tabulated: (a) infinite depth, and (b) limited depth over a rigid base. Actual 
soil profiles are neither, and you have to choose the case that most closely approximates your situation. 
Soil properties needed are Poisson's ratio v and undrained Young'~ modulus Eu. Poisson's ratio is usu-
ally assumed to be 0.5 for saturated cohesive soil sites, because no volume change (consolidation) 
occurs during immediate settlement.A smaller value, probably 0.25 or 0.33, is appropriate for unsatu-
rated sites. Much more difficult to determine accurately is the undrained Young's modulus. Ideally, you 
could use the initial slope or tangent modulus of the stress-strain curve from triaxial or unconfined 
compression tests on undisturbed soil specimens; Unfortunately, sample disturbance greatly reduces 
the Young's modulus, and therefore the calculated immediate settlement will be way too large. In situ 
tests such as plate load tests may be used to estimate the undrained mod~lus, but most of the time, 
geotechnical engineers use simple correlations with the undrained shear strength,· as described in 
Chapter 13. See Holtz (1991) for additional information about determining immediate settlement and 
its importance in foundation design. 
· i · 
FIGURE 10.11 
Notationfor dirrieri-
sions of loaded areas: {a) profile 
view;· {b) rectangular loaded area 
in plan; and {c) circular loaded area 
in plan {after U.S. Navy, 1986). 
... ·nB . 
. 
. 
H L[· ·•·o·· 
.. 0.~-~!.~~e.eh 
~~ 
· ·· ·• 
.. /po.mt 
. 
R 
Rectangle .. •·.. 
· 
· 
. 
Rigid base 
{a) 
(b) 
· 
C1rcle 
{c) 
TABLE 10.4 Shape and Rigidity Factors, I so for Calc~lating Settlements of Poin'ts on Loaded Areas at the Surfa~e of an 
Elastic Half-Space 
a. Loaded Areas on Surface of Infinite Depth 
Shape and Rigidity 
Center 
Circle (flexible) 
1.0 
Circle (rigid) 
0.79 
Square (flexible) 
1.12 
Square (rigid) 
0.82 
Rectangle (flexible) 
length/width 
2 
1.53 
5 
2.10 
10 
2.56 
Rectangle (rigid) 
length/width 
2 
1.12 
5 
\ 
1.6 
10 
2.0 
Corner 
0.56 
0.82 
0.76 
1.05 
1.28 
1.12 
1.6 
2.0 
Edge/Middle of Long Side 
0.64 
0.79 
0.76 
0.82 
1.12 
1.68 
2.10 
1.12 
1.6 
2.0 
b. Loaded Areas on Surface over a Rigid Base (see figure below) 
HIB 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2.0 
3.0 
5.0 
10 
H/B 
0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
3.0 
5.0 
10 
Center of Rigid Circular 
Area, Diameter = B 
0.00 
0.14 
0.35 
0.48 
0.54 
0.62 
0.69 
0.74 
0.00 
0.20 
0.40 
0.51 
0.57 
0.64 
0.70 
0.74 .. 
After U.S. Navy (1986). 
Corner of Flexible Rectangular Area 
UB= 1 
UB =2 
' uiJ;;,5 
UB = 10 
For Poisson's ratio v = 0.5 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.05 
0.04 
0.04 
0.04 
0.15 
0.12 
0.10 
0.10 
0.23 
0.22 
0.18 
0.18. 
0.29 
0.29 
0.27 
0.26 
0.36 
0.40 
0.39 
0.38 
0.44 
0.52 
0.55 
0.54 
0.48 
0.64 
0.76 
.. 0.77 
For Poisson's ratio v = 0.33 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.09 
0.08. 
0.08~ 
0.08 
0.19. 
0.18. 
0.16 
. 0.18 
0.27 
0.28 
0.25 
0.25 
0.32 
0.34 
0.34 
0.34 
0.38 
0.44 
0.46 
0.45 
0.48 
0.56 
0.60 
0.61 
0.49 
0.66 
0.80 
0.82 
. Q\(\\'2> 
ce 'Q 
. ~,~e('l.. 
o\ '(\ 
i,.\0{\ 
\-oc'Oo 
Average 
0.85 
0.79 
0.95 
0.82 
1.30 
1.82 
2.24 
1.12 
1.6 
2.0 
UB = oo 
0.00 
0.04 
0.10 
0.18 
0.26 
0.37 
0.52 
0.73 
0.00 
0.08 
0.16 
0.25 
0.34 
0.45 
0.61 
0.81 
475 
476 
Chapter 10 · 
Stress Distribution and Settlemert Analysis· 
,·, •' 
Example 10.7 
Given: 
A rectangular footing with a width of 2m and a·length of 3 m carries a column load of 1800 kN 
on a very deep deposit of saturated clay. It is estimated that the undrained Young's modulus of the 
underlying clay is 36 MPa. 
Required: 
·Compute the immediate settlement for the center and the corner of the footing. 
Solution: A column load of 1800 kN on a footi~g of 6 m2 gives a contact stress of 300 kP~. Because the 
foundation clays are saturated, we can assume that the Poisson's ratio is 0.5. Next determine the shape 
and rigidity factor,J.; 
The length to width ratio of the footing = 3/2 = 1.5, or halfway between two given values on 
Table 10.4a, so you need to interpolate. From TableJ0.4a, find Is ;= 0.82 and 1.12 for.L!B = 1 and 2, 
respectively. Or, I. for this case is 0.97. Wehave assumed the footing is rigid, because it is carrying a col-
umn load, and to prevent shear in the reinforced concrete footing, it will have to be reiatively thick. 
Thus the settlements at the center and corner will be the same. 
Using Eq. (10.14); we compute 
_.qoB 
· 
2 
Sj.- T(1 -: V )Is 
' 
u 
300 kPa(2 m) • 
. ·. 
'' '· 
. =. 
36 MPa , (1 - 0.25)(0.97) 
= 0.012 m or 12 mm 
If the footing were flexible, then' from Tabl~ 10.4, the two Is values for LIB = 1 and 2 are 1.12 
and 1.53; respectively. So for L/ B == '1.5, Is = 1.33, and the center Sj would be 16.6 or 17 mm. The car-
rier settlements should be about half of this value, and it is; Is = 0.66, so si = 8 mm; 
· ' 
. 
If this footing were on a soil layer with limited depth, then Table 10.4b. would be .used for a 
given H/B ratio. Remember that Table 10.4b gives only the settlement under the corner: If you 
wanted the settlement under the center, you would have to solve for the settlement under the corner 
of four'quarter footings or quadrants, arid then multiply the result by 4. Superposition holds! 
·The above procedure is for a loaded area on the surface of an elastic foundation: What if the 
foundation is buried-for example, to get to firmer soils, or to avoid frost action or swelling clays? In 
fact, footings for buildings are almost never located directly on the ground surface, but other structures 
such as tanks and embankments often are. For loaded areas founded at depth, the chart developed by 
Janbu et a!. (1956), modified by Christian and Ca'rrier (1978) using finite element calculations, as well 
as the work of other researchers, is often found in foundation engineering textbooks-for example, 
Coduto (2001) and U.S. Army Corps ofEngineers (1994). This chart is shown in Fig. 10.12. The settle-
ment equation is basically Eq. (10.14) for a saturated clay (Poisson's ratio = 0.5) with coefficients 11-o 
for depth of the excavation, and ILl for the distance below the footing to the rigid base. 
· Mayne and Poulos (1999) provide a comprehensive discussion of estimating the elastic settlement 
of footings and mat foundations that includes consideration of the flexibility, shape, and depth of the 
foundation, layer thickness, whether the soil profile is homogeneous or the modulus is increasing with 
depth ("Gibson modulus profile"), etc. See also their cl?sme to the discussion by Fowler eta!. (2001). 
10.5 
10.5 Vertical Effective Overburden and Preconsolidation Stress Profiles 
477 
L = length v = 0.5 
"flillill . 
~ 
!Lo 0.9 
HIB' 
FIGURE 10.12 Chart for estimat-
ing the elastic settlement under 
a loaded area in saturated clay 
(Carrier and Christian, 1978). 
VERTICAL EFFECTIVE OVERBURDEN AND PRECONSOLIDATION STRESS PROFILES 
' 
. 
: 
Go back and review Sec. 6.10 on vertical stress profiles. There we illustrated how to calculate the vertical 
effective overburden stres~ with depth for va~ious soil profiles and different depths of the groundwater 
table. We mentioned that in foundation engineering, plots of the total stress, pore pressure, and effective 
stress with depth at a' site are often needed for an~evaliuition of the settlement of shallow foundations. 
In this sdction we review four typical soil profiles that illu~tnite different field conditions fre-
quently encountered iri practice. You may want to also'take a quick look at se'c. 8.11 for some soil profiles 
for natural soil deposits. We mentioned in Sec. 10.2.2 that this information is ordinarily obtained from a 
site investigation, soil ~amp ling, and laboratory testing program. From consolidation tests the preconsoli-
dation pressure is determined and plotted at the depth corresponding to the depth of the samples on the 
same 'diagram as the .vertical effective overburden stress versus depth. Notethat.the preconsolidation 
pressure is always plotted from the zero stress line, riot the vertical overburden stress line. On the other 
hand, the Au determined from the stress distribution under thefo'undation (Sec>10.3) is always added 
directly to the veitiCaleffective overburden stress at any given depth (muy importante).'.:: . 
' 
In Fig. 10.13 we show four possible cases of a simple soil profile with the compressible stratum 
·arid the groundwater table starting at the ground 'surface. Plotted on each' graph are the vertical effec-
, itive overburden stress u~;,, th~ preconsolidation pressure a~, and thechangeinstress Aa due to the 
' foundation load. For each case we show how t? calculate the settlement for that layer using Eq. (8.18a). 
Case 1: Norm~lly Consolidated Soil, One-Dimensional L~ading Figure 10.13(a) shows a typical 
diagram of stress versus depth. Notice that the soil is normally consolidated, because from consolidation 
' ' tests performed on several specimens, thepreconsolidation pressure a], is found to be equal to the exist-
. ing vertical overburden pressure a~0• In Fig.10.13(a), both the a~0 and a], profiles are identical. The line 
·labeled a~0 + 'A.a is parallel to the a~0 and a], line because the Aa is one-dimensional (e.g., when the 
·external stress is applied over a large area):Because the soil is normally consolidated; we don't use the 
478 
Chapter 10; . Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis ... 
· .. 1'' 
, .. 
. ;'" 
',; 
., 
·' 
T 
"~ 
.!ll 
Q) 
:0 
N 
"iii 
.s= 
Cll 
~ 15.. 
a. 
Q) 
.E 
Cl 
0 
(.) 1 
.<:£, 
a. 
Q), 
Cl 
J 
: ~ ' •• , 
,._,, :, 
. (c),:./·· 
Cii 
-~ 
: Q)' 
:0 
"iii 
Cfl.· 
' 
Q)' 
0.. 
E 
0 
(.) 1 
(b) 
~ i ,. - ' . 
.• 
' 
-
' 
• 
• 
j 
,·! .. ·-
.·,: 
' 
CTv 
,,•· 
l ';' 
FIGURE 10.13 . Four profiles of u~0 , l:lu, and u;, with depth: (a) Case 1, normally consolidated, 
."one-dimensionalloading; (b) Case 2, normally consolidated, threecdimensionalloading; ;. 
, (c) Case 3, lightly overconsolidated, three-dimensional loading; and (d) Case 4, heavily · 
o~er~onsoqdated, thr~e-dir:nension~l _loadi':J9· No_te: Not drawn to th17 ~a me scale .. 
',,,_' 
l 
.-., 
:left side of Eq. (S.l8a)·; .we just ~se the right. hand te~m,which i~ the sam~ as Eq. (S.ll). If there ar~ 
. several strata with different compressibilities, then we use Eq. (8.14). Sometimes, if the compressible 
. stratum is very thick, engineers divide it into a numberof sub layers. Six .to 10 layers should be suffi-
cient Then we find the average stress within each sub layer to use in the settlement equation, whieh is 
a combination of Eqs. (8.11) and (8.14). For Case 1, the equation looks like.this: 
' 
' 
' 
\ 
• 
' • 
' 
• • 
' 
• 
'• "' <' 
r 
•, 
" 
~ 
• 
• 
> 
.' • 
., : • 
~-
"' • 
• 
<. 
' • • • 
.;_; 
S,-
Cc· 
n : 
, . 
cc:-•~~H-1 a; +lla· 
. e
0 i=l. 
1 og . . 
1 
a: 
j·l _, 
l 
(10.15) 
. 
. 
. 
~ 
. ·.As you can see, there are three constants plus the log term. The center of the ith layer in Fig.10.13(a) is 
· shown as line A. If allthe stresses are accurately plotted, then scaling off the distance 1-3 and dividing 
10.6 
,;;. 
10.6 ·Settlement Analysis Examples 
479 
··~it by the scaled distance 1-2 gives the ratio ofthe log term. Multiply this out and you have the settlement 
· ·. ·of the ith layer! Sum them all up and you have the settlement for the entire compressible stratum. 
' 
. 
'.. 
' 
' 
',' 
Case 2: Normally Consolidated Soil, Three-Dimensional Loading This case illustrates three-dimensional 
·-- loading, or; as shown in Fig.10.13(b ); Ll£T decreases with depth: The resulting equation for the consoli- · 
dation settlement is id~ntical to <:;ase L Similar to Ca~e 1, line B is the center of the ith layer. 
Case 3: A Lightly Overconsolidated ·Soil, Three-Dimensional• Loading In this case, the £T~0 curve is 
:;::·somewhat parallel to the preconsolidation pressure £Tp curve as shown in Fig.10.13(c). In some parts of. 
· 
the profile, the £T~0 +. Ll£T is both greater and less than the preconsolidation pressure; this is called 
, compound compressibility. Now you use both parts ofEq. (8.18a) or (8.18b): Let's consider the middle 
of a layer as the line. C. Here £T~0' + Ll£T. > · £T~, so the corresponding equation would look like a combi-
nation of Eqs. (8.18) and (8.14). 
. . , H; . [ 
£T3 
~. · • 
· 
a-4]· 
... -1--
C,~ log.--.:+ Cc2} log~ . 
+ eo 
. 
£Tz . -
. 
(T~ 
.. 
We left out the bunch of constants, but from' points 2-3 the soil is· preconsolidated, so we use C, [see 
Fig. 8.12(a)]; from points3-4 the soil is normally consolidated; and we use Cc [see' Fig: 8.12(b)]. For the 
lineD in Fig.10.13(c), we see that £T~o + Ll£T is within the overconsolidation zone: As a result, only C, is 
used; the equation is 
· 
·· ·· 
. ··H; [ 
£T3]' 
... -1.-.-
c,~ log-
.. 
+ eo . . 
.£Tz 
' 
Case 4: Heavily Overconsolidated Soil, Three~Dimensional Loading . In .Case 4, the soils are so heav~ 
ily overconsolidated'that ~verburden stress (T~o plus the applied stress Ll£T is always less than the pre-
consolidation stress £T~. This is shown in Fig~ 10.13(d). In this case we use only the left term of the 
consolidation equation, Eq. (8.18a), and use C, only, and we don't need the term with Cc. This the 
equation would look like 
· · · 
· 
sc· = ·.-
1
····H; 
[c,~ log(~3).] . 
+eo 
. 
. ·. 
£Tz ' 
1\,, 
.·_ ... ,' 
. ' 
'· ... .:' 
· •• 1' 
·~ 
~· 
... ~ 
SETTLEMENT ANALYSIS EXAMPLES 
· · · .. 
During the site investigation;th~ geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist logging the borehole 
will already be thinking about what type of foundation will be most suitable for the structure and soil 
conditions. He. or she should ·~l~ays b~ thinking of what soil parameters will. be needed for futurt: 
analysis foi this projecCif, for example,coinpn~ssiblesoils ani discovered under the site, the engineer 
or geologist should be asking, "Where should I ,be taking undisturbed samples f()r co~solidation tests?". 
By the time the site investigation is ~completed arid samples are in the laboratory, he or she should. 
ha~e a good idea of the preiiminary foundation design and what laboratory or perhaps additional field. 
testing will be necessary to obtain the appropriate soil para~eters for settlement analyses. So when we 
give all those soil properties in an example problem, you now have an idea of how those properties 
were obtained and what went into the project'up to that point. 
· : ··· .. · · . · t ;. 
• 
480 
Chapter .1 0 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
. ; The following four example problems are.quite comprehensive, and they are typical: of settle-
ment analyses geotechnical engineers must do as an important part of any shallow foundation project. 
These examples also provide a number of implications and practical lessons for geotechnical engineers. 
··'· 
i : -~ 
[· ! ' : 
Given: 
; 
.. 
• · ·.; 
. A brown siltysa~d fillS m thick was placed over a 15m thick layer of compressible gray silty clay. 
; < . Underlying.the clay-layeris-brown sandy gravel; The soiL profile is shown in Fig. Ex. 10.8a. Assume 
· . for this problem that the settlement of the fill and the sandy gravel is small compared to the settlement 
' : of the silty clay layer. Properties of the normally consolidated silty clay layer are: 
, . • 
. !,'' 
Initial void ratio, e0 = l.l. 
Compression index, Cc = 0.36. 
Secondary compressi6~ index, C;, = 0.06. · · 
Saturated density, Psat = 1.52 Mg/m3• 
',: 
•. ; .:t 
Coefficientof consolidation, cv ':"' 0.86 m2/yr., 
., . , , , 
· ·. 1 
The density of the silty sand fill ; is Z.O Mg/m3, and the grou~d~at~r table is at the .interface of 
thefillandclay,orat-:-5m., 
, 
. 
~ ... ' 
'':!; 
:. j 
1; 
't:f.,, 
:, 
J 
·,,; 
·Soil 
profile 
'~r~S~:~i-11~ .•. 
::: sand (SM) ·:,',· 
.: (fill) 
.:' .•':: 
, ..... ..:• .... :.,-:·: .. ·.>::sz., 
~~ 
·~· -101 
\;: 
a--\ 
~~:~~~'E . 
~34 
~ 
~(CL) ~ 
";; 
~~!-15 
a~0 + lla 
; ~. ' 
• 
• 
~.:..:....:--vu ~~==~ 
~ · 2oL..;.~~~~~"""T '':1 
'· .. .;00 ;o••·o0
°~o 
•. -:-
, ·' ·(Brown ~rl~· <:>~:·:· 
· .· • ' sandy '·' :0,;, . , 
. . . , . 
, " .. 
~'?~~puied ·. 
gravel ' 'v. . . 
, 
', 
. , J ' i ·' 
. 
. 
)gz 
'GP) '>oo., 
. I ·· ... ;, 
. , ' +(Pat-:-Pw 
.• .. : 
.. 
FIGURE Ex. 10.8a Soil 
profile and effective stress 
versus depth. 
'· ~"""~~'' o· -25 (u;. + Au),, m :·" •+ 
11
_;
2 
_· 
1
.0)9.81 kPa X 15 m 
0
- Y' ~d <::> 0 
n 
, , " 
, 
" 
.-:- 98 , 
, 
=,98+7_7. 
= 175 kPa 
. ' ' · 
:. : · 10.6 Settlement Analysis Examples 
481 
Required: 
Part I. Compute the consolidation settlement of the silty clay layer due to the weight of the 5 m 
· 
of new fill. 
· 
' ' 
Part II. Compute the time rate of settlement. 
Part III. Compute and plot u'(z) when U = 50%. 
Part IV. Compute the secondary settlement. 
Solution: Part 1: The procedure for this pait is to (1) compute the initial ~ff~ctive overburden pressures 
of soil layers, (2) compute the increase in vertical stress due to' ~xter~alload, (3) compute the final 
effective vertical stress, and (4) compute settlement 
·' (1) Initial effective stress: u~0 = p' gz; prior to fill placement 
U~0 (0m) = 0 
u~0 (at -15m) = (1.52 - 1.0) Mg/m3 .x 9.81 ~/s
2 X 15m = 77 kPa 
(2) Increase in u due to fill = pghtm 
. 
. 
~utili = 2.0 Mg/m3 X 9.81 rn!s2 X 5 m = 98 kPa 
(3) Final effective stress = initial effective stress + ~Utm• 
u~(t~p of silty clay)·= 0 + ~u '== 98 kPa 
u~(bottom of silty clay) = 77 + 98 = 175 kPa 
The above stresses are plotted in Fig. Ex.l0.8a. Curve A represents the initial v~rtical effective 
overburden stresses u~0 prior to the placement of the 5 m of silty sand fill. Curve B represents the final 
vertical effective overburden stress due to the fill after complete consolidation of the silty clay layer 
has taken place. Curve B equalsu~~ + ~u, where ~uis the increase in pressure due to the fill. We 
. assume that ~~ • = ~u (one-dimensional compression) and that the load is placed all at once. (Actually 
5 m of fill may take days to weeks to place and compact, but, for purposes of our example, let us assume 
it was placed instantaneously in one load increment.) .· . 
(4) Recall that the silty clay is normally consolidated. Thus the consolidation settlement of the 
layer is given by Eq. (8.11) 
· 
(8.11) 
For the mid depth of the layer, u~0 = 38 kPa and u~0 + ~u 
v = 136 kPa. 
Thus 
.. 
·. 
. 
15 m ' 
136 , 
, 
. . 
sc = 0.36 1 + l.llog38 = 1.42 m · · 
Since the silty Clay layer is 15m thick, it is prudent to'divide'the total thickness into thinner layers 
to improve the accuracy of results. A 1.5 m thick layer is chosen. The settlement of each of these layers is 
summed up to obtain the total consolidation settlement of the silty clay hiyer. To assist in the computa-
tions, Table Ex. 10.8a is employed, and the corresponding pressures u~0 and u~0 + Liu are indicated at 
the mid depth of each layer. For example,the average depth of the sixth layer is ~ 13.25 m; u~0 = 42 kPa 
while u~0 + ~u : 140 kPa; These values are simply scaled off from Fig. Ei.10.8a. Inserting the approc 
priate values into Eq.(8.11), we.obtain_ 
' 
. . 
. 
, 
' 
, 
;,; 
·. 
· . 1.5 m 
140 
Sc (12.5 - 14m) = 0.36 1 + 1.1 log42 = 0.134 m 
482 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
TABLE Ex. 10.8a Settlement Computations 
(1) 
Depth 
Below 
Ground 
Surface 
(m) 
5 
6.5 
8 
9.5 
11 
12.5 
14 
15.5 
17 
18.5 
20 
(2) 
Average 
Depth 
Below 
Ground 
Surface 
(m) 
5.75 
7.25 
8.75 
10.25 
11.75 
13.25 
14.75 
16.25 
17.75 
19.25 
(3) 
Soil 
Type 
(CL) 
(4) 
(5) 
O"~o 
D.u 
(kPa)' (kPa) 
4 
98 
12 
19 
27 
34 
42 
so 
57 
65 
73 
(6) 
<\1 
O"~o + D.u 
a~o 
101.9 
3.8 
109.6 
11.5 
117.2 
19.1 
124.9 
26.8 
132.5 
34.4 
140.2 
42.1 
147.8 
49.7 
155.5 
57.4 
163:1 
65.0. 
170.8 
72.7 
(7) 
Log' 
Col. 
(6) '· 
1.43 
0.979 
0.788 
0.668 
0.586 
0.522. 
0.473 
0.433 
0.400 
0.371 
(8) 
Cc 
0.36 
(9) 
Cc 
1 +eo 
0.36 
1 + 1.1 
(10) 
Thickness 
of Depth 
Increment 
(m) 
1.5 
(11) 
Settlement 
(m) 
0.367 
0.252 
0.203 
0.172 
0.151 
0.134 
<-6th 
0.122 
0.111 
0.103 
0.095 
Sc = ~ D.H = 1.71 m 
. €v = 11% 
The computations for each layer are listed in Table Ex.10.8a. The total consolidation settlement 
of the 15 m thick layer is 1. 71 m, or about 11% strain. This value of sc is about 20% larger than the set-
tlement calculated above for a single 15 m thick layer. All things considered, it probably is a more 
accurate prediction. Although the answer is given to two decimal places, there is seldom justification 
for such precision in settlement computations. An estimate of"approximately 1.7 m" would usually be 
accurate enough. Research (for example, Holtz and Broms, 1972; Leonards, 1977) has shown that con-
solidation settlements can be predicted within about ±20%. 
Note that a settlement of 1.7 m means that 1.7 m ~f the fill would settle below the groundwater 
table, which is at the original ground surface; and a decrease in the density of the fill due to buoyancy 
would result. Thus the actual settlement would be somewhat less than 1.7 m. This condition has been 
ignored in this example. Otherwise the solution is one of trial m1d error. 
In Part II of this example you are asked to compute the time rate of settlement. We can construct 
Table Ex.10.11b incorporating U avg• T, sc,and t by using Eqs. (9.5) and (9,12) and Table 9.1. We usually 
10.6 . Settlement Analysis Examples 
483 
assumeH remains constant at 15m (see Sec. 9.3 and Appendix B.2). Since the clay layer hasdouble 
drainage, the value of H dr in Eq. (9.5) is 15 m/2, or 7.5 m. The value of cv is given as 0.86 m2/yr. 
Values ofT for given values of U avgfrom Table 9:1 are substituted into this equation and solved 
fort, Column (4) in Table Ex.10.8b. The settlement in Column (3) is obtained from Eq. (9.12) by multi-
plying the total consolidation settlement for this example, 1.71 m, by Column (1). The data in Columns (3) 
and (4) are plotted [similar to Fig. 9.5(a)] in Fig. Ex.10.8b. 
In engineering practice, because of the great dependence that the rate of settlement has on the 
drainage path, only estimates of the time rate of settlement can be made. If there were continuous lay-
ers of permeable soil-for example, thin sand seams-interbedded in the 15m clay layer, then the rate 
of settlement would be significantly greater (see, for instance, Example 9.6). Another factor is our 
inability to accurately predict the coefficient of consolidation cv. If possible, estimates should be field 
. checked, especially for. important jobs. 
· 
In Part III of this example you are asked to determine the effective str~ss; with depth when 
, Uavg= 50%. The computations start with the evaluation of Uz from Fig. 9.3 and the construction of 
Table Ex. 10.8c. 
The depths in Column (1) of Table Ex.10.8c represent evenly spaced elevations within the 15m 
thick clay layer. Column (2) is the ratio of the depth to layer thickness. The time factor for U avg of 50% 
is found from Table9.1 to be 0.197 (use 0.2 for convenience). Using Fig. 9.3 along the time factor curve . 
forT = 0.2 and the 'various ratios ofz/H in Column (2) of Table Ex.10.8c, find the values of the degree. 
of consolidation Uzat these ratios. For example, at z/H = 0 (and 2.0), the value of Uzis 1.0, or 100% 
consolidation at the top and bottom of the clay layer. At a ratio of 0.25 z/H (and 1.75 z/H)the degree 
of consolidation is 70%, etc. These values are placed in Column (3). The effective st~ess is found by 
multiplying Uz in Column (3) by ,lu, the weight of added fill, or 98 kPa. A plot of the isochrone for 
Uavg = 50% is shown in Fig. Ex. 10.8c. You should compare. this figure with Fig. Ex. 10.8a. From 
Table Ex. 10.8b, you can see that it takes about 13 yr to develop this isochrone. The isochrone repre-
sents the dividing line between the portion of ,lu that has gone into effective stress and the amount of 
pore pressure in the clay layer that remains to be dissipated. If the clay layer were sampled and a con-
solidation test were performed at a depth of -12.5 m (the middle of the clay layer); the value of the 
preconsolidation pressure, u~, would be 61 kPa ( u~0 + ,lu, 38 + 23 kPa). This value is obtained from 
Fig. Ex. 10.8c. 
There are practical implications to be derived from Part IlL If a foundation engineer wanted to 
reduce the consolidation settlement of a structure, the site could be preloaded with a surcharge fill, 
TABLE Ex. 10.8b Time Rate of Settlement 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
U.vg 
T 
s; (m) 
t (yr) 
0.5 
0.1 
0.008 
0.17 
0.52 
_g __ 
0.2 
. 0.031 
0.34 . 
2.03 
~ 1.0 
0.3 
0.071 
0.51 
4.65 
E 
0.4 
0.126 
0.68 
8.26 
Q) 
0.5 
0.197 
0.86 
12.92 
~ 
0.6 
0.287 
1.03 
18.82 
: (/) 1.5 
0.7 
0.403 
1.20 
26.42 
0.8 
0.567 
1.37 
37.17 
0.9·· 
0.848 
1.54 
55.59 
2.0 
0.95 
1.163 
1.62 
76.25 
1.00 
00 
1.71 
00 
FIGURE Ex. 10.8b Data from Table Ex. 10.8b. 
484 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
Soil 
profile 
;~~'~i;;, 
-
~ •• 
(~~r~ 
~ 
• · ... o' o., ·.c,' 
)~n·
0 ,1J:-.On-'i¥o
0
• 
bo~ Sandy~;; 
; ~· gravel o
0
'. 
) '(GP) ·'" 
;~0'.~"~:~,~~··1· 
At t ,;. 12.92 'yr, Uavg ;, 50% lsochr~ne rep~~sents amount of !:iu 
converted into !:iu' and shows re~aining !:iu to be dissipated. 
FIGURE Ex. 10.8c Data from Fig. Ex. 10.8a and Table Ex. 10.8c. 
'1; 
TABLE Ex. 1 O.Sc Isochrone D?ta for U.vg = 50% 
(1) 
(2).:. 
. (3) 
(4) 
Depth (m) 
'z/H 
liz 
!:iu~ (kPa) 
-5 
0 
1.00 
98 
-6.88 
0.25, 
0.70,' 
69 
-8.75 
0.5. 
0.455 
45 
-10.63 
. . 0.75 
0.285 
28 
.:_12.5 
1.0 
0.23 
23 
; -14.38 
1.25 
0.285 
28 
-16.25 
1.5 
0.455 
45 
-18.13 
1.75 
0.70' 
69 
-20 
2.0 
1.00 
98 
which is later removed. The time the preload should be applied may be calCulated as in this example. If 
·the stress distribution ofthe new structure is about the same as or less than the 50% isochrone shown 
in Fig. Ex. 10.8c, then the consolidation settlement would be calculated by using the recompression 
index C,, and the settlements would be substantially less (Sec. 8.7.2). 
Part IV, the final part; illustrates the computation for time rate of secondary compression. First 
plot the consolidation settlement data in Table Ex. 10.8a; Sc versus log time, shown in Fig. Ex. 10.8d. 
FIGURE Ex. 10.8d Data 
. from Table Ex. 10.8b. 
Or--r-r~Tn~--r-rT7T~---,-r~Tn~--r-rTTT~ 
Scat u100 = 1.71 m-+-
=:--.ec, 
I 
2·'b.1 
1 
10 
100 200 
1000 
Time (yr) 
. 10.6 . Settlement Analysis Examples 
485 
Note that this is a theoretical settlement-log time relationship, Solving for the secondary settlement 
Eq. (9.28) for onelog cycle,-we obtairi 
' 
: 
~ : 
. 
~ 
' 
Ca 
. . 
.· 
i Sc~- 1 +eo (H 0 )(illogt) 
:~ 0.06 (is m)(l) 
1 + 1.1 ... 
,, "' : • ' 
',.·· 
·= 0.43 hvlog cycle of time 
• ; 
•. -1 
. 
-
This slope is shown in Fig. Ex.; 10.8d. This same rate of secondary compression starts at point a on the 
theoretical settlement-time ·curve. Point a corresponds to th~ settlement at 100% primary consolida-
' tion (sc = 1.71 m). Note that the primary consolidationcmve has been extrapolated slightly to point a. 
Thus, from Fig. Ex. 10.8d, the total settlement at the end of, say, 200 years is expected to be about 1.8 m. 
To be more precise than this in predicting settlements is beyond our ability to accurately evaluate soil 
properties and field drainage conditions. 
> 
• • 
• -
' 
• 
' f 
: 1 
' ' ; 
. ; : "' ' :. 
- i . 
. . 
\ . ' ~ ' 
. 
~ 
• ' 
. . 
' 
. 
. 
' .· The preceding example illustrates som'e 'of thecomputational details of a time rate of settlement 
' ' imalysis' for the' simple case of one~dimerisional loading and for' a. ri.~i:maily consolidated 'clay. If the 
loaded area were of limited extent, then you would have to take into' account the''stress distribution 
with depth at key points under the' loaded area. You would use the i:echniques'discussed in Sec.10.3 to 
establish curve B (ila) in a diagram; similar to 'Fig. Ex.10.8a. You' might' even have to do this for sev-
·. eral sections under the foundation -;-·JD'r exanipie, in the center, at the edge, and under theco~ner of the 
' loaded area> ' 
' ' 
: ' . 
. . ' . ' . 
. 
. . ' 
' . 
.. · · · 
'BecauSe the cla'y in E~ample :10.8 :~as_ noriliauy co'ils~iidate.d, c~ffipiitation Of the ConSolidation 
settlement (Part I) was relatively straightforward:' if the claY had been oveiconsolidated-that is, if 
. a~~< cJ-J,__:.then you would use Eq~(8.16) or (8:17) and theconcepts discussed in Sec: 10.5.'' 
.. Sometimes the upper part of the layer is overconsoiidated. and the lower part nonnally consoli-
.. dated; and you hilVe to. take this into account in your computations. Another frequent complication is 
that the soil and consolidation properties (Ceo e0 ) vary throughout the soil profile. In that case, when 
· ·· you break up the profile into smaller layers, as we do in the next example, the layers may not necessar-
ily be evenly spaced. In this situation, tables, such as in Table Ex. 10.8a, are very helpful for making the 
actual computations. 
··· ·· 
... · 
· 
· -
--
· ··· 
····· · ··· 
· 
' 
Procedures for handling compiex settlement problems in engineering practice' are treated' in 
depth in foundation engineering textbooks; When soil permeability and therefore cJ varies within the 
compressible iayer, or w~en bound;uy layers impededrainage, th~ probleiil_of tillle rate of _consolida-
tion becomes very complex, and numerical techniques such as found in Scott (1963) and Harr (1966) 
are called for. Often these involve finite difference type solutions (Sec. 9.3.2). 
Example _10.9 
; 
~ ' 
Given: •·.·· 
Soil profile, soil properties, and a~0 (Z), a~(z), and a~0 + ila(z), as shown in Fig. Ex. 10.9. The 
foundation rests at an elevation of-2m. 
···; 
Required:_,. 
• Compute the settlement. 
486 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
1, 
T 
,1' 
·Soil profile 
= 2.2 Mg/m3" 
···:.:·;·.-~·-·:·.-~:j·:~-.-.-.-,--.-~·::·. 
.W,d/~//////7/% 
; ~Very hard clay~ 
FIGURE Ex .. 10.9, .• 
.~ ~/////////////////J 
-! ~ 
Solution: Figure Ex. 10.9 shows that the soil is overconsolidated and that down to a depth of 10m, the 
addition of Aa leads ,to a final vertical effective stress that exceeds the preconsolidation pressure . 
. Further, the ground":ater table is at th~ topo~ the cmnpres'sible layer and the external loading is shown 
.astheresultingAa(z)ciirve. 
··.. 
· 
.•. · .. · .·, .'' . '. · , 
· ~. 
. . . 
o' 
.. 
' . : Break the compres.siblel<iyer up into seven' layers; the top layer has a thickness of .1 in and the 
res't of the layers are 2m thiCk. Prepare a tabldo facilitate computations. For each layer, record the 
stresses 'at the mid depthofea~hiayer to iepreserii' the' "average'' conditio~s. (This problem is simi-
lar to the compound ~oinpressibility Case 3 in Sec. 'io.5.) We have filled in the .top l)ortion of 
Table Ex. 10.9 with the layers above a depth of 10m as they all have terms using Cc. At the average 
depth of 2.5 m for tlie first layer, 'dete.rmine 'from. the graph' a~0 ( = 48 kPa ), a~0 + A a v( = 217 kPa) 
and a~(= 117 kPa). These numbers are us~din Colu!ilns (6) [C, log( a~/a~0)] ;:tnd (7) to determine 
the recompression and virgin compression portions of the change in void ratio, respectively,which 
are then summed and divided by (1 + e0 ) in Column (8) to get the vertical strain .. This is ~ultiplied 
TABLE Ex. 10.9. i , 
(1) 
. (2) ·;,' 
'<.; (6),. :,·.::.' ,., ... ' 
(9) 
(10) 
C, log( u~!CT~0) .. , 
'' ,-
.Vertical 
H; 
!:..H; 
:. ?r C, ~og(u~rlu~0) ,.c;'c l?g(u~rlu~) l strain, Bv 
.(m) 
(m) 
1 ''0.0155 
·o.2i5 ;,_, · 
0.115' 
·.··1 
0.115 
3 
4 
.... -. 63 
129. 
. 200 
' . ' 0.0125 
"""'' 
... 0.152 ' 
0.0824 
2 
0.165 
5 
·. 
;~ '. 
6 
82 
146 
185 
0.0100 
0.0823 
''0.046 
2 
0.0923 
7 
8 
102 
160 
177 
0.0078 
0.0351 
0.021 :. : 
2 
. 0.043 
9, 
175 .• .• ' 
'0.003 
'.'.: 
10 
'122 
.175;;·, 
:: J' 
~ ) 
I 
'0.0063' 
-
2 
0.006 
11 
,,.,_ 
·;:} <. i '' 
I 
r'" 
' ., 
12 
141 
192 
175 
o:oo38 
-
0.0019 . 
2 
0.004 
13 
' 
14 
161 
208 
181 
0.002 
-
0.001 
2 
0.002 
15 
Total settlement (m) 
0.427 
i10;G.'.seftleriient Analysis Examples 
487 . 
by the layer thickness in Column· (9) to obtain that layer's contribution to the total settlement in 
. Colmnn.(9). This is essentially alayer-byclayer,use of Eq. (8.i8a) .. · . , · .·, , .. 
'. 
·· 
... ' ''Forthe layers below a depth of 10 in in this problem, the influence of the foundation stress is so 
' . small that' the final ~ffecti~e stres's, a~~ + .. ~a~. does not reach the preconsolidation pressure, so that all 
.. : settlem'eni is ·frb"m recompressionstnii~s o~ly: In.this ca·s.e; rather. than,l!sing.the ratio C, log( af,/a~0 ), 
. '. . . we use' c, log( c'r~1!d~a) to com put~ th~ d1aHge in yoid, ~aiio~.arid ihatis t}le ~ni.ly contribution to settle-
ment. When all layer contributions to settlement are surrimed, we obtain the total settlement of 0.43 m. 
' ' ,• . ''. ' .. '"·' ·'"' 
. . ' 
' ..... ' ·. 
. 
. 
~" . 
. . 
. 
. _. . 
. 
'. 
. ... 
. ' 
·~ '" . '':.' 
'. . 
,·:,: 
.; ; '' i ·:: 
1 
'·•, 
·• L 
-:: '", i~~.:· 
· ', '. 
; : , : 1, Here is a yery important ~tat~ment of philosophy: When settlement is reported to a client in a report, 
you should say "the • s_ettlement is .estimated to.be about 0.5 m.'~ To report ,the settlement as "0.490 m" 
implies that geotechnical engineers can predict settlement with that amount of precision. In fact, we can 
predict with an accuracy of only about ±20 p~rcent To be overly precise will only get you into trouble. 
Example 10.10 
Given:·.:. 
~ ' c ·, 
'' 
. , 
~ e.A circular,water tank, 8m high and 27;m)n diameter, (q0 =:;80 kPa) is supported on a flexible 
matfoundation on a sandlayer9 mthick that oyerliesa30m thick layer of San Francisco Bay mud. 
Belo\V. the clay is another layer of granular material (assumed incompressible). Consolidation test data 
is shown in.Fig. 8.5. The groundwater,tableis2 mbelow the ground surface. Forsimplicity, we assume 
that the tank is on the ground surface, but ordinarily thebottomof the foundation is placed below the 
•, , , ·'frost penetration depth. The a~erage soil parameters and profile a_re shown in Fig. Ex. 10.10a. 
;Re~~ired: 
>' '.: 
. •·;) 
a; Compute tile ~hange in stress with depth du~ to the foundation load at the center and edge · 
of the tank. 
' 
' ' ' 
' ' ' 
'' ' . 
b. 'Compute the settleriientof'the ta~k·a·t the center a·~d at the ~dge.' 
30m 
'Ysat = 14.4 kN/m3 
Cc = 0.99 
e0 = 2.6 
. OCR= 1.0 
FIGURE Ex .. 10.10a' ~oll ~·r;;ile 
·and tank dimensions. · 
488 . Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
:. 
·• Solution: 
1l 
a. We solve this part by: first computing. the existin'g ve'~ti6al effective overburden' stress with 
· 
i depth. Next, we compute the change in stress I::. a (z) due to the tank loading. [Wewill assume 
. that the compressible layer is infinite iri depth and co~pute A'a .· Actualiy, the' existence of a 
. relatively rigid layer (compared to the clay) below the compressible layer will change the true 
·. '. stress distribution: We will!~ive' that solution as· well, later.]' · 
.·. 
' ' 
·.· 
'' 
As explained in Example 10:8,. the accuracy of the settlement' calc~lations can be 
improved .by breaking the 3o m thick cl~y layer. into subl~yers. In this c~se: ~e ~el~ct 10 sub-
layers of 3 m each. Then find the stress in the middle of each sublayer for both overburden 
stress and t:.u. For example; the average stress· (a~0 ) at the center ofsubiayer 7 at 19.5 m 
~ · 
~ · 
below the top of the clay layer (or 28.5 m below the ground surface) is 
· 
avo= (pgz)~ .+ (p'gz)~' +(//gzh 
,.. 
. 
kN 
~)8.2 m3 • 2 J!l+ (19.2- 9:8) • 7+ (14.4.:- 9:8): 19.5 
= 36 kPa + 66 + 90 = 192 kPa 
The rest are shown on Fig. Ex. 10.1Gb, where we have plotted a~0 versus depth. 
The value of az(z) has been calculated for both the center and edge of the circular 
· tank using Fig. 10.4 and the calculated values for Zfr arid x!r. As 'an example, the stress change 
at the center of the tank(x/r = 0) for a depth of9 m (z/r = 9/13.5 = 0.67) gives an influence 
value of 80; multiplying 80 by q0 = · 80 kPa gives 64 kPa. This value and subsequent numbers 
for the center of the tank are shown in Column (2) of Table Ex. 10.10a. Column (5) gives the 
I::. a for the edge of the tank. 
The corresponding values using the computer program by Christian and Urzua (1996) 
are given in Columns (3) and (6): Notice that both methods give about the same number. 
Both of these first two approaches assumed an infinite depth of the clay layer.' Actually, this 
is not correct, because there is an incompressible pervious layer below the clay that alters the 
stress distribution. We used the chart in Poulos and Davis (1974), based on Milovic (1970), to 
take into account the rigid base. Still, we had to make an assumption that the upper granular 
"; 
' 
'. 
'· 
'-'. 
·, 
i 
; 
; 
' 
: 
' 
' 
,, 
' 
', 
FIGURE Ex. 10.10b Vertical stress 
profiles. 
' '10.6 Settlement Analysis Examples 
489 
TABLE Ex. 10.10a Evaluation of .iu(z) Using Three Different Methods 
of Calculation: (a) Fig.l0.5; (b) Christian and Urzua 
(1996); and (c) Poulos and Davis (1974)" 
Depth · 
0 (1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(m) 
Center 
Edge 
-9 
64 
66 
64 
.38 
'31 
30 
-15 
48 
··. 47 
. 26 
25 
-20 
37 
34 
38 
21 
: 21 
24 
-25 
26 
25 
' 18 
: 16 
-30 
19 
19 
26 
14 
14 
. 18 
-35 
14 
15 
11 
11 
-39 
13 
12 
19 
10 
10 
16 
"Stresses in Columns (1)-(6) are in units ofkPa. 
layer has the same modulus as the clay layer. Obviously, it does not. The answers, however, 
appear to be about the same. Recognize that when we use elastic theory it is only a way to 
estimate the stress changes with depth (Sec. 10.3). 
b. 'With the stresses now known, we use Table Ex. 10.10b to compute the settlement of the tank 
center and the edge. The table is set up to solve the consolidation settlement Eq. (8.18a) for 
a normally consolidated soiL Data are entered for the soil sub layers of 3 metres. Column (2) 
shows the average depth within a hiyer. Column (3) gives the soil type. In our case, there is 
one soil type (denoted in the computer program as c-3). In Column (4), we compute the 
vertical effective overburden stress, 0"~00 at the average depths of the ten sub layers. From 
our stress~distfibution computations, we' add • flu that we obtained from Table Ex. 10.9a, 
· using using Columns (2) and (5) for the center and edge values, respectively. Next, we take 
a~0 + tla and divide by a~,; [Column (4)+ Column (5) divided byColumn (5)]. Column (7) 
is the log of Column (6). We skipped Column (8) and took care of it in Column (9) by 
TABLE Ex. 10.10b Computations for Tank Center Settlement ' 
(1) 
. (2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(6) 
(7) 0 
.. (8) 
(10) 
(11) 
Depth, 
Mid-layer 
Soil 
U~o 
.iu~ 
U~0 + .iu~ 
log 
H; 
.iH; 
z (m) 
depth (m) 
type 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
U~o 
Col. (6) 
Cc 
Cell +eo 
(m) 
(m) 
9 
10.5 
c-3 
109 
62 
1.57 
0.195 
0.274 
3 
0.161 
'. 
12 
13.5 
123 
52 
1.42 
0.153 
0.126 
15 
16.5 
137 
43 
1.31 
0.119 
0.098 
18 
19.5 
151 
. 35.5 
1.24 
0.092 
0.076 
21 
22.5 
164 
30 
1.18 
0.073. 
0.060 
24 
25.5. 
178 
25 
1.14 
0.057 
0.047 
27 
28.5 
192 
21 
1.11 0. 
0.045 '•7 
i 
0.037 
30 
31.5 
206 
18 
1.09 
0.036 
0.030 
33 
34.5 
220 
15 
1.07 
0.029 
0.024 
36 
37.5 
233 
13 
1.06 
0.024 
0.019 
39 
Total Settlement 
0.677 
490 
Chapter 10 .. : Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
TABLE Ex. 10.1 Oc. Computations for Tank Edge Settlement 
(1) 
Depth, 
z (m) 
9 
12 
15 
18 
21 
24 
27 
30 
33 
36 
39 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
Mid-layer 
Soil 
!T~o 
au~ 
U~o + au~ 
log 
Hi 
a Hi 
depth (m) 
type 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
CT~o 
Col. (6) 
Cc 
Cell + e0 
(m) 
(m) 
10.5 
13.5 
16.5 
19.5 
22.5 
25.5 
28.5 
31.5 
34.5 
37.5 
c-3 
109 
30 
1.27 
0.106 
0.274 
3 
0.087 
123 
27 
1.22 
0.086 
0.071 
137 
24 
·us 
0.070 
0.058 
151 
21 
1.14 
0.057 
0.047 
164 
19 
1.12 
0.048 
0.039 
178 
17 
1.10 
0.040 
0.033 
192 
15 
1.08 
0.033 
0.027 
206 
13 
·1.06 
0.027 
0.022 
. 220 
12 
1.05 
0.023 
0.019 
233 
11 
1.05 
0.020 
0.016 
Total Settlement 
0.418 
computing the ratio of Ccf(1 + e0 ). Column (10) is the thickness of the sublayer, in our case 3m 
each. The settlement computation for each sublayer is given in Column (11), where we multi-
plied Columns (7) X (9) X (10), and the total settlement is given by summing up the settle-
ment of each sub layer in Column (11 ). The settlement for the center of the tank is 0.68 m (0.675 
musing the computer program), and the edge settlement is 0.42 m (0.413 musing the computer 
program). 
In our report to the client, we would state that the settlement in the center of the tank 
would be about 0.7 m and about 0.5 mat the edge. Incidentally, on difficult and/or important 
jobs, it is good practice to measure and plot the actual settlement versus time (as we did in 
Chapter 9) and then compare the measurements with our predictions. This way geotechnical 
. engineers can become better calibrated and perhaps adjust some of the parameters such as 
the coefficient of consolidation to obtain the best fit between actual and predicted settle-
ment. This information will lead to improved designs and less expensive foundations in 
future projects on the same soil dep<?sit. 
· · · 
Example 10.11 
Given: 
Data from Fig. Ex.10.10a. The value of Cv, the coefficient of consolidation, is 1m2/yr. 
Required: 
Compute and plot the time rate of consolidation settlement. 
Solution: From Fig. Ex. 10.10b yo~ probably noticed that the increase in l.:.u from the loaded tank on 
the surface is almost linear. Such a linear variation of t.:.u = l.:.u allows us to use Eqs .. (9.5), (10.9) and 
(9.12) to prepare our plot. 
· 
. A look at Fig. Ex. 10.10a will show that both the top and bottom layers are pervious and will 
dr'ainthe compressible clay layer during consolidation. Therefore, we have a case of double drainage, 
and 2H = 30 m, where H = the drainage distance. 
10.6 Settlement Analysis Examples 
491 
Using Eq.(9.5), we find 
Solving for the real time, t, 
:·· · 
t · 
m2 
t · 
T = c- = 1-----= 
v Har · yr ·(15m? 
T(15 m)2 
225m2 
.·. 
t = 
= T-- = T X 225 yr 
Cv 
m2 
1-
. yr 
Now, make a copy of Table 9.1 and add two more columns-one for 11h and the other for time t. For a 
. given value of U avg• multiply the corresponding val~e of Tin Column (2) of Table Ex. 10.11 in the 
above equation and solve fort (or, 225 X 0.008 = 1.8 yr) and this goes in Column (3). Fill in the rest of 
Column (3) the same way. . 
· · 
· 
· 
The fourth column is nothing more than Uavg X sc;for Uavg :== 0.1,the 11h is 0.1 X 68 em= 6.8 em. 
Fill in the rest of Column ( 4). 
. 
. 
· 
. 
. A plot of expected settlement versus time thatwould be sent to the client is sh'own in Fig. Ex. 10.11. 
If the life of the expected structure is only 50 yi, then the most settlement that would occur by that time 
·would be only about40 em. Note that the rate of settlement depends on many factors. Just as in Example 
10.10, for important structures, geotechnical engineers would try to take settlement measurements with 
time and compare them with the predicted values. If the field data deviates, then one could back-calculate 
the coefficient of consolidation, Cv' for example, and recalculate the time-settlement. After all, you have a 
full-scale field loading test with the prototype structure! .. 
TABLE Ex. 10.11 
Time History of Consolidation 
Settlement 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Time (yr) 
(4) 
00 
200 
400 
U.vg (%) 
T 
t (yr) 
Ah (cJ?) 
E' 
0.1 
0.008 
1.8 
6.8 
~ 
'E 20 
0.2 
0.031 
7 
13.6 
Q) 
E 
0.3 
0.071 
16 
20.4 
Q) 
0.4 
. 0.126 . 
28 
27.2 
: ~ 40 
rn 
OS 
0.197 
44 
34 -· ( 
c: 
0 
'0.6 
0.287 
65 
40.8 
'ia 60 
0.7 
0.403 
91 
47.6 
:2 
0 
0.8' 
0.567 
128 
54.4 
~ 80 
0.9 
0.848 
190 
·. 61.2 
0 
., 
(,) 
0.95 
1.163 
262 
64.6 
68 
FIGURE Ex. 10.11 
Consolidation settlement 
versus time . 
. If there were a continuous pervious seam (even 1 em thick) in the middle of the 30m clay layer, 
what effect would that have on the time rate of consolidation? It would reduce the overalltime by one 
quarter. Check Eq: (9.5) and confirm this. Suppose that' the continuous seam was at 101nfrom the top 
·boundary. What then? You would have a case of double drainage with two layers. The drainage path of 
the toplayer would be 5 m, while thatfor the 20 ni thick layerwould be 10m. In this case, you would 
have to make two tables of time rate of settlement, as the layers would dissipate 11u at different rates. 
Then you would have to superimpose the combined settlements. 
492 
Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
PROBLEMS 
10.1 Compare the stress distribution with depth for (a) a point load of 1200 kN and (b) a 1200 kN load applied 
over an area of 3 X 3 m. Plot the results. 
10.2 If you used the Boussinesq (or Westergaard) theory for Problem 10.1, do the problem again but use the 
Westergaard (or Boussinesq) theory instead. Comment on the differences between the two theories. 
10.3 Compute the data and draw a curve of uziQ versus depth for points directly below a point load Q. On the 
same plot draw curves of u ziQ versus depth for points directly below the center of square footings with 
breadths of 6.5 m and 20m, respectively, each carrying a uniformly distributed load Q. On the basis of this 
plot, make a statement relative to the range .within which loaded areas may be considered to act as point 
loads. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
10.4 Thecenter of a rectangular area at'ground surface has Cartesian coordinates (0, O);;ndthe corners have 
coordinates (7, 18). All dimensions are in metres. nie area carries a uniform pressure of 150 kPa. Estimate 
the stresses at a depth of 20m below ground surface at each of the following locations: (o;o); (0, 18), (7, 0), 
(7, 18), and (12, 28); obtain values by both Boussinesq and Westergaard 'methods, and also determine the 
ratio of the stresses as indicated by the two methods. (After Taylor, 1948.) · · · : •. 
• 
• 
I 
' 
10.5 Compare the results ~f Problem 10.4 with those of the 2:1 method.' C~inm~~ts? 
10.6 Calculate the stress distribution with depth at a point 3.5 m from the corner (along the longest side) of a rec-
. tangularly loaded area 15 by 35m with a uniform load of 75 kPa. Do by (a) the Boussinesq theory, (b) the 
Westergaard theory, and (c) th~ 2:1 method. 
10.7 How far apart must two 18m diameter tanks be placed such that their stress overlap is not greater than 10% 
of the contact stress at depths of 10, 20, and 30m? . 
10.8 Compute the stresses for the data of Example 10.5 parts (a) and (b), using the Newmark chart, Fig.10.8. 
10.9 Work Example 10.5, using superposition of the results of Figs. 10.7 and 10.4. How does your answer compare 
with the solution for Example 10.5? 
10.10 Given the data of Example 10.6. Instead of a load on the surface, compute the depth of an excavation to 
cause a reduction in stress at the bottom of the excavation of 200 kPa if p = 2.1 Mg/m3• The excavation plan 
· · area is shown in Fig. Ex. 10.6a. 
· 
10.11 For the excavation of Problem 10.10, estimate the stress change at a depth of 50 m below the bottom of the 
. excavation at point 0'. 
10.12 Is the 2:1 method usable for excavations? Why? 
10.13 A strip footing 2.5 m wide is loaded on the ground surface with a pressure equal to 175 kPa. Calculate the 
stress distribution at depths of 2.5, 5 and 10 m under the center of the footing. If the footing rested on a 
. normally consolidated .cohesive layer whose LL was 78 and whose PL was 47, estimate the settlement of 
thefooting.· 
' 
10.14 How would the estimated settlement under the center of a 4 X 4 m square footing compare with the settle-
ment of the 4 m wide strip footing in the previous problem, assuming soil conditions were the same? Assume 
the footing is flexible enough to provide uniform contact pressure to the soiL 
10.15. How much difference in the computed settlements is there in Problem 10.14 if the Westergaard theory is 
. used instead of Boussinesq theory? 
10.16 A large oil storage tank 90 m in diameter is to be constructed on the soil profile shown in Fig. P10.16. 
Averagedepth of the oil)n the tank is.18 m, and the specific gravity of the oil is 0.92. Consolidation tests 
froni the clay layer are similar to those given in Problem 8.18. Estimate the maximum total and differen-
tial consolidation settlement of the· tank .. Neglect any settlements in the sand. Work .this problem 
(a) assu~ing conditions at the middepth of the clay are typical of the entire clay)ayer, and (b) dividing the. 
clay layer into four or five thinner layers, computing the settlement of each thin layer and summing up by 
Eq. (8.14). (Hint: See Example 10.8.) 
· 
·,,·: 
1,; 
10m 
''Problems 
493 
Deptti (m} 2 m · 
.. ~·--=: ::g::~f= .. -:-. ~~~-~-:-&;.s:s 
. :; 
. Dense sand 
~2o~-~~~--~~~~~~~~~~ 
.. 1 .. 
<.Medium stiff clay Wn = 29.3°/d, : 
. -30 
. e0 = 0.79 
Pd = 1.5 Mg/m3 
10.17 Estimate 'the ulti~ate consolidation settlement und~r th~ center lin~ of a 17 X ~ 7 m mat foundation. The mat 
is 1.2 m thick reinforced concrete, and the average stress on the surface of the 'slab is 80 kPa. The soil profile 
is shown in Fig. P10.17. Oedometer tests on s~mples of the clay provide these average values: 
u~ = 130 kPa, Cc = 0.4o;· C, = 0~03 
Neglect any settle~ents due to th~sand !aye~ ... ' · 
, 
. . . 
.. , 
1 • : 
! ·: 
10.lS Three uniforrnJy distributed loads oflOO kPaeach.~reappli~ct't~ to'~ 10 fli square areas 6n the soil profile 
.. shown in Fig. P10.18. Undisturbed samples ofthe clay were taken p~ior 'to 'construction; imd consolidation 
'tests indicated that the average preconsolidation stress is about llO kPa;tile average compression index is 
0.50, and the average recompression index is 0.02. Estimate the toh!J consolidation settlement for the clay 
. '' 
layer 'only imder the center of the middle 'loaded area.:.' . 
. 
. 
i '· 
,. • • • ' .. . 
•. i 
10.19 A series of oil storage tanks are to be constructed near.Mystlc River powerst~tion ·l~Boston, MA. The typ-
ical tank is 22m in· diameter, a~d it exerts\in' average foundation stress of about 125 kPa. The soil profile at 
the siteisvery similar to that shown in Fig. 8.19(a):Estimate both the total and differential consolidation 
settlement under the average tank. (Hint: See Example 10.8.) 
. 
10.20 A new highway to Siracha, Thailand, is to be constructed east of Bangkok, across a region of deep deposits of 
very soft marine clay. Atypical soil profile is shown in Fig. 8.21(a). The average Ccr = 0.8 below the drying 
crust. The proposed embankment is 17 m wide at the top, has three horizontal to one vertical side slope, and 
is 2.5 m high. Estimate the ultiinate'corisolidatioH settlem~nt of the centerline of the embankment. 
Psat = 1.8 Mg/m3 
Clay 
Wn ;= 42% 
Plan:.· 
' 
Profile: 
-~-_ 
..... 10m_··:~·.·····. 
1om····:g3··_· 
·10m 
_· 
'\ '< • ' 
; ',:' ' • _:. • ; _; 
_" ,. 
~I, 
.;: 
·.. 
' 
: 
+ 
10m 
+ 
10m 
+ 
10m 
·; 
'-'.! ·:. ··.:· 
;,' 
; 
_:, 7 
• 
,' 
', 
.. . . 
. 25m.~.. 
. 
25m 
q~ = 100 kPa 
f 
10m· Med/dense 
!HHH 
t 
sand 
% = 100 kPa 
q0 = 100 kPa 
HHH! . 
HHH! 
sz 
w& -=--t 
GWT 
3 m Soft clay 
. Psat = 1.83 Mg/m3 
· 1J 
m/ Med. dense 
_ 2·o M 1 3 
l 
Sand 
FIGURE P10.17 
· Psat = 1.9 Mg/m3 
.~ 
FIGURE P10.18 
. 
494 · Chapter 10 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
•• ::! 
10.21 Figure P10.21 shows a proposed foundation site, with 10 ft of sand overlying 15 ft of clay with consolidation 
properties shown. The clay is normally consolidated. ;\s_sume 1-D conditions, 
· 
(a) Compute the initial a~ at the middle of the clay layer prior to ex·cavation and ·construction. 
(b) After excavation and during construction, the foundation area will be heavily loaded with the structure 
and equipment so that a~ at the middle of the clay layer will be increased to 3900 psf. Determine the 
settlement that will occur under these conditions. 
(c) After construction is completed, the equipment will be removed, and the final a~ at the middle of the 
clay layer Win be 3200 psf. 
· · 
. 
. . . 
· 
. 
. 
. 
. · 
· 
As part of your answer, please be sur~ to sketch the ~ompressio~ c~rve followed in parts(b) and (c). 
FIGURE P10.21 
Sand 
Clay 
. 'Yt ~ 120 pcf 
-c~ = o.o33 
_·cc,~o.16s .'· 
~ f < 
• l 
I", 
I ' \ .' . ~ . : I i! ! : 
10.22 As part of a construction project, a 7.5 m thick layer of clay is to be loaded with a temporary3 m thick sand 
layer (refer to Fig. P1022). _The figu~e shows tlie water table location; soil unit weights, and the compression 
. ·curve properties for the'clay:Assume the sand layer remains dry.: " , 
. .. 
. 
. . . . : (a) Calc~late. th~ value of a~ i~ the ~iddle brthe clay layer (at 3.75 m bel~~ the water table) before the sand 
· 
. . 
layer is applied, and after consolidation is complete.· ' , , 
·. · · . · 
·. · · 
·. . . 1 • 
• • 
' .. (b). Based-on your answer in part (a) and the compression curve characteristics,calculate.the settlement that 
will occur under these conditions. 
, . : · 
· · · 
" · · , · 
' · 
· 
· " · ·· 
· 
·(c) How much will the clay layer heave when the 3m sand layer is removed? .. 
) ·, 
i , 
. ' 
' 
l 
: ~., 
. ' . ,_ 
w. 
' l : 
,· ' 
. 
. 
. 
,,·, 
FIGURE P10.22 
,,•,' 
3m_ t 
. · 
_· A'pplied saric(layer: · 
. 
SZ 
'Y d = 16 kN/m3 · 
· 
=-
;" 
; , ·1 
i Cl~y. 'Y; ~- 20.5 kN/m3 ~. 
. 
· · · ;h :;,_ 14 k:Pa, c,. ~- o.o3· 
Cc. = 0.18 
,,r 
·, 
·.·! 
10.23 Figure P10.23 shows the 1-D compression curve for a Clay. 
. 
.· 
. 
' 
' 
J ''(a) Using log interpolation between 100 and 1000, dete~mine the u~ value at a vertical strain, Bv ~ ZO%. 
o·,~~r· ,,,1,. 
lllij 
;;g 10 
~ 
<If 
c:" 
. ·~ 20 
.(j) 
~ 
t:: 
' .. ·' ~ 30 
4o~~~wu~L-~~~~ 
10 
FIGURE P10.23 
Effective consolidation stress, a~c (kPa) 
,> ; 
·.·,, 
10.24 
10.25 
·Problems 
495 
. (b) If the initial void ratio, e0 = 0.846, determine C, and Cc for this soil. For Cc, use the portion of the curve 
between u~ = 200 and 800 kPa. 
· ·· · · 
·: 
(c) If the original clay layer thickness is 9.5 m, determine the settlement that occurs in the layer when it is 
loaded from 70 to 200 kPa. (Note: You don't need the results from part (b) to do this.) 
A large embankment is to be built on the surface of a 15 ft clay layer. Before the embankment is built, the 
initialu~ at the middle of the clay layer is 480 psf. The results from a 1-D consolidation test on the the clay 
from the middle of the layer are as follows: u,~ ~ 1800 psf, C,. = 0.0352, Cce = 0.180. If the finalu~ at the 
middle of the layer after the embankment loading is 2100 psf, what is the settlement, in inches, of the clay 
layer resulting from this loading? 
· 
Figure P10.25 shows a proposed site where an-excavation will be made. The 10 ft layer of sand will be 
removed, so that the top of the 24ft normally consolidated clay layer will be 'exposed. Assume full capillarity 
in the clay only. 
. 
· 
· 
·· 
· 
...... · 
. ··-.:·· 
(a) Assume that the water table location remainsthe sameduring excavation. Compute the uv,lT~ and u 
values at the middle of the clay layer before and after the excavation. · . ' . · 
:. : · 
(b) Assuming 1-D conditions, compute how much the clay layer will deform due to this excavation, in inches. 
Specify whether this is settlement or heave. 
· 
· ·, 
, 
r. 
· 
· 
., ,, 
Before excavation 
After excavation:: 
10' 
Sand,yd=110pcL· 
24' 
¥. 3' 
Clay, y 1 = 120 pcf 
c,. = 0.035 
Gee= 0.170 
'Sl 
3' 
I"::".' 
: 
-'---------. FI,GURE P10.25 : 
10.26 Figure Pl0.26 shows the soil profile at a site where you plan to lower the water table. You have results from 
two consolidation tests, one from the upper 12 ft thick overconsolidated crust, and another from the lower 
32ft thick normally consolidated zone. You plan to lower the water table from its current 12ft depth to 20ft 
below ground surface. The consolidation properties for each layer are shown. Assume full capillarity. 
(a) Coinputethe u~ in the middle of each layer before and after the water t~ble is lowered. 
(b) Determine the total settlement that will result from lowering the water table. 
0,--------
--· 
'• 
--~--
Stiff clay, y 1 = 120 pcf 
· 
G,. = 0.029, Gee = 0~ 178, u;, = 1650 psf 
· Soft clay, y 1 = 118 pcf 
G,. = 0.034, Gee = 0.185 
44 '--------
FIGURE P10.26 
10.27 When a consolidation test is performed on some soils, the virgin compression region is not linear, but bilin-
ear. Figure P10.27 shows such a compression curve from a 15 ft thick layer. 
(a) What vertical strain, ev, occurs when the soil is loaded from an initialu~1 = 560 psf to u~2 = 3000 psf? 
(b) If you load the soil further, to u~3 = 4000 psf, how much additional settlement occurs? 
(c) Finally, if you unload from 4000 psfback to u~·= 3000 psf, what additional deformation (in feet) occurs? 
496 
Chapter 10 
FIGURE P10.27 
Stress Distribution and Settlement Analysis 
' u' 1 = 560 psf ' = 98o psf 
• L 
V 
Up 
•'; 
' i c,., = 0.032 ' 
u~2 = 3000 psf 
Cc. = ~:1~ ~ 
u~3 = 4000 psf., 
-
"""'* 
' 
\ : ~ ' 
-,; 
:(.··,: \ / 
10.28 Figure P10.28 shows a· soil profile' where • a· clay layer will consolidate under an embankment loading of 
·' 15.0 kPa:There is no capillarity. Your firin'performed two consolidation tests: • :. · 
; . 
' 
one test in die~ ted that' the ~oil is ~~~rc~n~~iidated, \Vith u~ =
1 1 io kPa. 
one test indicated that thesoilis normally' consolidated. 
Both tests gave the same C,. and Cc. values, shown in the 'figure. 
(a)· Determine the initial u~ at the middle of the clay layer (i.e., at depth 5.5 m) .. 
(b) Compute the settlement due to the embankment loading, assuming that the overconsolidated assump-
tion is correct (u~ = 110 kPa). 
·· 
· 
·· 
... 
. .. -
···• 
(~) Compute the settlement again, this time assuming that the soil is normally consolidated., 
'jl 
i :· 
0.-------'--
,§:::·' 
.s::: a 
.·CD: 
o:. 
Sand 
'Y~ = 1.6 kN/m3 
'Yt= 18 kN/m3 
i l ' 
' l ~ ' 
Clay 
• ,: 
'Yt = 20.5 kNtm3 • 
c,.,::: 0.025 
c;, = o.o25 
': 1 
; '~ 
FIGUREP10.28 
· 8.5'--------
"; ~ ''i 
1':' 
l.', 
), 
-•·' 
1.' 
': ,,'\ ~ ' 
";:· 
1'"'" 
' 
; I ~ 
',: ' 
if' 
·, 
' ~ ' 
';.< 
'.I 
C H A P T E ·R 
1 1 
The Mohr Circle, Failure 
1' 
' 
Theories, and Strength .·Testing 
of Soil and Rocks 
11.1 
INTRODUCTION 
. 
. 
. 
: 
,' 
, 
I 
, 
. 
In order to discuss the stress-deformation and shear strength properties of soils, we need to introduce 
some.new definitions and concepts about stre~s and failure. From Chapters 8 through 10, you know 
something about the load-settlement-time characteristics of cohesive soils due to one-dimensional 
loading. But to understand the response of sands and non plastic silts, clays and plastic silts, and rocks to 
types of loading other than one-dimensional, we need to give you some background information on 
how we describe stresses in geotechnical engineering, failure theorie~, and tests commonly used on 
soils and rocks. 
If the load or stress in a foundation or on a slope is increased until the deformations become 
unacceptably large, we say that the soil in the foundation or slope has "failed~" In this case we are 
referring to the strength of the material, which is really the maximum or ultimate stress the material 
can sustain: In geotechnical engineering, we are generally concerned with the shear strength of soils 
and rocks, because, in most of our problems in foundations and slope stability, failure results from 
excessive applied shear stresses. 
· , . . 
· ., 
·· 
The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
Symbol 
Dimension 
Unit 
Definition 
c 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
is 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
--· ''. 
h 
L' 
mm 
Intercept of the Mohr failure envelope- Eq. (11.8) 
· Frictionon the frictioii'sleeve of a Dutch cone penetrometer 
'Penetration of Swedish fall-cone 
· 
PI 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
qc 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
Limit pressure in the pressuremeter test 
Point resistance of a Dutch cone penetrometer 
(Continued) 
497 
498 
Chapter 11 
-
Symbol 
-
D 
H 
N 
Nc 
T 
CD 
cu 
uu 
at 
'Y 
8 
(} 
u 
Ut 
u2 
0"3 
O"ff 
O"n 
7" 
'Tf 
'Tff 
'Thv 
¢ 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Dimension 
L 
L 
MLT-2·L 
L 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML~1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
Mf.-lr-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-lr2 
ML-lr-2 
Unit 
mm 
mm 
N·m 
(degree) 
(%) 
m 
·(degree) 
kPa 
kPa. 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
.kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
(degree) 
Definition 
Diameter of vane 
Height of vane 
Blow count in the Standard Penetration Test 
CPT correlation or bearing capacity factor 
Torque in vane shear test 
Consolidated drained (triaxial test) 
Consolidated undrained (triaxial test) 
. Unconsolidated undrained (triaxial test) 
Angle of the failure plane in the Mohr-Coulomb failure 
criteria- Eq. (11.10) 
· 
Shear strain (angle of rotation in DSS test) 
Horizontal displacement 
. 
. 
. Angle of inclination of resultant shear and noriilal stress, 
or angle of principal stress rotation 
Normal stress 
· 
Major principal stress 
Intermediate principal stress 
Minor principal stress 
Normal stress on the failure plane at failure - Eq. (11.7) 
Normal stress 
Shear stress 
Undrained shear strength 
Shear stress on the failure plane at failure- Eq. (11.7) 
Shear stress on thehorizontal plane during direct simple 
shear test · · · · 
· 
... · 
· 
· 
. Slope of the Mohr failure envelope (sometimes called the 
· angle of internal friction)'- Eq. (11.8) ·. 
: 
Note: A prime on an angle or stress denotes effective stress. 
11 ;2 
· STRESS AT A POINT 
. 
.. . 
.· . 
. 
. 
. 
. .. 9 
• 
. . 
. .. 
··As we mentioned when we discussed effective stresses in Chapter 6, the concept of stress at a point in a 
soil is really fictitious. The point of application of a force'within asoil mass could be 'on a particle or in 
a void: Clearly, a void cannot support any force,but if 
. . 
F1 
. . 
. 
the force were applied to a particle, the stress could be 
extremely large. Thus, when we speak about stress in 
the context of soil materials, we are really speaking 
about a force per unit area, in which the area under 
consideration is the gross cross-sectional or engineer-
ing area. This an!a contains grain-to-grain contacts as .. Fs 
. well as voids. The concept is si~ilar to the' "engineering 
area" used in seepage and flow problems (Chapter 7). 
F2 
F4 
F3 
Consider a soil mass that is acted ~pon by a·set 
of forces F1, F2 , .••• , Fn, as shown in Fig. 11.1. Fo:i the 
time being, lettuce a~sume that these forces act in a 
FIGURE 11.1 
A soil mass acted upon by 
two-dimensional plane. We could resolve these forces 
several forces. 
. ·11.2 . Stress at a Point 
499 
c 
H == uxsin a -
Area= 1 
Area = 1 sin a ~'-----t.,------''-a-.-~A 
· 
Area = 1 cos : 
V=uyCOSa 
. 
Sign conventions 
FIGURE 11.2 Resolution of the forces of Fig. 11.1 into components on a small 
element at point 0. Sign conventions are shown in the small inset figure. 
into components on a small element at any point within the soil mass, such as point 0 in that figure. The 
resolution of these forces into normal and shear components acting, for example, on a plane passing 
through point 0 at an angle a from the horizontal is shown in Fig. 11.2, which is an expanded view of a 
small element at point 0. Note that for convenience our sign convention has compressive forces and 
stresses positive because most normal stresses in geotechnical engineering are compressive. This conven-
tion, then, requires that positive shear stresses produce counterclockwise couples on our element 
(Perloff and Baron, 1976). Putanother way: positive shears produce clockwise moments about a point 
just outside the element, as shown by the insert in Fig. 11.2. Clockwise angles also are taken to be 
positive. These conventions are the opposite of those normally assumed in structural mechanics. 
To begin, assume that the distance AC alon.g the inclined plane in Fig.11.2 has unit length, and 
that the figure has a unit depth perpendicular to the plane of the paper. Thus the vertical plane BC 
has the dimension of 1 · sin a, and the horizontal dimension AB has a dimension equal to 1 · cos a. 
At equilibrium, the sum of the forces in any direction must be zero. So, summing in the horizontal and 
vertical directions, we obtain 
~Fh =H- Tcosa.- Nsina = 0 
(11.1a) 
~Fv = V + T sin a - N cos a = 0 
(11.1b) 
Dividing.the forces in Eq. (11.1).by the areas upon which they act, we obtain the normal and shear 
stresses. (We shall denote. the horizontal normal stress by u x and the vertical normal stress by u y; the 
stresses on the a-plane are the normal stress u a and the shear stress T ~.) 
Ux sin a·- TaCOS a- ITa sin a·= ri 
u y cos a -
T a sin a - u a cos a = 0 
Solving Eqs. (11.2a) and (11.2b) simultaneously for(]'~ and T a• we obtain 
_ 
. 2 
.. 
2 
_·ux+uy 
ux-uy 
u a -
u x sm a + u y cos a -
. 2 
+ 
2 
cos 2a 
Ux- Uy 
T a = ( u x -
u y) sin a cos a = 
2 
sin 2a 
(11.2a) 
(11.2b) 
(11.3) 
(11.4) 
If you square and add these equations; you will obtain the equation for a circle with a radius of 
( u x - u y )/2 and its center at [ ( u x + u y)/2, 0]. When ~his cirCle is plotted in T~u space, as shown in 
Fig.11.3(b) for the element in Fig. 11.3(a), it is known as theMohr circle of stress (Mohr, 1887).1t rep-
resents the state of stress at a point at equilibrium, and it applies to any material; not just soil. Note that 
the scales for T and u have to be the same to obtain a circle from these equations. 
' 
' 
f, 
': 
' 
' 
500 
Chapter ,11 
,The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
T 
• 
<o l···.· 
.. ~., ·~ 
u 
l ., ~ "' 
Radius = (u1 -:- u3) 
'. 2 ' 
(a) 
(b) 
' 
, (c) 
FIGURE 11.3 The Mohr circle of stress: {a) elem·ent at equilibrium; {b) the Mohr circle; (c) Mohr circles including u 2• 
Since the vertical and horizontal planes in Fig.11.2 and Fig.11.3(a) have no shearing stresses act-
ing on them, they are by definition principal planes. Thus the stresses ax and a y are really principal 
stresses. You may recall from your study of mechanics of materials that principal stresses act on planes 
where T = 0. The stress With the largest algebraic magnitude is called the majorprini:i/Jal streSS and 
den~ted by the symbol ai. The smallest principal stress is called the minor principal stress, a3' and the 
stress in the third dimension is the intermediate principal stress, a 2 • In Fig: 11.3(b ), a 2 is neglected, since 
our derivation was for two-dimensional (plane stress) conditions. We could, however, construct two 
additional Mohr circles, one for a 1 and a 2 , and one for a 2 and a 3 , to make a complete Mohr diagram, 
as shown in Fig.11.3(c) .. 
Now we can write Eqs. (10.3) and (10.4) in terms of principal stresses. 
' 
' 
•.-< 
' 
' 
'' 
~+~ ~-~ 
~= 
2 
+ 
2 
~~ 
(11.5) 
.·. a1-'- a3 . 
Ta=. ,2 .. sm2a 
(11.6) 
Here we have arbitrarily assumed that a .i: = a 1 and ay =:' a 3• You should verify that the coordinates of 
(a a, T a) in Fig.11.3(b) can be determined byEqs, (11.5) and (11.6). From these equations, also verify 
that the coordinates of the center of the circle are [ ( a 1 + a 3)!2, 0], and thattheradius is ( a 1 - a 3)!2. 
It is now possible to calculate the normal stress a a and shear stress r a on any plane a, as long as we 
know the principal stresses. In fact, we could almost as easily derive equations for the general case where 
ax and ay are not principal planes. These equations, known _as the double angle equations, are those 
11.2 Stress at a Point 
501 
generally presented in mechanics of materials textbooks. The analytical procedure is sometimes awkward 
to use in practice because of the double angles; we prefer. to use a graphical procedure based on a unique 
point on the Mohr circle called the pole or the origin of planes. This point has a very useful property: any 
§!!E_ight line drawn through the pole will intersect the Mohr circle at a point which represents the state of 
,~lane-in€/ined at the same orientation in space as the line. This concept means that if you know 
the state of stress, u and r, on some plane in space, you can draw a line parallel to tha(plane through the 
coordinates ofu imd r on the Mohr circle. The pole then is the point where that line intersects the Mohr 
circle. Once the pole is known, the stresses on any plane can readily be found by simply drawing a line 
· from the pole· parallel to that plane; the co'o'rdin'ates ofthe poinf of intersection with the Mohr circle 
'determine the stresses. on that plane: A few examples wiil illustrate how the pole method works. . 
\ 
' 
;!j 
; 
I 
I 
Example 11.1 
" 
'j 
' 
'. ~ . 
··Given: 
I'\' 
Stresses on an element as shown in Fig. Ex. ll.la . 
. Required: 
The normal stress u a and the shear stress r on the plane inclined at a·= 35° from the horizontal 
.reference plane. 
· 
· 
· 
u 1 =52 kPa 
(a) 
(c) 
FIGURE Ex.11.1 
T (kPa) 
u3 = 12 kPa 
(d). 
u (kPa) 
502 
Chapter 11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
. Solution:,. 
l :~ 
. ,, 
J ;', 
• 't 
' 
. ·:: 
''.(.. .. , -·-
.· 
,- , ... , .. J-
... ___ 
: 
,,. 
:_· .• -
·'· 
·-
-
.•.• 
: •• 
' ' 1. Plot the Mohr circleto some convenientscale (see Fig~ Ex.11:1b ). · 
~ ,:·: 
• • 
]; ~ 
I 
, 
J 
/ ' ; 
~. f: 
', ; \ ~ . ' 
• 
•, '' 
'• • 
·; ;'/.' 
·'····.·· .·· a1-a3,·52-.12. 
'• 
radius of circle =,; , "" .. ,= 
, : . = 20 kP_a 
'2.'" Establish the o;i~in. of' pl~nes or t~~ 'pole. It.i~· pr~bably easier to' use, th'e' ~orizontal plane 
'' .. upoll',which ;1 acts.The state of stress onthis pl<ine\is i~dicated by pointAin Fig: Ex. 1l.lb. 
·" Draw 'a line pa~aliel to tlie'plane up~n which this state of stress (c'r1, 0) acts (the horizontal 
plai1e) _thro~:~gh_t~t? poir1t repr~s_enting g 1 and_Q. By definitior, the polt? P i~ .. wll,~re this line 
intersects the Mohr circle. [By coincidence, it intersects at (a3, 0).] A line. through the pole 
inclined at an angle a = 35° from the horizontal plane would be panillel to the plane on the 
element in Fig. Ex.'l1.1a, and this is the plane on which we require the normaland shear 
stress. The intersectionis at point C in Fig. Ex. 11.1b, and we find that ci~ = 
39 kPa and 
'T a = 18.6 kPa. 
· ' : -: : 
.. ~ , .. 
· 
I 
You should verify these results by using Eqs. (1l.5) and (11.6). Note that r a is positive, since 
point C occurs above the abscissa. Thus the sense of r a on the 35° plane is determined as indicated in 
·:,,.Fig. Ex. 11.1c.and d, which represent the top and bottom parts ofthe given element. For both parts, 
the direction or sense of the shear stress 7 a is equal and opposite (as it should be). However, they are 
both positive shear stresses, which is consistent with our sign convention (Fig. 11.2). 
Example 11.2 
Given: 
. The same element and stresses ~sin Fig. Ex.11.1a, except that the element is rotated 20° from 
the horizontal, as shown in Fig; Ex: 11.2a. 
. 
. 
,. 
' 
u1 =··52 kPa 
. 
. ' ' . 
a= 35o 
ua = -12 kPa 
Horizontal 
???C·' 
(a) 
. FIGURE Ex. 11.2 · 
T (kPa) 
ua=39--l 
c 
u (kPa) 
(b) 
·• :, 11.2. Stress at a Point 
503 
Required: 
As in Example 11.1, find the normal stress a a and the shear stress T a on the plane inclined at 
a = 35° from the base of the element. 
Solution: 
1. Plot the Mohr circle (Fig. Ex.11.2b ). Since the p~i~cipal ~tresses are the same, the Mohr circle 
will be the same as in Example 11.1. 
• : 
: 
. 
2. Find the pole of the circle. As:in'the previous example, draw a line paiallel to a plane on 
which you know the stresses. Ifweagain begin with the major principal plane, this plane is 
inclimid at' an angle of 20° to the horizontal. Start at point A; and where this line intersects 
the Mohr circle defines the pole.P of this circle. 
, · . ··.:;::~ · , 
3. Now find the stresses on the a-plane, which as before is inclined at 35° to the base of the ele-
ment. From line AP, turn an· angle in the same dir(!ction as i~' the element, 35~, and the 
stresses on that plane are defined by the point of intersection ofthe line with the Mohr .circle 
(in this case at point C). Scale off the coordinates of point c to determine a a and Ta· Note 
that these stresses are the same as in Example 11.1. Why?· Because nothing has changed 
except the orientation in space of the element. 
· 
· 
' 
' 
. 
' 
' 
For step 2, we could just as well have used the minor principal plane as our starting point. In this 
case a line from ( a 3 , 0) could be drawn at 70° from the horizontal (parallel to the arplane ), and it 
would intersect the· Mohr circle at the same point as before, point P. We now have a check on the 
step-if we have done everything correctly, we should obtain the same pole. Since lirie AP is parallel to 
the major principal plane, we can show the direction of a 1 right on this line in Fig. Ex.ll.2; similarly, 
the dashed line from the pole to a 3 is par,allel to the arplane. 
' 
• 
' 
' 
' 
. f ';· . ' 
,. 
' ' :,. ' 
' 
;:. ". 
. 
' 
Now you can probably begin to see what is really happening with the pole. It is just a way of 
relating the Mohr circle of stress to the geometry or orientation of our element in the real world. We 
COUld just 'as Well rotate the T-a axes to coincide With the directions of the principal stresses in space, 
.·but traditionally T VerSUS a is plotted With the axes horizontal and Vertical. 
· Example 113 · 
Given: 
j;, 
. The stress shown on ihe element in Fig. Ex. 11.3a .. , , 
'.r 
, · .. 
': . , · .. 
, . 
• 
T' 
, 
.. , 
.,~, 
.=· 
'' ;' 
( 
~ 
" 
; • •. I' 
1 I / 
Required: 
'' 
a •. Evaluate a a andTa when a;:= 30~,> 
:b. ·Evaluate a 1 and a 3· when a = 30°;. :;·. · : 
" 
c.··· Determine the orientation of the major arid minor principal planes .. 
d. , Find the maximum shear stress ana the orientation of the plane 'on w~ich it 'acts. 
· Solution: Construct the Mohr circle, as shown in Fig. Ex: 113, according to the following steps: 
1. ·Plot the ~tate of stress ori 'tl:le horizohtal plane (6,2)(Fig. E~.'1l.3b) ~ipoint A. Note that the 
shear stress makes a counterclockwise moment about point a and tlieiefore is positive. 
504 
Chapter 11' ·. The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
r (MPa) 
~ ; 
1 
,-,;; 
j~ O'v = 6 MPa 
r--21~.· 
'.··.·· .. ·. ·•:· .. ·1· . ·,,;, .. ·' 
: 1 ~ ~ . 
• ·:·. : •• , 
:. ' uhj~~M·~:a : • 
,,,, . · '' a=;"·3oo · .. ·· ~2~Pa 
;.. 
'' 
'.,, 
I 
:;;; 
:t 
,• ... 
6MPa 
:I· 
(a) 
,-;· 
-., 
'·· '· 
,M', 
' !. 
~, . 
(b) 
FIGURE Ex. 11.3 
; ~ . 
2., In a similar manner, plot point B.( -4, -2). The shear stress on the vertical plane is negative, 
since it makes fl clockwi~~ moment. . 
. . ,·.': ' . . . 
' . 
.. 
. . . . . 
':: . 
3. :, Points A and B. are t\vo points on a circle (a diameter in this case; since their planes are 90° 
apart); the center of the circle has coordinates of [ (u x + uy)/2, 0]. Construct the Mohr circle 
with center at (1, 0). 
· 
.. 4 . .. To find the pole, remember. that a line drawn parallel to the plane (horizontal in. this exam-
ple) upon which a known state of stress acts, point A, intersects the Mohr circle at the pole P. 
As a check, you could also draw a line in the vertical direction from point B ( -4, -2) and 
find the same pole.' 
.. , 
5. To find the state of stress on the plane inclined at angle a.= 30~ from the. horizontal, draw 
the line PC at an angle 30° from the horizontal (see Fig. Ex. 11.3b ). The 'state of stress on this 
plane is given by the coordinates at point C (1.8, 5.3) MPa. 
•)·. 
6. Lines drawn from p to Ut and CT3 establish the orientation of the major all'd ~iilor' principal 
planes. The values of u 1 and u 3 are determined automatically once the Circle is drawn; here 
they are 6.4 and -4.4 MPa, respectively. Of course u 1 and u 3 are perpendicular to their 
respective planes, which are oriented at 11 ~ and 101 o to the horizontal, respectively. 
•7 •. : The maximumshear stress can be c~lculated by Eq. (11.6) when 2u := 90°; This is ( u 1 -
u 3)/2 
or ± 5.4 MPa (see points M or M'). Yo:u can also simply scale off the ma~imum value of T 
from the Mohr diagram: The orientation ofT max is the line PM or PM', depending on which 
mutually perpendic~lar plane you desire .. (Actually T = .. -5.4 MPa is the minimum shear 
· stress) ; · 
· · 
· · : · .. : · ,· 
·.' 
. " . . · . . 
' 
·· 
. · . . · : ·, · . , 
· 
·· 
~ 
0 
.11.2 Stress at a Point 
505 
Example 11.4 
Given: 
1\vo planes, a and. b,- are separated.by .an unknown angle 8. On plane a, ua = 10 kPa and 
Ta = +2 kPa. Plane a lies 15° from the horizontal, as shown in Fig. Ex. 11.4a. The stresses on plane b 
are ub = 9 kPa and Tb = -3 kPa .. 
Required: 
a. Find the major and minor principal stresses and their orientation. 
b. Find the stresses on the horizontal plane. 
c. Find the angle between planes (and b. 
So/utlom. 
. 
. I 
1. Plot the coordinates of ~he stresses on planes a and b. If you assume the body or element is in 
equilibrium, then these coordinates are on the circumference of the Mohr circle. To find the 
center, construct a pefpendicular to the line AB, which joins the two points. The intersection 
of the horizonta. 1 u~xis and the perpendicular bisector to A. B. is th~ center of the circle C. 
2. Establish the pole by drawing a line from point A parallel to the plane (15° from the hori-
zontal) upon whj, h the stresses at point A act to where it intersects the Mohr circle. The 
intersection oft is line and the Mohr circle is the pole P. · 
· · 
'': 
10 kPa 
2kPa I . 
Horizontal ~-
Plane a 
plane 
· 
On plane b: ub = 9 kPa, Tb = -3 kPa, 
oo = ? from plane a 
(a) 
FIGURE Ex. 11.4 
T (kPa) 
(b) 
506 
Chapter 11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
3. Lines from the pole p to (Tl and (T3 indicate the orientation of the major and minor principal 
planes. The principal stresses act perpendicular to these planes. The scaled-off value of a 1 is 
equal to 10.65 kPa, and a 3 is found to be 3.61 kPa. 
4. The stresses on the horizontal plane are found by drawing a horizontal line from the pole 
until it intersects the Mohr circle at point H; the stresses on this plane are (8.6, 3.18) kPa. 
5. To find the angle between the two planes a and b, draw the line PB from the pole to B. This 
line is the actual orientation in space of plane B. The angle e then represents the true angle 
between planes A and B, or 8 = 46°. 
Example 11.5 
Given: 
The stress on an element shown in Fig. Ex.11.5a. 
Required: 
' 
' 
, 
., 
Find the magnitude and direction of the major and minor principal stresses. 
Solution: Refer to Fig.Ex.11.5b for the foll~wingsteps: 
y 
1. Plot the two pointsX andY from 1the given stress coordinates. These two points lie on the 
Circumference of the circle. Where the line XY intersects the a~axis establishes the center of 
the Mohr circle at (6, 0). 
! 
2. Locate the pole by drawing a line from pointY parallel to the plane on which the stress at 
Y acts. This line is at 45° from the horizontal, and it intersects the Mohr circle at the pole P, 
which is the same point as point X. 
T (kPa) 
u 1 = 8.85 kPa 
ol 
l 
4 
~ 
"1: 
. l--·-· 
·'~ u(kP~) 
X 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE Ex. 11.5 
11.3 Stress-Strain Relationships and Failure Criteria 
507 
3. To find the direction of the principal stresses, draw a line from the pole to u 1 and u 3 ; these 
lines are shown dashed on Fig. Ex.ll.Sb. The direction (arrows) of u 1 and u 3 are shown in the 
figure. The values of u 1 and u 3 are scaled off the figure and found to be 8.85 kPa and 3.2 kPa, 
respectively. 
, 
· 
._, __ ............ "'"-~--""" ~~- ........... -~ 
····~··· ,.· 
By now you can see that the Mohr circle of stress represents the complete two-dimensional state 
of stress at equilibrium in an element or at a point The pole simply couples the Mohr circle to the ori-
entation of the element in the real world. The Mohr circle and the concept of the pole are very useful 
in geotechnical engineering; we shall use them throughout the rest of this text. 
11.3 
STRESS-STRAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND FAILURE CRITERIA 
a 
Earlier,' in the introduction to Chapter 8, we briefly mentioned some stress-strain relationships. Now we 
want to elaborate on, as well• as illustrate, some of those ideas. The stress-strain curve for mild steel is 
shown in Fig.11.4(a). The initial portion up to the proportional limit or yield point is linearly elastic. This 
means that the material will return to its original shape when the stress is released, as long as the applied 
stress is below the yield point. It is possible, however, for a material to have a nonlinear stress-strain 
curve and still be elastic, as shown in Fig. 11.4(b). Note that both these stress-strain relationships are 
independent of time. If time is a variable, then the material is called visco-elastic. Some real materials 
such as most soils and polymers are visco-elastic. Why, then, don't we use a visco-elastic theory to describe 
the behavior of soils? The problem is that soils have a highly nonlinear stress-strain-time behavior, and 
unfortunately only a mathematically well-developed linear theory of visco-elasticity is available. 
a 
a 
ayr------------------
8 
8 
8 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
a 
a 
8 
8 
8 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
' 
' 
' 
·,; 
' 
'> 
' 
' 
' 
I 
' 
' 
, 
FIGURE 11.4 Examples of stress-strain relationships for ideal and real materials: (a) mild steel; (b) nonlinear elastic; 
(c) perfectly plastic; (d) elasto-plastic; (e) brittle; and (f) work-hardening and work-softening. 
508 
Chapter 11 '· · The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Note that so far we've said nothing about failure or yield. Even linearlyelastic materials yield, 
as indicated in Fig.11.4(a), if sufficient stress is applied.At the proportionaJ limit, the material is said 
to become plastic or to yield plastically. The behavior of real materials can be idealized by several 
plastic stress-strain relationships, as shOwn in Figs. 11.4(c), (d), and (f). Perfectly plastic materials 
[Fig.11.4(c)], sometimes called rigid-pla~tic, can be treated relatively easily mathematically, and thus 
are popular subjects of study by mechanicians and mathematicians. A more realistic stress-strain 
relationship is elasto-plastic [Fig.11.4(d)]. The, material is linearly elastic up to the yield point a y; then 
it becomes perfectly plastic. Note that both perfectly plastic and elasto-plastic materials continue to 
strain even without any additional stres~ applied. The stress-strain curve for ii.ild steel cari be approx-
imated by an elasto~plastic stress-strain curve, and this theory is very useful in, for. example, working, 
punching; and machining of metals. 
.• 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
Sometimes materials such as cast iron, concrete, and a lot of rocks are brittle, in that they exhibit 
very little strain as the stress increases. Then, at some point, the material suddenly collapses or crushes 
[Fig.11.4(e)],More complex but also realistic for many materials'are the stress-strain relations shown in 
Fig.11.4(f). Work-hardening materials, as the name implies, become stiffer (higher modulus) as they are 
strained or "worked." The little hump in the stress-strain curve for mild steel after yield [Fig.11.4(a)] is 
an example of work-hardening:Many soils are also work-hardening-'-for example, compacted clays and 
loose sands. Work-softening materials [Fig.11.4(f)] show a decrease in stress as they are strained beyond 
a peak stress. Sensitive clay soils and dense sands are examples of work-softening materials. 
At what point on the stress7strain curve do we have failure? We could call the yield point "failure" 
. if we wanted to. In some situations, if a material is stressed to its yield point, the strains or deflections are 
so large that for all practical purposes the material has failed. This means that the material cannot satis-
factorily continue to carry the applied loads. The stress at :'failure:' is often very arbitrary, especially for 
nonlinear materials. With brittle-type materials, however, there is no question when failure occurs-it's 
obvious. Even with work-softening materials [Fig; 11.4(f)], the peak of the curve or the maximum stress 
is usually defined as failure. On the other hand, with some plastic materials it niay not be obvious. Where 
would you define failure if you had a work-hardening stress-strain curve [Fig. 11.4(f)]? With materials 
such as these, we usually define failure at some arbitrary percent strain..,-for example, 15% or 20%-or 
at a strain or deformation at which the function of the structure might be impaired. ' 
· 
Now we can also' define the strength of a material. It is the maximum or yield stress, cir the stress 
at son1estrain which we have defined as "failure." 
. 
. 
· · · 
· ' 
As suggested by the above discussion, there are many ways of defining failure in real materials-
or, put another way, there are many failure criteria:·Most of them don't work for soils, and in fact the 
one we do use, which is the subject of the next section, doesn't always work so well either. Even so, the 
most common failure criterion applied to· soils is the Mohr..:.Coulombfailure criterion. 
11.4 
THE MOHR-COULOMB FAILURE CRITERION 
11.4.1 Mohr Failure Theory 
Mohr .is the same Otto Mohr of Mohr circle fame. Coulomb you know from coulombic friction and 
electrostatic attraction and repulsion, among other thirigs. Around the turn of the twentieth century, 
Mohr (1900) hypothesized a criterion of failure for real materials in which he stated that materials fail 
. when the shear stress on the failure plane at failure reaches some unique function of the normal stress on 
· that plane, or 
· 
·· ·' 
7ft = f(aff) 
(11.7) 
where T is the shear stress and a is the normal stress. The first subscript f refers to the plane on which 
the stress acts (in this case thefailu~e plane) andthe secondfmeaiis."at failure." . . . 
... 
) 
' 
, ' •. ' 
• 
• 
f 
~. 
, 
" 
' 
· ·. ; , 11.4 The Mohr...:coulomb Failure Criterion 
509 
I 
U1f 
I 
, 
I 
I 
' .. 
/ 
Failure plane 
If./ . 
T 
'. I 
Tff = f(uff) ' 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 11.5 (a) Mohr failure criterion; (b) element at failure, showing the principal stresses and the 
stresses on the failure plane. ; 
.. · . • 
· · .. : 
r11 is called .the shear strength of the mat~rial, and the relationship expr~ssed ~y Eq. (11.7) is 
· shown in Fig.11.5(a). Figure 11.5(b) shows an element at failure with the principal stresses that caused 
failure and the resulting normal and shear stresses on the failure plane. 
:For the present, we will assume that a failure plane exists, which is not a bad assumption for soils, 
; 
. rocks, and many other materials. Also, we won't worry now about how the principal stresses at failure are 
: applied to the element (test specimen or representative element in the field) or howthey are measured. 
: .. 
Anyway, if we know the principal stresses at failure, we can draw or sketch a Mohr circle to rep-
. resent this state of stres~ for this particular element. Similarly, we could conduct several tests to failure, 
. . or we could measure the stresses in several elements at failure and construct Mohr circles for each test 
.or element at failure. Such a series is plotted in Fig.·1t6. Note that' only the top half of each Mohr cir-
' : cle is drawn, which is conventionally done in soil mechanics for convenience only. Since the Mohr cir-
.. cles are determined at failure, it is possible to construct the limiting or failure envelope of the shear 
:. • ·,stress: This envelope; called the Mohrfailure envelope, expresses the .functional. relationship between 
·.the shear stress r11 and the normal stress u1[atfailure [Eq. (11.7)]: "· ... · 
Note that any Mohr Circle lying below the Mohr failure envelope (such as circle A in Fig. 11.6) 
:represents a stable condition. Failure occurs only when the combination of shear and normal stress is 
::~:.:such that the Mohr circle is tangent to the Mohr failure envelope. Note also that circles lying above the 
Mohr failure envelope (such as circle Bin Fig.11.6) cannot exist. The material would fail before reach-
ing these states of stress. If this envelope is unique for a given material, then the point of tangency of 
the Mohr failure envelope gives the stress conditions on the failure 'plane atfailure. Using the pole 
,, i ' • 
' : 
~ 
: 
'Mohr failu're envelop~ .. 
. •: ,, 
'1; 
,:l 
. FIGURE 11.6 The Mohr circles at failure define the Mohr failure envelope. 
·'· 
510 
Chaptet.U• 
The.Mohr.Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
_l, 
.T ·, 'i 
;; 
, ' 
.• (a) . 
":•' 
' ' ' 
· ... 
/ 
/ 
" 
/ 
/ 
' 
/ 
'll ~~erst 
/'. .. 
/ ' 
' \; 
· 
. , 
/~t 
. 
··'/ 
CT1f'· 
.u."~~CT3f 
' ., 
-~~--
T:~t·· 
. '/ 
/ 
.· 
/ 
k
·CT.1f 
I 
~ ·:' ; 
; ~ ' 
(b), : ';. ) ~ ~ 
~ t l 
•' 
~~-a_,~ 
822~l~~=-a, 
. (c) 
FIGURE 11.7 {a),Mohr failur~ hypothesis for determining the angle of the failure plane in the {b) element; 
{c) conjugate failure planes. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
! I, y 
; 
1 
. ', ~ . 
. ' method, we can therefore determine the angle of the failure plane from the point of tangency ~f the 
Mohr circle and the Mohr failure en~dope. The hypothesis, that the point of tangency defines the angle 
•. of the failure plane in the elemept or test specimen, is the Mohr failure hypothesis. You should distin-
. guish this hypothesis from the Mohr failure theory. The •Mohr failure hypothesis· is' illustrated in 
• ,Fig;:11.7(a) for the element atfailure shown inFig. 11.7(b): Stated another way: the Mohr failure 
· • hypothesis says that the point of tangency of the Mohr failure envelope with the Mohr cirde at failure 
determines the inclination of the failure plane: . . · 
· · 
.; 
· 
. 
· ::· 
. 
. 
· Another thing you should note from Fig: 11.7(a) is that, even though in soil mechanics we com-
• ''·. manly draw only the top half of the Mohr circle, there:is a bottom half, and also a botto~~half Mohr 
··l ' · 
failure envelope. This also means, ifthe Moh~ failure hypothesis is valid, that itis equally.Jikely that a 
,; failure plane will form at an angle of~a1 ;as shown'iri Fig.•U.7(a). In faCt; it is the nonuniform stress 
. · .. ' . :. 
conditions on the' ends of a test specimen and small inhomogeneities within the specimen itself that we 
think cause a single failure plane' often to form in a tesi specimen: Ever wonder .why a cone forms at 
· • : , failure i~ the top and bottom of· a concrete cylinder when 'it. is • failed in compression? Shear stresses 
between the testing machine and specimen caps cause nonuniform stresses to develop within the spec-
;:; . . 
imen: If everything is homogeneous and u~iform stress conditions are applied to a specimen; then mul-
: ;tiple failure planes form at conjugate angles,: ±:aj, as shown in Fig.'ll.7(c). · ::·o ·. •;;i•. r 
; • 
!' ,. 
i j 
' 
~ : 
' 
·~. 
11.4.2 ~Mohr-Coulomb Failure Criterion 
::c:J.• 
'' .if}~lJ, l 
Now we ·~re going to involve Monsieur Dr. Coulomb in our story. In addition to his famous experi-
\. 
ments with cats' fur and ebony rods, M. Coulomb (1776) was also.concerned.with military defense 
works such as revetments and fortress walls. At that time, these constructions "'ere built by rule of 
thumb, and unfort~nately for theFrench military defenses many of. these works failed. Coulomb 
became interested in the problem' of 'the lateral pressures exerted against retaining walls, arid he 
devised a system for analysis of earth. pressures against retaining structures that is still used today. One 
of the things he needed for design was the. shearing strength of the· soiLSince he was also interested in 
the sliding friction characteristics of different materials, he set up a device for determining the shear 
resistance of soils. He.observed that there was a stress-independent component of shear strength and 
a stress-dependent component. The stress-dependent component is similar to sliding friction in solids, 
. 
. 
. : 
' -" ; ' 
~ , 
' 
.. : 
• . 
~ 
' : . 
'. ~ .. , . . 
. 
' ' " 
~· 
: .: >; ' .. : j 
; J··· 
'. 1 
T 
T c 
_L~~------~----------~~ 
a 
FIGURE 11.8 The Coulomb strengthequation · 
presented graphically. 
· 
11.4 The:Mohr.::..coulomo Failure CriteriOn 
511 
so he called this component the angle of internal 
friction,· denoting it by the: symbol r/J. The other 
component seemed to be related to the intrinsic 
cohesion of the material and it is· commonly given 
· the symbol c. Coulomb's equation is, then, 
' 
:·· 
-· 
. 
' 
7f ~ utadrjJ + 
~· .: 
(11.8) 
where 7fis th~ shear strength of th~ soil, ir is the 
applied normal stress, and rP and c are called the 
strength parameters of the soil, as defined. above. 
This relationship gives a straightline.and is, therefore, easy to wo.rk.with. As is explained in the next 
chapter, neither rP nor cis an inherent property of the material;' ori the contrary, they are dependent 
on the conditions operative in the test. We could; much as M. Coulomb probably did, plot the results 
of a shear test on soil to obtain the strength parameters IP and c (Fig.11.8). Note that either strength 
paramet~r could be zero for any particular stress condition; that' is, 7 = c when rP = 0, or 7 = (]" tan rP. 
when c .:;= 0. As we shall see in Chapter 12, these relationships are valid for certain specific test condi-
tions for.some soils.· 
· 
\. -· · .. : 
; ~·-~··c 
Although who first did sO is unknown, it would see in reasonable to combin'e the Coulomb equa~ 
tion, Eq. (11.8), with the Mohr failure criterim1, Eq. (1i.7); Engineers traditionally prefer to work with 
straight lines, since anything higher.th~m a first~order equation.(straigh! line) is more complicated. So 
the natural thing to i:lo :was to straighten out that curved Mohr failure envelope, or at least approximate 
the curve by a straight li~e o~er some given stress range; then the equation for that lineih terms of the 
Coulomb strength parameters could be written. Thus wasborn the Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, 
which is by far the most popular strength criterion applied to soils: The Mohr-Coulomb criterion can 
be written as 
· 
: .... " 
. 
··- -
· 
' 
(11.9) 
; 
These terms have been defined previously. This simple, easy-to-use criterion has many distinct advan-
tages over other failure criteria. It is the only one that predicts the stresses on the failure plane at failure, 
and since soil masses have been observed to fail on rather distinct surfaces; we would like to be able to 
estimate the state of stress ai failure on.potential sliding surfaces. So the Molir..:.coulomb criterion is 
very useful for analyses of the stability of earth slopes and foundations: \ 
. \; . 
Before we discuss the kinds of tests used to determine the Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters, 
we should look' a little more carefully at some Mohr circles, both before failure and at failure. they 
have several interesting characteristics that will be 'useful later on. 
First, if we know .the angle of inclination cif.the Mohr. failure envelope or have determined it 
from laboratory tests, then it is possible to write the angle of the failure plane Cit in terms of the slope 
rjJ of the Mohr failure envelope. To do this, we have to invoke the Mohr failure hypothesis. Then the 
failure angle measured reh:ltive to the plane of the major principal stress is 
(11.10) 
. 
. 
·: 
: 
' 
-
A pro~f of this equation is ~eqtie'sted in one of the problems at the end of the chapter. 
, ' . 
S~cond, let's look at a soil element subjected t~ principal stresses that are less than the stresses 
required to cause failure. Such a state of stress might be represented by the Mohr circle. shown in 
• , : '.; ''·Fig. 1L9(a)i In·this case 7/ is the mobilized shear resistance on the potential failure plane, and 7ft is 
... : ·the shear strength available (shear stress on the failure plane at failure): Since. we haven't reached 
512 
Chapter 1l<: . The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
"',, 
T 
·,., 
'•\ 
'',,'; 
J, ·' 
' 
\ 
' 
·:¢-··.· 
.. ;<T1_.;·. /'''.: 
.•• 
. 
. <T3' 
.. 
·.· .. 
'.,(. --.' . 
: ;• 
~
o-1(!·.:·' 
" 
: 
. <T3f 
:1 
" 
1 ;t 
,,.,. 
~ i , : ; ; .; 
·),.\ 
,' ;· 
'l, 
;1' 
\ . ~ 
' ; : : 
;;t" 
l 
l 
,. 
' i; \ 
,. ' 
<T3f 
<Tff 
<Tn 
(b) 
T 
(c) 
<T1f 
<: 
<Shear strength 
available when 
<T 
FIGURE 11.9 • (a) Stress conditions before failure; (b) stress conditions at failure; 
•:: (c) Mohr failure env~lope for a purely cohesive material (after Hirschfeld, 1963): : 
~ \ I I • 
'.,; 
':\ 
.,: i ; ' ' 
: : . 
~ ~ ' 
'•\: 
<,l 
•'l• 
'. 
,. 
' 
. 
., 
-
L 
·i 
ll 
failure yet, some reserve strength remains, and this in a way is a definition of the factor of safety in 
' : I · 1 the,material. Or, 
, · 
. 
, 
-
. 
" 
·;. 
', fast~r of safety (F.S.) = '!!!-( ay~ilable) 
-
' 
' • • 
· .'Tf (applied) -
.-._, 
.'~ L.' 
(11.11) 
!: 
, .. , 
Now, if the stresses increase so that failure occurs, then the Mohr circle becomes tangent to the 
Mohr failure envelope; According to the Mohr failure hypothesis, failure occurs on the plane inclined 
11.4 The Mohr:....coulomb Failure Criterion 
513 
at a1 and with shear stress on that plane of Ttt· Note that this is not the largest or maximum shear stress 
in the element! The maximum shear stress acts o~ the plane inclined at 45° and is equal to • 
· 
av- u3f 
Tffiax = 
2 
> 7!! 
(11.12) 
Why, then doesn't failure occur on the 45° plane? Well, it cannot, because on that plane the shear 
strength available is greater than T max· This condition is represented tiy the distance from the maxi-
mum point on the Mohr circle up to the Mohr failure envelope in Fig.11.9(b ). That would be the shear 
Strength available When the normal Stress Un on the 45° plane WaS (ulf + U3f)/2. 
. 
The only exception to the above discussion ~ould tie when the shear strength is independent of 
the normal stress; that is, when the Mohr failure. envelope is horizontal and 4> = 0. This situation, 
shown in Fig.11.9(c), is valid for special conditions, which are discussed in Chapter 12. Such materials 
are often called purely cohesive for obvious reasons. For the case shown in Fig. 11.9(c), failure 
theoretically occurs on the 45° plane (it doesn't really, as is explained in Chapter 12). The shear strength 
is T1, and the normal stress on the.theoretical failure plane at failure is (u1~ + u 31 )/2. 
11.4.3 .·Obliquity Relations 
'Another useful thing we should do before going on is to write· the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion in 
. terms of principal stresses. at failure, rather than as in Eq. (11.9) in. terms of Tff and Uff• Look at 
Fig.11.10 and note that sin 4> = RID, or 
· 
· 
· 
U1f- U3f 
. 
. 
2 
sm 4> = ----,---------
.ulf. + u3f 
2 
+ c cot 4> 
or (uv- u3f) = (uv + u3f) sin 4> + 2c cos cf>. If c = 0, then (uv- u 31) = (uv + u 31) sin cf>,which 
can be written as . 
' 
· .. 
(uv- u3f) 
sm 4> = -,--'-----=--,-
(ulf + u3f) 
t= 
~~c-c-ot_~_~_ 
.. _ 
.. --=--,-_o-----~ 
u,,+ U3t 
2 
FIGURE 11.10 Mohr-Coulomb strength envelope with one Mohr circle at failure.· 
(1l.13) 
514 
Chapter 11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Rearranging, we have 
or the reciprocal is. 
a 1 = 1 +'sin <P 
a3 
1 - sin <P 
a 3 = 1 - sin <P 
a 1 
1 + sin <P · 
( 
' 
; '. 
', 
Using some trigonometric identities, we can express Eqs. (11.14) and (11.15) as 
-
= tan2 45° + -
(Tl 
( 
<P) 
(T3 
2 
a 3 = tim2(45° - !) 
(Tl 
2 
(11.14) 
(11.15) 
' (11.16) 
(11.17) 
Equations (11.14) through (11.17) are called the obliquity relationships, because they relate the 
major and minor principal stresses at failure when the angle of obliquity is a maximum. Obliquity in 
soils can be explained by analogy with the sliding friction behavior of a block on a rigid surface subject 
to normal and shear forces, or we can use a more realistic case of a foundation block resting on the 
ground surface. As shown in Fig.11.11(a), the foundation block has only a normal stress a acting on it. 
u 
T 
0 
-
f--u~ 
u 
(a) 
u. 
T 
I 
I 
(! /R 
~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Ta 
i7 
l 
(b) 
Ul 
I 
T 
I 
I 
FIGURE 11.11 
Foundation block 
k/ 
/R 
under normal and shear stresses: 
(a) application of normal stress 
only; (b) addition of shear stress 
to block in (a); (c) increase of 
,~w/)L,~Lk~ 
0 
applied stress to point of sliding 
~u~ 
u 
(incipient failure) and (! = cf>, 
angle of maximum obliquity. 
(c) 
11.4 The Mohr-Coulomb Failure Criterion 
515 
'T 
""' 
Mohr failure 
et:~velope 
FIGURE 11.12 Mohr circles for a three-dimensional 
state of stress. 
The Mohr diagram for this condition is on 
the right side ofFig.11.11(a). In Fig.ll.ll(b), 
a shear stress 'T a is applied to the base of the 
block, and the movement of the block to the 
left is resisted by the frictional resistance 'T,. 
The resultant R acts at an angle e from the 
vertical, and the tangent of e is, of course, 
Tala, as shown in the Mohr diagram to the 
• right for this stable condition ( 'T, > 'Ta)· 
Finally, in Fig. 11.11(c), the applied shear 
stress just equals the maximum frictional 
resistance ( 'T a = 'T r = a tan rp) and the block 
is at incipient failure, or just starts to slide. 
The angle e then becomes equal to coeffi-
cient of friction between the block and the ground surface, and the static friction becom~s the sliding 
friction. The Mohr plot is shown at the right, at the failure condition, and the angle of maximum 
obliquity, Bmax• is equal to the angle of internal friction¢. The obliquity relationships are useful for 
evaluating laboratory test data and in foundation design and analysis: 
. .The last factor we should consider is the effect of the intermediate principal stress a 2 on 
.·conditions at failure~ Since by definition a 2 lies somewhere between the major and minor princi-
. pal stresses, the Mohr circles for the three'pfincipal stresses l~ok like those. shown in Fig. 11.3(c) 
and again in Fig. 11.12. It is obvious that a 2 can have no influence on'the conditions at failure for 
the Mohr failure criterion, no rnatt~r what magnitude it has. The intermediate prin~ipal stress a 2 
probably does have some)nfluence in real soils, but the Mohr-Coulomb failure theory does not 
consider it. ' 
. 
. 
. 
' 
. 
. 
' 
11.4.4 Failure Criteria for Rock 
When tested in compression, most rocks except those that are very soft, will have a very brittle 
type failure.Their,stress-strain response is similar to that shown in Fig.11.4(e). Probably the best 
known theory to predict brittle failures and the development of tensile cracks in rocks and other 
brittle materials is the Griffith crack theory. Although it predicts tensile behavior of rock rather 
, well, it is quite complicated (Jaeger eta!., 2007) and not very practical to use. The Mohr-Coulomb 
theory; on. the other hand, is simple and practical, and although far from perfect, it is probably the 
most commonly used failure theory in rock mechanics (Goodman, 1989). Because intact rock usu-
ally has an appreciable unconfined compressive strength at zero confining stress, the Mohr failure 
envelope has a significant intercept, because unconfined compressive strength, as we shall see in 
Chapter 12, is twice the undrained shear strength 'Tf· (The unconfined compression test on rock is 
discussed in Sec. 11.5.4 below.) Mohr-Coulomb is applied to.rocks by extrapolating the failure 
envelope to the left of the T-axis; through this intercept on the zero-confining stress axis, and into 
. the tensile side ofthe normal stress axis, as shown in Fig. 11.13. Because rocks can fail in tension, 
·there is a tensile.stress cutoff to the Mohr failure envelope on the tensile side of the Mohr dia-
gram. As noted by Goodman (1989), the minor principal stress can· never be less than the tensile 
strength of the rock. 
Another popular failure criterion for rock is the Hoek and Brown (1980; 1988) criterion for 
fractured rock~ (see also Wyllie, 1999, and Jaeger eta!., 2007). The Hoek-Brown.criterion is a very 
practical empirical criterion based on years of experience observing the behavior of rock masses in 
tunnel and slope construction, supplemented by laboratory tests on fractured rock and model studies 
of jointed rock. We discuss the Hoek-Brown criterion in some detailin Sec. 13.16, after we know 
more about laboratory testing of both soils and rock. 
516 
Chapter 11 · ·· 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
FIGURE 11.13 Mohr-Coulomb 
failure criterion showing a ten~ 
~ 
:::l 
p 
c: 
0 
"iii 
c: 
~ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
sion cut~off (Goodman, 1989). 
-To u3 
u3 
u3 
u1 
u1 
11.5 
LABORATORY TESTS FOR THE SHEAR STRENGTH OF SOILS AND ROCKS 
u1 
u 
In this section we briefly describe some of the more common laboratory tests for determining the 
· shearing strength of soils and rocks. Some of the tests 'are rather complicated, and for details you 
should consult manuals and books on laboratory testing of soils-for example, U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers (1986), U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1990), Bardet (1997), and Head(1996 and 1998). For 
testing rock, see Goodman (1989), Wyllie (1999), Jaeger et al. (2007), and The International Society 
for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) Blue Book of ISRM suggested test methods (Ulusay and Hudson, 
2007). Many routine tests for both soils and rocks are now standardASTM (2010) tests. · 
11.5.1 Direct Shear Test 
. 
. 
The direct shear test is probably the oldest strength test for soils. Coulomb used a type of shear box test 
· more than 230 years ago to determine the necessary parameters for his strength equation. The test in 
priticiple is quite simple. Basically, there is a specimen container; or "shear box," which is separated 
horizontally into halves. One-half is fixed; with respect to that half, the other half is either pushed or 
pulled horizontally. A normal load is applied to the soil specimen in the shear box by a figid loading 
cap. The shear load, horizontal deformation, and vertical deformation are measured during the test. 
Dividing the shear force and the normal force by the nominal area of the specimen, we obtain the 
shear stress as well as the nonnal stress on the failure plane. Remember that the failure plane is forced 
to be horizontal with this apparatus. 
A cross-sectional diagram of the essential features of the apparatus is shown in Fig.11.14( a), while 
Fig. 11.14(b) shows soine typical test results. The Mohr-Coulomb diagram for conditions at failure 
appears in Fig.11.14(c). As an example, if we were to test three samples of a sand at the same relative 
density just before shearing, then as the normal stress u n was increased, we would expect'from our 
knowledge of sliding friction a concurrent increase in the shear stress on the failure plane at failure (the 
shear strength). This condition is shown in the typical shear stress versus deformation curves for a dense 
sand in Fig. 11.14(b) for u,;1 < Unz < un3. When these results are plotted•on a Mohr diagram, 
Fig. 11.14(c ), the angle of internal friction cp can be obtained. , 
Typical results of vertical deformation 11H for a dense sand are showri in the lower portion of 
· Fig.11.14(b). At first there is a slight reduction in height or volume of the soil specimen, followed by a 
: dilation or increase in height or volume. As the normal stress u,; increases, it becomes more difficult for 
the soil to dilate during shear, which seems reasonable. 
11.5 . ·Laboratory. Tests for,the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
517 
Un3 = P3/A 
----
(a) 
Un2 = P2/A 
Un1 = P,IA 
T 
----- Un1 
----- Un2 
:.----- Un3 
·., (c) 
(b) 
FIGURE 11.14 . (a) Cross-sectional schematic diagram of direct shear apparatus; {b) typical test results 
{dense sand); and {c) Mohr diagram for specimens at the same relative density. 
. . . . 
We do. not obtain the principal stresses. directly in the direct shear test. Instead, if they are 
needed, they may. be inferred if the Mohr~Couloinb failure. envelope is· known. Then, as. shown in 
.. ,Example 11.6; the angleof rotation' of the prindp:al stresses may b~deiermined. Why is there rotation 
' of the priricipalplanes? Initially, the hofizontal plane (potential filihire plime)is a principai plane (no 
shear stress), but after the shearing stress is applied and at failure, bydefinition; it cmuiot be a principal 
plane: Therefore, the principal phines must rotate in 'the direct shear test. How much do they rotate? It. 
I depends on the slope ~f the Mohr 'failure envelope, but'it is' fai~ly easy t'o cietermi~e, as is shown in 
' ·Example ll.(ifyou make solm!'siinple'assump.tions. 
.. · '· 
' .. '· 
:. 
' 
. ·. 
· 
" 
' 
' 
•• 
' 
' 
: 
' 
•• 
'-
'· 
• 
., 
' 
.,, 
> 
Example 11.6 
. •\ -.. 
Given:,.,:,.,. 
,,,. 
,, 
.. , 
Th~ iriitlal and failure c~hdid~ris in a ctire~ishe~r test,' as ~hown in Fig. :Ex.'i1'.6 .. : 
. 
. ' 
. 
! •' . 
":' ';' . ': 
~ ' ' '. . 
' 
~ 
. 
. ' . .;. ,. 
. ' [! l l ' . ": 
. 
. Req~ired: 
.. Plot the Mohr circles for both initial conditions and at failure, assuming ¢ is known: Find the 
principal stresses at failure and their angles of rotation at failure.,; 
... 
: t ; ~ . ! ,· j '. -· 
·, Solution: :The Mohr circles both for initial conditions and at failure are shown on the right side of 
Fig. Ex.ll.6.'At failure, you know that the normal stress on the failure.plane, u11, is the same as the 
initial normal stress, u n. Since ¢ is known (assume c is small or zero), from: the Mohr failure 
518 
Chapter 11 
:. The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
;·,, 
.,·; 
Element on the 
failure plane 
,,m., I rl~u,. . 
conditions: 
. 
: · 
. 
. 
·------ .' .. ·.· -:-.. -.. ·.~::;:~-. ;~~~::-;;~0-
,• ,· 
. 
···'I 
',! 
Mohr diagrams 
T 
·Pole 
lT3o lTn = lT1o 
lT 
T 
Atfailure: 
llTn 
_____ Ttt 
---·---IJ~F 
TL_~~----
-.
3
; £Ttt= lTn ~ 
. . . . 
/ 
. 
. 
·. 
•'. 
// 
// 
lT1f 
lT3f 
/ 
\ 
/ 
/ 
/\) 
/ 
/ 
/ 
FIGURE Ex. 11.6 
hypothesis (Fig. 11. 7) the shear stress' (:m thefailure. pliuie at faih.ir'e 1~ detennined. by the point of 
tangency of the Mohr Circieat failure. The'centerofthe failun! circle can be found bydrawing a 
. perpendicular to the Mohr failure enveio'pe from the point of tangency. The radial distance is, of 
<course,egualto[(a~-a3 )/2]t:' 
• 
'· •. 
. 
'' · · ·•• 
.·. '• · ' 
·" • 
'Another way to find the Mohr· Circle at failure is graphiCally by trial and error. Find the only 
. circle that is tangent at ( a!t, Ttl) and. whose diameter lies on the a-axis: Once. the failure circle is 
drawn, the values of aij and a 3j can be scaled off. From the pole method, the angles of rotation of 
these stresses are readilyfound, as shown in Fig. Ex.11.6:' : · 
.· 
·' · · .: 
1 ' 
· 
' 
There are, of course, several advantages and disadvantages of the direct shear test Primarily, the 
test is inexpensive, fast, and simple, especially for granular materials. We do observe shear planes and 
thin failure zones in nature; so it seems all right to actually shear a specimen of soil along some plane to 
see what the stresses are on that plane. Disadvantages include the problem of controlling drainage-it is 
very difficult if not i~possible, especially for fine-grained soilS. Conse.quenily; 'ihe 'test is not so suitable 
·for other than completely drained conditions. When we force the failure plane to occur, how can we be 
sure that it is the. weakest direction or even at the same critical direction as occurs iri the field? We don't 
·; 
., know. Another flaw in the 'direct shear.test is that there are rather serious stress'concentrations at the 
sample b~undaries, which lead to highly. nonuniform. stress conditions within the test specimen itself. 
And finally, as shown by Example11.6, an uncontrolled rotation of principal planes and stresses occurs 
between the start of the test and failure. To· accurately model the in situ loading conditions, the amount 
•of this rotation should be known and accounted for, but it isn't. The Mohr Circles for the direct' shear test 
are further illustrated by Example 11.7. 
; ;i 
·,.' 
• 1' 
11.5 Laboratory Tests for the Shear: strength of Soils imd Rocks 
519 
Example 11.7 . 
. Given: 
-;'' 
' Adirect·shear test is run on a medium dense sandy silt, with the' normal 'stress Un = 65 kPa; 
K 0 = 0.5. At failure, the normal stress is sti1165 kPa imd the'shearstress is 41 kPa. 
Required: 
Draw the Mohr circles for the initial conditions arid at failure and determine: .. 
a; The principal stresses at failure. · 
'b: The orientation of the fail~~~ plarie. 
c. ·The ~rientati~n of the major principal plane at fail~re .. 
d. The orientation of the plane of maximum shear stress at failure. :•: . 
. Solution: 
'';,. 
. a. The initial co'ilditioris areish~wri i~ Fig. Ex: 11.7, by circle i. Si~be Ko~ o.s,; thi{initial hori-
zontM stress is 32.5 kPa. The normal stre'~s on th~ specimeh is held co~stant at 65 kPa during 
the test, so ui; is' also uti·. Since the shear stn~ss at faihi~eis 4i'.~Pa,'the failure P?int [as in 
Fig.11.13(c)] is plotted as point F. The 1> is determined to be 32°. What happens between the 
inithil M~hr Circle i imd at faihiie f is ~nknown: Tile c~~structio~ of ciicle f was described in 
" . 'Example 11.6: The' center of circle fis found to beat (91 kPa, O):So, uv = 139 kPa and 
. a3f.,~ ~3 kP~~ ·:·· ·::". 
. d, .•... ', 
'~· : 
·. · , . · ..• • •••• ; ··: 
, ,.. 
. · · •• 
. b. .The state ofstressat failure.point F is (65,41) kPa, and the failure plane is assumed to be 
h~riz~ntal-~good as~umption fo~ the direct shea~ test.. :. 
'·' ' . ' . 
.. 
;; ' 
; 
t 
i 
' 
l 
,, 
i! 
cr1( 
... Normal stress, u (kPa) 
!'. 
-•· 
-. ·-,, 
.• 
'-'' 
',., 
FIGURE Ex.11.T 
·.:.·· 
520 
Chapter 11 . , The. Mohr Circle, Failure,Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
· c.· A line drawn horizontally from the known state of stress at point F intersects the Mohr circle 
at P, the pole. Line Pavindicates the orientation of the major principal plane. It ·makes an 
angle of about 60.5° with the horizontal. 
d. Line PM is the orientation of the plane of maximum shear stress; it is about 16° from the 
horizontal. Note.that, in this example, if we didn'tassume that the Mohr.failure envelope 
passed through the origin oftheMohr,diagram,more than Oll(! test at different ali's would 
be required to establish the Mohr envelope. 
11.5.2 Triaxial Test'' · 
! ~ i , I , 
1 f 
;j( 
During the early history of soil mechanics, the direct shear·.-~est was one of the most common tests for 
measuring soil shear strength. Then, about 1936; A. Cas'~grand~ whiie: ~t' MT'r:b~gan research on the 
development of a cylindrical compression test in an attempt to overcome some of the serious disad-
vantages of the direct shear test. Now this test, commonly called the triaxial test, is by far the more pop-
ular of the two. It is much more complicated than the direct shear but also much more versatile. We can 
control drainage quite well, and there is no rotation of a 1 and a 3 • Stress concentrations still exist, but 
. they are significantly less than in,the di?ect shear test.Also, the failure plane ,can occur anywhere. An 
adde'd advantage: we can control the'stress paths to failure reasonablyweJl,which means that complex 
stresspaths in the field can ll1o~e effectively be m~deled in' the laboratory with.' the triaxial test. Stress 
paths an~ explained in Chapter 13. 
: 
· · . 
. . . . , 
·· 
, · · , · . , 
, 
The principle of the triilXial test is shown in Fig. 11.15( a). The soil specimen is usually encased in 
. a rubber membrane to pre~ent th~ pressurized cell fluid (usually water) from penetrating the pores of 
the soil. Axial load is applied through a pistori, arid often the volume change of the specimen during a 
drained test or the induced pore water pressure during an undrained test is measured. As mentioned 
above, we can coritrol the drainage to and from the specimen, and it is possibl~. with some assumptions, 
to control the stress paths applied to the specimen. Basically, we assume the stresses on the boundary 
of the specimen are principal stresses [Fig: 11.15(b )]. This is not really true because of some small shear 
p 
'.::' 
lllll "~" }' 
! Ill Ucell 
U cell ----(')()------
~To 
volume change or pore 
water pressure measurement 
device (~ Vol or ~u) 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 11.15 (a) Schematic diagram of the triaxial apparatus; (b) assumed stress con.ditions on the triaxial specimen. 
· 11.5 ··Laboratory Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
521 
stresses acting on the ends of the specimen. Also, as mentioned before, the failure plane is not forced-
the specimen is free to fail on any weak plane or, as sometimes occurs, to simply bulge. 
You will note that the Uaxial in Fig; 11.15(b) is the difference between the major and minor prin-
cipal stresses; it is called the principal stress difference (or sometimes, incorrectly, the deviator stress). 
Note aiso that for the conditions shown in the figure, 'u2·= u 3 = Ucell· Sometimes we will assume that 
Ucen = u 1 = a2 for specialtypes of stress pathtests .. ' 
', 
As mentioned, the triaxial test is far more complex than the direct shear test; entire books have 
been written on test details and interpretation of the 'results (see, for example, Bishop and Henkel, 
1962). Most of the data and test results described in Chapter 12 were derived from triaxial tests. · 
Drainage conditions in the triaxial test are models of specific critical design situations required 
for the analysis of stability in geotechnical engineering practice. These are commonly designated by a 
two-letter symbol. The first letter' refers to what happens before shear-that is, whether the specimen is 
consolidated. The second letter refers tO the drainage conditions during shear. The three permissible 
drainage paths in the triaxial test are as follows: 
Drainage Path 
Before Shear-During Shear 
. Unconsolidated-Undrained 
Consolidated-Undrained 
Consolidated-Drained 
Symbol 
uu 
cu 
CD 
. . 
. Forreasons explained in Chapter 12, the unconsolidated-drained test defies interpretation and 
, is therefore meaningless. Triaxial test results for the three drainage paths are-described in detail in 
Chaptef12. 
· 
· 
· 
· · · 
· 
· 
·· 
· 
Example 11.8 
Given: 
.. A conventional consolidated-drained (CD) triaxial test is conducted on a sand. The cell pressure 
is 100 kPa, imd the applied' axial stress at failure is 200 kPa. 
. '.. . . 
. 
. 
. 
. ' 
. . . 
' 
. 
. 
. 
Required: 
a. Plot the Mohr circles for both the (1) initial and (2) failure stress conditions. 
b. Determine cfJ (assume c = 0). 
c. Determine (3) the shear stress on the failure plane at failure r11, and fmd (4) the theoretical 
angle of the failure plane in the specimen. Also (5) determine the angle of maximum obliquity. 
d. Determine (6) the maximum shear stress at failure Tmax and (7) the angle of the plane on 
which it acts; calculate (8) the available shear strength on this plane and (9) the factor of 
safety on this plane. 
Solution: 
a. Refer to Fig. 11.14(b) mid Fig, Ex. 11.8. (1) The initial conditions are shown at the top of 
Fig. Ex. 11.8 for the conventional triaxial test. The initial stress is equal to the cell pressure 
Ucelb and it is equal in all directions (hydrostatic). Therefore the Mohr circle for the initial 
stress conditions is a point at 100 kPa, as shown in the Mohr diagram of Fig. Ex. 11.8. 
522 
Chapter.11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Initial conditions: 
Mohr diagram: 
~CTcell = CT30 =. 100 kPa 
T(kPa) 
0--·~,~·~~ 100kP• 
At failure: 
, 
~CTaxial = 200 = (u1 -
u 3),}· 
r-S' ~ 100 
"" ~ 300 kP• 
U ~ 
CTcell = u31 = 100 kPa 
u (kPa) 
FIGURE Ex. 11.8 
(2) At failure, the a axial= (a1 -
a3)f = 200 kPa, and the cell pressure acell = 100 kPa is 
held constant during the conventional test. So 
av = (al - a3)f + a 3r = 200 + 100 = 300 kPa . 
Now we can plot the Mohr circle at failure; av = 300 and a 31 = 100. The center is at 
( a 1 + a 3)!2 = 200, and the radius is ( a 1 -
a 3)!2 = 100. The circle at failure is shown in 
Fig. Ex. 11.8. 
b. We find¢ graphically to be 30°. We can also use Eq. (11.13) if we prefer an analytical solu-
tion. Thus 
av- a3f 
200 
¢ = arcsin 
= arcsin- = 30° 
av + a3f 
400 
c. 
(3) From the Mohr failure hypothesis, the coordinates of the point of tangency of the Mohr 
failure envelope and the Mohr circle at failure are (a11,'T11 ). From Eq. (11.9), we know that 
Tff = a11 tan ¢, but unlike the direct shear test we don't know aft in the triaxial test. Look 
carefully at Fig.11.10. The small angle near the top of the Mohr circle is¢ (by a theorem from 
high school geometry). Therefore, since c = 0, and solving for a11, we obtain 
av + a3f 
av -
a3f . 
art= 
2 
-
2 
sm¢ 
= 200 - 100 sin 30° = 150 kPa 
Tff = aft tan ¢ =)50 tan 30° = 87 kPa 
( 4) The theoretical angle of inclination of the failure plane can be found graphically by the 
pole method or analytically. From the stress conditions at failure shown in Fig. Ex. 11.8, the 
pole is at (100, 0), and aj can be m!!asured to be 60°. 
For the analytical solution, use Eq. '(11.10) 
¢ 
ar = 45° + - = 60° 
2 
• 11.5 Laboratory Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
523 
(5) The inclination of the Mohr failure envelope is 30° and the point of tangency determines 
the condition of maximum obliquity. In other words, the ratio r11117tf is a maximum at this 
point on the Mohr circle and thus the maximum obliquity angle Bmax = ¢. 
l71f- 173f 
' 
d~ (6) Tmax = 
2 . 
= 100 kP~. 
(7) From the pole, the plane ofT max is inclined at 45° from the horizontaL 
(8) The available r [see Fig. 11.9(b)] can be determined from 
.
. 171f + 173f 
T available = 17 n tan ¢ .= 
2 . 
tan ¢ 
= 200 tan 30° = 115.5 kPa 
which is greater than T max = 100 kPa. Therefore the factor of safety on the 45° plane 
[Eq. (11.11)] is 
· 
F.S. = T available = 115.5 = 1.16 
Tmax 
· 100 
. (9) Note that thefactor of.safety on the "a1 = 60°plane i~ 
F.S. = T available = 86.6 ~ 1 ' 
Tf( 
86.6 
· 
A factor of safety of one makes sense in this latter case because the specimen is at failure. 
11.5.3. Special Laboratory Soils Tests 
O"cell 
Other types of laboratory strength tests that you may hear about include hollow cylinder tests, plane 
strain tests, and so-called true triaxial or cuboidal shear tests. These tests are schematically illustrated in 
Fig.11.16. In the' common t~i~xial test, the intermediate principal stress can be equal only to either the 
major or minor principal stress-nothing in between. With these other tests it is possible to vary 172 , 
(inside) 
O" axial = O"z 
· Any stress can be 
u1, u2 or 0"3 
(a) 
Ends are fixed so that 
e2 = o (plane strain) · 
(b) 
Any stress· can be 
u1, u2 or u3 
O"x* O"y* O"z 
, 
(c) 
, 
FIGURE 11.16 Schematic diagrams for the: (a) hollow cylinder test; (b) plane strain test; and (c) true triaxial or 
cuboidal shear test. 
524 
Chapter 11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Top platen rotates 
Soil specimen 
t 
\ 
Confining ring 
Horizontal shear plane 
(a) 
Bottom platen is 
fixed 
Uv 
I· 
____-/~ 
,_uh=Kouv 
(before shear) 
. Constant specimen diameter maintained by: 
1. Wire-reinforced rubber membrane (NGI type) 
2. A stack of very thin confining rings (SGI type) 
3. Rigid plates (prismatic) (Roscoe-Cambridge type) 
(b) 
FIGURE 11.17 Schematic diagrams of: (a) torsional or ring shear; (b) direct simple shear apparatus. 
which probably models the stress conditions in real problems more accurately. These tests are primarily 
used for research rather than for practical engineering applications. 
A couple of other tests of the direct shear type should also be mentioned. Torsional or ring shear 
tests [Fig; 11.17(a)] have been developed so that the test specimen may be sheared to very large defor-
mations. This is sometimes necessary to obtain the residual or ultimate shear strength of certain materials, 
and it is easier to do with a ring shear device than by repeatedly reversing a direct shear box. A more 
common test used in Scandinavia, Japan, and North America for static and dynamic testing is the direct 
simple shear (DSS) test [Fig.11.17(b)]. In this test, a fairly homogeneous state of shear stress is applied, 
thereby avoiding the stress .concentrations that exist in the ordinary direct shear' apparatus. Since stress 
. conditions in the DSS test are not the same as those shown in Examples 11.6 and 11.7 for the direct shear 
box, they are described in Exampl~ 11.9. , 
' 
· · 
' 
· 
Example 11.9 
. Given: 
The DSS test. 
RequirE!d: 
Illustrate the stress conditions in the test, and draw the Mohr circles for both initial and failure 
conditions. 
· 
Solution: The initial conditions for the DSS test shown in Fig. Ex.11.9a are the same as thosefor the 
· direct shear box test shown in Fig. Ex.'11.7. The sides of the soil sample are forced to rotate through 
an angle '}'by the application Of a horizontal shear Stress, Thv· These Stress conditions are shown in 
Fig. Ex.11.9b.Note the absence.of complementary shear stresses on the outside of' the soil sample; 
this is necessary for simple shear. Inside the sample, however, the applied stress system is assumed to 
be pure shear, and complementary stresses are necessiuy for equilibrium. With theapplication of 
Thv• and with u v and uh constant, the Mohr circle enlarges about the same center as the initial Mohr 
, ·11.5 ··Laboratory Tests for the Shear.Strength of Soils and Rocks 
525 
··!. 
(a) lniti.alconditio,ns·· .; 
/-/-= 
~==t=='-T:_;fW , 
i • J , · 
1' 
y{ 
~~~ 
v-· 
Soil 
h.~.h·;, 
Thv ;.(· '·,. • , 
(b) With application of shear 
; • stresses on top and bottom . 
only (se~ text) 
FIGURE Ex. 11:9 ·' : 
.,.,·' 
•' 
",,; ·.,.; 
. 
-,,, \.' .. :\\ < ;· 
, , :. 
(c) Mohr ~ircles, 
.. ~- ~ 
' . 
1 
• . . 
: :. . :, 
; t 
. 
. 
: 
. 
. 
. 
• • ·, 
;·; t 
, ; ~ 
• 
-~ 
-~':. > . 
' 
·'· .. l r· ! : 
• • 
< , .. · ... , : -·' 
. 
· circle LAt failure, the Mohr circle is just tarigent to the' Mohr failure envelope; and the Mohr circle 
. ' . iooks like circlef of Fig~Ex:'li.9c.' _ ·.·-···. 
' . 
'' . ; .. ·' " ;:· . "''· " 
. '', 
_ ' . 
. . . ' .'_·For this ~ondition at failure, the p~le Pis foundb'y extending 'a liiie f~om ·(a~;-::_r~~) horizontally 
(the plane on'\vhich these stresses act) to where it intersects tlig Mohr circle.' Lines drawn from the pole 
represent the orientations ofdifferent states ofstress within the soil'sampi~~ The lineP~fcorresponds 
to th~ plane of maximum (absolute value) shear stress; the line PF represents th~ orientation of the 
failure plane:-it is not horizontal as in the dire~~ shear test. The line Pav denotes the orientation of 
the a 1 planes when Thv is negative ori the'horiwntal surface~ When(and if) the sign of Thv becomes pos-
itive on the horizontal plane, as in· a cyclic simple shear test, then the pole is located at P' for that part 
or' t~~ cirde: The iine Palf .~eco~~sth~ ~ew orient~tion of the p~incipal, plane ~it~ ~ negative (}, the 
~iigleofprincipalstre~srotation .. · · 
···· 
· 
·· · ··· · ' 
· 
· 
· · · 
· 
" 
11.5.4 "laboratory Tests for Rock strength 
\ ... 
' 
. 
' 
.. 
.i; \' 
In Chapter 3 we described how, in rock mechanics and rock engineering, it is the defects Uoints, fractures, 
faults, bedding planes, etc.) in the rock that control its behavior. Even if the intact rock between the 
defects is very strong and impermeable, the defects usually make a rock mass weakerand more per~ 
meable. Nonetheless, we are still interested in the strength and other mechanical properties of intact rock 
•. spedmens.As with mittiral·soil deposits;rockmass~s often·hiwe highly variableproperties,'and knowing 
'' only. the type of rocl( gives just a very gerierill idea of its engineering properties, Laboratory tests on rock 
specimens help engine'ers chanicterize the' :ock mass variability'and also provide design information. 
526 
;r 
,,,,, 
' 
Chapter 11 · : ·The Mohr Circle,' Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
In.this section, we discuss some of the more common laboratory tests for the rock strength and related 
mechanical properties. In situ tests for rock are mentioned in the next section. For a good description 
of the equipment and procedures for rock core drilling and sampling, see ASTM (2010) D 2113. 
· Laboratory tests are performed mostly on rock cores of various sizes obtained from the core 
barrels of rock drills. Test specimens are selected from cores in core boxes similar to what we showed 
in Sec. 4.13. The test specimens must be properly prepared so that the results are meaningful and 
repeatable (Goodman, 1989;ASTM, 2010, D 4543). 
Probably the oldest and perhaps the most common rock test is the uniaxial or unconfined 
compression test. The configunttion is very: similar to tests on concrete cylinders, and many of the 
same considerati~n as to end'conditions andrate of loading apply. The ends of the core must be cut 
parallel, then polished and capped to minimize end effects. See ASTM (2010) D 7012, Method C, 
and ISRM Method No. 14 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007) for detailed test procedures. Because the 
strains at failure·are very small, flexing of the testing machine can adversel{influence the test 
results; thus these tests must be performed using a very stiff c~mpression testing machine .. ' '' ' . 
A stiff testing machine is also required·for triaxial compression tests performed on 'rock cores. 
The equipment and interpretation are basically the same as for triaxial tests on soils described in 
Sec. 11.5.2. The main difference is that the equipment for testing rock has a much greater lateral pres-
sure and axial load capacity than normally used for soils. For detailed test procedures, see ASTM 
(2010) D 7012, Method A, and ISRM Method No. 20 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007):. 
Because unconfined and triaxial tests on rock cores are expensive and time consuming, sometimes 
an index of the compressive strength of the rock will provide sufficient information for a preliminary 
assessment of strength. In this case, the point load test will provide an index of the strength of the rock, 
and ASTM (2010) D 5731 is the appropriate standard. Rock cores can be tested on. their diameter 
(diametral test) or axially (axial test) similar to soils. The test can also be performed on specimens of dif-
ferent shapes, such as the· block test and the irregular lump test, to provide an index of the rock strength. 
The shear strength of rock may be tested in a direct shear device similar to that used for testing of 
soils, but much stronger and heavier. Minimum cross sectional area should be 1900 mm2 (about 3 iri.2) • 
. . The test procedure is outlined in ASTM (2010) D 5607 and ISRM Method 15 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007). 
. • ' . . •• Th~ tensile ~ti:ength oiintact rockis also of int~rest to rock engineers, because, depending on the 
.. loading conditions in the field, it may govern design. The tensile strength cim be determined directly or 
by index tests. The' test p~ocedure' for the' direct iensiie strcingth ~frock cores is in ASTM (2010) D 2936. 
l ' 
. ; .· \ · • 
1 
, 
• • 
. 1 : ,. • 
' 
1 ' ', 
' ' 
• 
. · ( ; ' 
' 
l 
. · 
' ; : ' ' 
' 
' ; ' 
' · , ' 
' 
' 
· .. · 
, 
' , 
· • · 
, 
• ~ · · r 
" 
~ 
• · ' ; , 
, 
Another tenstle strength test performed on rock cores ts the sphttmg tenston test, sometimes called the 
Bi~zilian' test; the. procedure is! in ASTM (2010) :p 3967. S~e' alSc) ISR,M Method,N 0. 21 (Ulusay and 
Htidson,2007).': 
: '::. · . 
1'·', ••• 
··.··: .• .: 
... • ··; 
.• " .. 
:., 
.·,·,,: 
. . . 
The elastic properties of rock cores may be obtained from the results of ulifasonidesting. By 
'·: applying. either. a' steady 'state' compre~sion:o~ 'a high' frequency shear pulse to the erid of a rock 
. specimen; the m~asured: trav~l times a~d s'pecim~n dime'nsions deter~irie the pulse .vd~city, and 
'from' elastic theory; the 'hitrasonic' el~stic constants such as: the Young'smoduh.is; shear 'modulus, 
... and.Poisson's ratio may. be determined. For.details.see ASTM (2010):D 2845 andJSRM Method 
No.19 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007). 
· 
•. 
· For further information on laboratory testing of rocks and especially the interpretation of the 
test results, see Goodman (1989), Wyllie (1999), and Jaeger eta!.' (2007): 
. 
.. 
·;; · .. , ., ' 
· ,. '' ' 
.. 
'''·" 
! ·, 
.·., 
11.6 ,, :IN SITU TESTS FOR THE SHEAR STRENGTH OF SOILS AND ROCKS 
' 
,. 
' 
'" 
} 
" 
' 
•• ~- .' 
' 
~ 
• 
" 
• 
• 
~ 
• 
' 
• 
v 
• 
; 
• 
• 
' 
• 
• 
• 
' 
'} 
• 
:. ' 
,· ,'. 
' 
' 
• 
' 
"·, •1 , Obtain~ng ~igh quality undisturb7d ~amples of the .~ubsurface,soils an~ rocks is.,expensive and often 
.. , ..... difficult, and some. deposits such. as stiff.fissured clays, loose sands, and highly. fractured rock are 
. ~ ~: , . almostimpossible to sample.'Another considenition.is that poor qualfty 'soil and rock sampling is, 
• c' '• '' ' '. 
' ' 
~' " 
'' . ,. 
i ' . ' . ' •' 
> 
' 
' 
• ·' 
> 
• 
• 
' 
• 
• 
' 
• • • 
• 
' 
• 
• 
•• ·:' 
"11.6 ; In Situ Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
527 
~unfortunately, often the case rather than'the"exception· iri' the Uriited States. We have_ already dis-
cussed the effect of sample disturbance on the consolidation properties of days (Sec. 8.5:3); simiil1rly; 
sample disturblmce can significantly, and negatively affect the measured shear strength in laboratory 
tests: Rock cores.made by sin'gl~-core barrel drilling~re.often badly.broken and disturbed by the 
drilling.process, and thus the strength properties measured in subsequent laboratory tests on. these 
... samples are seriously compromised.Also, in the case of rock, it maybe impossible to obtain samples 
·, i· for laboratory testing of, for example, discontinuities in rock masses or soft, weak, or, as mentioned 
above, highly fractured rock. Often, in situ tests are performed on the rock ..!..,:for example, in the walls 
' of a tunnel or other underground excavation. 
. . 
. 
· 
. Because of all these considenitions, in recent years there has been increasing. interest in deter-
. mining the strength of soil and rock in situ. In soils, this is accomplished by various probes and instru-
ments that are inserted relatively easily and quickly into the subsurface. The major disadvantage of in 
'i' 'situ tests is that the properties are obtained only indirectly through correlations with laboratory tests 
. 'or by back calculation from theory or actual failures: On the other hand, the~e' are significant statistical 
advantages to having lots of even indirect subsurface information obtained 'rapidly and at relatively 
low cost compared with a few, expensive laboratory tests on samples of what may not even be the 
weakest or the most critical strata at the site. Finally, some properties, such as K 0 , deformation modu-
lus, and shear strength of discontinuities in rock, c:m be determined reliably only in the field. · · ,. · 
,;·: 
' 
' 
':: 
' 
. 
11.6.1 _In Sit~'Tests for Shear Strength of Soil_s 
,., :, 
· '·Table ll.llists the common tests for determi~ing in situ the shear strength 'and related properties of 
'·' 'soils. This will give you a general idea of ~llat techniques are available as ~eil as some of their limita-
•. ,, , ' tions. References are also listed in the table if you· need additional details about these tests and their 
interpretation. 
TABLE 11.1 .' Field Methods for Dete~~i~i~g-Shear Strength In Sit~· 
Test --. ·''! 
Stahcia~d-~. 
penetration 
test (SPT)' · 
; ·~ .. ~. 
· R,e~arks 
A standard "split-spoon" . 
:sampler is driven by a : : · · 
. 63.5 kg harrimer falling::·' 
.. · 0.76 m. The number of 
· · . blows required to drive 
. ·, . ' ; 1 : i! . . . 
the sampler 0.3 in is called! .. 
Vane shear · · ' 
test (VST)· 
the standard penetration· 
. resistance or blow count, . 
N. Disturbed sample 
,obtained.·· 
·· · 
Four bladed vane rotated; 
maximum torque . ; 
measured; TJ from • ' . 
theoretical formula or":' · 
empirical correlations.:· 
Fig. No. 
11.18 
l\' .1.r;1 
Best For 
Sandy soils 
Soft to 
medium clays 
Limitations 
Good estimates of density 
and strength of sands. Very 
rough correlation with TJ · 
for stiff clays. Unreliable in 
soft, sensitive clays. Gravel 
and cobbles can cause prob-
lems. Results are sensitive 
to test details and borehole 
stability. Several corrections 
required. 
Unreliable if sand layers, 
varves, gravel, etc., or if 
vane rotated too rapidly. 
Corrections may be 
required unless calibrated 
to local soils. ' · 
References 
ASTM(2010)D 
' 1586; de Mello · 
(1971); Schmertmann 
· (1975); Kovacs eta!. 
(1977); Sabatini eta!.: 
(2002) . 
ASTM (2010) D ' . ' 
2573; Cadling and' 
Odenstad (1950); 
· Bjerrum (1972); 
Schmertmann (1975); 
·· Ladd eta!. (1977); 
Jamiolkowski et a!. 
(1985); Richards 
(1988) 
. 
· · '(Continued) 
. 528 
Chapter .11 ·:!· . The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories; ·and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
TABLE 11.1 
(Continu'~d) ·; · 
·.::•t:L 
. 
-. 
. .. ,: ,· 
·, '~ 
.Ye's{; 
Remarks 
Dutch cone 
penetrome-
ter (CPT) . 
A 60° cone (projected 
·area 10 cm2) pushed at : 
1 to 2 rnlmin. Point.resis-
. '·11.20 
. . . · : !L . : tance q, and friction on 
the friction sleeve Is mea-
sured either electrically or . 
. mechanically at 5-20cm ' 
,;; 
~ ; . 
;· 
:, Gravel causes problems. 
ASTM (2010) D 3441 
. except very . 
Requires local correlation 
· and D. 5778; Sanglerat 
,:,(1972);ESOPT 
coarse granu-:; _ for soft clays .. !:> 
larsoils. 
· 
I· 
· ; (1974);Schmertmann 
. 
(1975, 1978); Ladd 
.. et al. (1977);Meigh 
. interVals. ' 
· 
",'• 
· (1987); Lunne et al. 
(1997); Mayne (2007) 
Piezocone 
: A Dutch cone penetrom-
11.20( d) · Sa!lle as CPT; 
et~r.witha piezomete~ . · · 
p~n~tro~-. 
4;.· 
eter 
included at the point.~ 
(CPTh) 
• 
;,;! 
. 
·'' ,' 
Pressure-
.A cylindrical probe is 
11.21 
meter 
·inserted in a drill hole 
(PMT) 
(may be self~boring). 
,f; 
Lateral pressure is 
· applied incrementally 
· to sid~ of hole. 
' ' · 
.. ,: 
,;, 
.i 
!"'" 
Flat Plate 
dilatometer 
test (DMT) 
A flat 96 X 15 mm blade, · 
11.:22 
sharpened at the end; 
with an inflatable 60 mm 
diameter steel disc on one· ... 
face. 
' . · 
., 
Screw plate 
, The plate is screwed down . : .. :11.23 
com pres~ . . . · to the desired testing :. 
· 
· 
someter . . 
depth; hydraulic pressure , : 
(SPC) . 
· · • is applied incrementally : 
· and the settlement is · 
. . observed; continue loading 
until the bearing capacity .• ·. 
of the soil is reached. ' 
Iowa bore-
.Device is lowered into a · 
hole shear i' . b~reh~l~ and~xpanded; .·· 
test (BST) 
. . : against the sidewalls (un)· 
. :Then entire mechanism is: ' . 
. : : .. :' l \ 1 ,. : pulledfrom ground sur~.::;,:: 
face and maximum shear; . 
load measured. Stage test , 
results are used to plot 
Mohr diagram to get~·. 
· ! Range of u n is from about 
30 to 100 kPa. 
'11.24 
, very effective 
with stratified 
_cohesive 
deposits 
. , All soil types, 
provided that 
a stable and 
'• 
constant·· 
diameter 
borehoh; '~~n 
'tie excavated 
All soil types 
''without" 
· grav~l 
· · particle~ . 
AllsoiltY!Jes 
except very 
coarse granu-
lar soils 
Loessial 
(silty) soils : 
Same as for CPT 
,, 
,,, ' 
> 
ASTM(2010) .. 
D 5778; Ltinne et 'at 
(1997); M:ayne (2007) 
ASTM(2010) 
D 4719; Menard 
(1956, 1975); 
Schmertmann (1975); 
Ladd et al. (1977); 
Baguelin et al. · 
(1978); Mair and 
Wood (1987); Briaud 
· (1992); Clarke (1995) 
Theoretical basis in elastic 
ASTM (2010) 
theory; soil properties from 
D 6635; Marchetti · 
empirical correlations, not . "(19SO); Schmertmanri 
all equally reliable. 
· 
(1986); Briaud 
and Miran (1992); 
Sabatini et at (2002) 
Mostly used to study the . 
compressibility of granular .. 
soils. Schwab (1976) found . 
. good agreement with the 
screw plate and the VST in· i 
. plastic Swedish clays. 
with 10% or more gravel or 
caving sands. Rate effects . 
and uncertain drainage .. 
co'nditions during shear . : .. 
make the test difficult to . : 
interpret. (Is it CD or CU 
or somewhere in between? 
What is the effect of rate of 
shear?) 
, JanbU: and Senneset : 
.· (1973); Mitchell and · 
Gardner (1975); 
Schwab (1976); · 
.. Schmertmann (1970) 
. Wineland (1975); 
Schmertmann 
: (1975); Handy (1986) 
11.6 
In Situ Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
529 
Because shear strength is determined indirectly, in situ tests give only an index of the actual 
shear strength of the soil. On the other hand, when correctly performed in the appropriate soil condi-
tions, the results can be very useful to geotechnical engineers. For information on how to interpret in 
situ test results and select design parameters iri geotechnical engineering practice, see Ladd et al. 
(1977), Jamiolkowski et al. (1985), Sabatini' et al. (2002), and Canadian Geotechnical Society (2006), as 
well as the references in Table 11:1. 
· 
The standard penetration test (SPT) (Fig. 11.18) has been around for more than a century and is 
probably the most common in situ test in the world. The equipment is relatively simple, and the test can 
be performed with a conventional geotechnical drill rig in most soil types. However, it is best suited for 
testing sandy soils, because the SPT blow count N correlates well with density and, as we shall see in 
Chapter 12, indirectly with the friction angle of.the sand. The SPT is sometimes used for cohesive soils, 
but it is much less accurate, and in fact the results are meaningless in soft, sensitive clays. Another big 
advantage of the SPT is that a sample is obtained, and although the sample is badly disturbed, it can be 
used for visual classification and index test. The SPT results are very dependent on the equipment details 
and even the person performing the test (Kovacs et al., 1977), so to get reasonably repeatable results, the 
measured N must be corrected for applied energy, rod length, and borehole diameter (Sabatini et al., 
2002). Another important consideration is the liners that should be used inside the sampling spoon, and 
are often left out by the drille.r, which leads to underestimates of the blow count by about 20%. 
. 5 
0 
(') 
I 
~~ i~! 
(3.5 em) 
(a) 
2 in; . 
. (5cm) 
With· 
liner 
FIGURE 11.18 Standard penetration test (sPn: (a) "split-spoon" sampler; (b) drill rig with sampler 
being inserted inside hollow stem auger at 1. The sleeve encloses the 63.5 kg hammer. Hammer in 
the raised position is shown at 2. (Drawing courtesy of Mobile Drilling Co., Indianapolis, Indiana. 
Photograph by W. D. Kovacs.) 
530 
Chapter 11 
·The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
One of the best in situ tests for soft to medium clays is the vane shear test (VST; Table 11.1). As 
shown in Fig.11.19(a), torque is applied to the vane rods and after some rotation of the vane, the soil 
Applied 
torque, T 
T 
j_ 
r-.--o----1 
(a) 
Rod 
Vane 
~ 
R"P'"" 
· 
surface 
. 
Disturbed 
soil 
....._m_....c 
Vane 
(b) 
(c) Theorectical formulas: 
H 
3 Tmax 
_ 0 =1: T,= 2 :;;:D3' 
H 
6 Tmax 
D = 2: 
Tf = 7 :;;:D3' 
FIGURE 11.19 (a) Principle of the vane 
shear test; (b) end view of the vane, 
showing the probable zone of distur-
bance and the rupture surface (after . 
Cadling and Odenstad; 1950); (c) theoret-
ical formulas for Tt, assuming a uniform 
stress distribution. 
· 
shears along a cylindrical rupture surface [Fig.11.19(b )]. 
Most field vanes have a height-to-diameter (H/D) ratio 
of 2; common sizes are 76 X 38 mm, 100 X 50 mm and 
130 X 65 mm [the standard Swedish Geotechnical Insti-
tute (SGI) vane].· The shear strength is obtained from 
either empirical correlations or from theoretical formu-
las .[Fig. 11.19(c)] relating the torque to an assumed 
shear stress distribution on the sides of the blades. Both 
·approaches may be unreliable unless calibrated for local 
conditions. Cadling and Odenstad. (1950) describe the 
calibration process for the SGI VST. Another possibility 
is to apply a correction factor for very soft clays based on 
. embankment failures (see Sec. 12.11.4). 
As indicated ,in Table 11.1; the Dutch cone ·pen-
etrometer test (CPT) can be used in sand soils as well as at 
sites with soft to stiff clays, as long as neither one has 
much gravel and larger particles. Because it is a quasi-
static test, the CPT is especially effective in loose sands. 
The test was originally developed in the 1930s in Holland, 
. thus its name. There are two types of Dutch cone pen-
etrometers, mechanical and .electrical. With the mechani-
cal CPT [Fig. 11.20(a)], thecone and friction sleeve are 
pushed by a system of hydraulic jacks, and the point resis-
tance qc and sleeve friction fs are measured by calibrated 
. hydraulic load cells. The modern electrical cone uses 
strain gage load cells to make the same measurements 
[Fig.11.20(b)].An even more modern development is the 
piezocone penetrometer, which is basically a coiwentional 
electrical cone with peizometric ports. 1\vo different 
peizocone configurations are shown in Fig.11.20(c) along 
with the standard cone dimensions. In addition to the 
conventional measurements, the piezocone measures the 
induced pore water pressure during penetration, and if 
· the test is stopped periodically, the dissipation of that 
pore pressure can be. used to determine consolidation 
. properties (Sec. 9.7). Figure 11.20(d) shows some typical 
CPT results; the soil profile is obtained either from cor-
relations with qc and fs orfrom a nearby soil boring, 
because no samples of the subsurface are obtained with 
the CPT. 
.. 
The principal features of the pressuremeter test 
(PMT) are shown in Fig.11.21. The original Menard pres-
suremeter has three cells, as shown in Fig. 11.21(b); the 
measuring cell is between the two outside guard cells. The 
OYO pressuremeter (lateral load tester, LLT) from Japan 
uses a single long cell that apparently gives similar results. 
After the borehole is excavated, the probe is lowered to 
Push inner rods 
Push inner 
Closed 
position 
rods 40 mm-measure 
point resistance q0 
40 mm agai'!-measure 
point and side friction 
resistance, qc + fs 
~ 
J 
~ 
401 
Seal 
sleeve 
Watertight 
_seal. 
I 
' 
I~ 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
'1 
I 
40mm 
40mm 
--
I 
40 
-
401 
401 
40I 
~ 
de= 35.7 mm 
(c) 
I 
-/soL 
~ 
' 
' 
I 
80 I 
i 11 il 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
' 
60' 
(a) 
'f-
I 
' 
I 
40I • 
E 
E 
r-
Push outer rods 
80 mm.:.Ciose 
penetrometer; then 
push down to next 
testing depth 
Friction sleeve 
(area = 150 cm2) 
Soil profile 
Miscfill 
Loose sand 
and silt 
Soft clay 
Dense silts 
and sands; 
some gravel 
10 
E 
~· 
., 
Cl 
20 
0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I ' 
I ,.,. 
·--3. 
~"'\ 
~ '· 
~,. 
%-pgz 
T I = -----;v;-
Signal 
cable 
Teflon 
ring 
Strain 
gauges 
Strain 
1...'11-oil----jf-- gauges 
ORing 
seal 
fs (kPa) 
Where pgz =total overburden pressure at depth z 
Nc =correlation factor (bearing capacity 
. factor); range from 5 to as high as 
70, depending on the soil deposit 
(d) 
FIGURE 11.20 Dutch cone penetrometer (CPT): (a) Begemann (1953) mechanical cone with friction 
sleeve; (b) cross section of a modern electrical penetrometer with strain-gage load cells to measure both 
the point resistance and the sleeve friction (after Holden, 1974); (c) Dutch cone and piezocone configura-
. tions (after ASTM, 201 0); (d) typical cone penetrometer test results correlated with the soil profile, and 
formula for calculating Tf from cone penetrometer results. 
531 
532 
Chapter 11 . 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
Volume 
measuring 
system 
Measuring zone 
21 to 36 em 
· 
~ 
::I 
tJl 
tJl 
~-
0.. 
oc: 
·c: 0 
m·w 
Et: 
:led 
-c. 
0>< 
>Q) 
(c) 
oc: 
·;:::: 0 
a;·u.; 
Ec: 
:led 
-c. 
0 
>< 
>Q) 
Pseudo-elastic 
phase 
pressur· 
Pressure 
(d) 
P, 
FIGURE 11.21 
Pressuremeter test (PMT): (a) Schematic diagram of probe and measuring system 
(after Mitchell and Gardner, 1975); (b) detail of probe. Typical test results: (c) pressure and volu-
metric expansion versus time, and (d) volumetric expansion versus pressure (after. Menard, 1975). 
. 
. 
the desired testing depth and inflated,with equal increments of pressure [Fig.11.21(c)] orvolume and 
held for 60 s. The process is continued until the borehole yields or the maximum pressure or volume of 
the device is reached. Results are plotted as shown in Fig. 11.21(d). Although the limit pressure Pt 
depends . on the shearing resistance of the soil in the borehole, it tends to greatly overpredict the 
undrained shear strength as determined on laboratory samples by other in situ tests. Thus, some type of 
local correlation is. advisable (see the references in. Table 11.1). There are problems in many soil 
deposits with the stability of the borehole, and a self-boring pressuremeter (SBPMT) helps to overcome 
some of these difficulties. However, the SBPMT is rather complex and requires considerable experi-
ence to obtain good results(refer to Jamiolkowski et al., 1985, for further details regarding this device). 
The dilatometer test (DMT) was developed in Italy by. Marchetti about 1980, and since then, 
because of considerable research and development, it has become rather popular, especially on the east 
coast of the United States and in Florida. The DMT equipment is shown in Fig.11.22. The blade is pushed 
into the ground to the desired.testing depth at a rate of 1.2 m/min. Then the membrane is gradually 
inflated and the pressures required to just move the membrane about 0.05 mm and to move it 1 mm are 
recorded. Sometimes the pressure during deflation is recorded at the point when the membrane deflec-
. tion is again 0.05 mm: Marchetti used these readings and the theory of elasticity to develop the material 
. and lateral stress indices as well as the dilatometer modulus. A number of other soil properties including 
11.6 
In Situ Tests for the Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
533. 
FIGURE 11.22 Flat plate dilatometer test (DMn equipment: (1) blade; 
(2) expandable steel membrane; (3) control unit showing low- and high-
pressure gages; (4) tubing and cabling fordownhole control; and (5) valves 
for controlling and venting gas (photo courtesy of Prof. Paul Mayne). 
the friction angle for sands and silts and the undrained shear strength of clays can be determined by 
empirical correlations. 
' 
· 
.. , . 
The screw plate compressometer (SPC) was developed in Norway in the early 1970s. The principle 
and field test setup are shown in Fig:11.23(a) and (b). Two sizes of plates, 160 mmand 300 mm, are com-
monly used, although smaller diameters may be better for very stiff clays. The plate and hydraulic loading 
system are screwed down to the desired testing depth, the pressure applied in increments typically held 
for 5 min; and the plate settlement recorded.T\Vo ways of plotting the test data are shown in Fig. 11.23( c) 
and (d). One big advantage of the screw plate compressometer over the pressuremeter and dilatometer 
tests is that it loads the soil in the same direction as common foundation loading.· 
The Iowa borehole shear test was developed for use in loess soils in Iowa. The equipment is 
shown in Fig 11.24, and the procedure and limitations are briefly described in Table 11.1. 
• Other in situ tests you may encounter in practice include geophysical methods, the seismic 
cone test (SCPT)test, and the Becker penetnition test (BPT). Geophysical methods such as seismic 
refraction and electrical resistivity have been used for' many years, but not very commmily, for site 
.. characterization. In· recent years, however, techniques such. as ground-penetrating n1dar, SASW 
·(spectral analysis of surface waves), geotomography, and several borehole logging techniques have 
\ 
been developed to where they are practical and economic.· Many of these developments are 
describedin the papers in Woods (1994). The SCPT gives information on subsurface shear wave 
velocity and damping, properties useful for geote'chnical earthquake engineering. The Becker pene-
tration test was developed in the late 1950s in Alberta for oil exploration in predominantly gravel 
sites (CGS, 2006). The BPT uses a double acting Diesel pile driving hammer (rated energy 11 kJ) to 
drive a double wall closed-ended casing up to 3 m in length and 230 mm· in-diameter rapidly through 
gravelly deposits. The driving resistance or blow counts of the BPT are roughly correlated with the 
SPT N (Harder and Seed, 1986) at1dCanadian Geotechnical Society (2006) ... 
'.! 
.,. 
534 
',i s 
c 
CJ) 
E 
CJ), 
~ 
en 
'.! 
Hydraulic house : · · · 1. 
Two sizes: 
160 mm diameter 
300 mm diameter 
plate 
0 
50 100mm 
Scale 
.(a) 
,. , · .. ' 
,•, ;. 
Hydraulic hose 
Settlement gauges 
Outer pipe 
Earth anchor 
0 
:i, 
'·.' 
. Fai·l~re · . 
Field compressometer 
50 
Scale 
'·(b) 
100 mm 
'' 
·· Ska-Edetiy: 
Depth'4 m 
0 em plate diam . 
. 16 em plate diam. 
D 
'·f"lllq, 
·. 
":!:~ 
.. I- I''''· 
- ,- -
• 
. m_. 
_, 
.8 i-8--+1' 
·= 
·Settlement, 8/B (%), 
' (d) 
·• ' 
10 
FIGURE 11.23 Screw plate compressometer (SPC): (a) principle; (b) field setup (afterJiuibu ~nd Senneset, 1973); 
(c) settlement-time and (d) pressure-settlement data for Ska-Edeby clay, Sweden (after Schwab, 1976). 
\ 
•'i' 
'',1 
'.,:;· 
; ,' ,,_11.6: 'In Si~uTests for, the Shear, Strength of Soils and Rocks 
535 
Hydraulic 
gauge 
\ 
''.: 
· Pulling device 
/Worm 
~Console 
, ·Pressure 
regulator 
., : .. · :. 
.· Pressure~-: 
Gas _lines ... gauge . , .. 
".' 
.\ ·. 
t. 
FIGURE 11.24 The Iowa borehole shear (BST) device, showing the pressure source 
and instrumentation console, the pulling device, and the expanded shear head on 
the sides of a borehole (after Wineland, 1975). 
' 
'· :' 
;, 
;,1·',, 
',·' 
11.6.2 Field Tests for Modulus and Strength .. Ot·RoCks. 
1 
' 
Depending on the type and size of the co'nstruction, it rna/be n~cessaryto test the rocks at a site in situ 
rather than iri the laboratory. The rocks' at~· site may be.s~ fiactured or weak that core drilling and 
undisturbed sampling are impossible. Sometimes size of the construction involves large loaded areas-
for example, dams and bridges-and if the joints are closely spaced or infilled with highly weathered 
rock, undesirable settlements of the structure could occur. In such cases, to provide realistic design infor-
mation, it would be necessary to test large. specimens ofthe rock, which is impractical and too costly. 
· 
·• . 
. Field testing is especially. needed to. eyaluat~ 'tlie strength across discontinuities that may nega-
·. 'tiveiy influence stability. The equipment is massive, because a: large chunk' of undisturbed rock is being 
tested. Large jacks are employed to provide the normal and the shear.forces. See Wyllie (1999) and 
ASTM (2010) D 4554 for additiohai infonn~tiori and test details., . . 
. . · ' ' 
·•·.. . . . 
., Forweaker rock (RQD <50%), an.in situ u~iaxi'alcomprefsion,testmay be performed by 
formirig a square specimen from natural mate'rial in a tunnel, for exampk The rock is loaded by a suit-
., ablejack using the surrounding ro.ck:as a 
~e1,1ction. See ASJ'M (20l0) D4S55 for detajls. , , 
· 
· · Because compressibility is so important in many design situations, ASTM and ISRM have devel-
. oped test procedures to provid~ iilformation on the in situ rnodtllus of rock .. '. . 
'. 
' 
Flatjack tests are performed in natural rock masses usually parallel to the long axis to a small 
tunnel or adit in order to provide information about the in situ state of stres~es (normal to the flatjack) 
'536 
Chapter 11 
; The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories,' ana Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
in the rock and to obtain the modulus of deformation as a by-product. The flatjack consists of two steel 
plates welded together, having a surface area of about600cm2• Measuring points are constructed on 
the rock face. A slot is drilled into the rock face by means of overlapping holes, and the flatjack is 
inserted and grouted in place.A hydraulic pressure is applied to the inside of the jack to overcome the 
deformation cause by creating the slot, and this gives the initial in situ stresses. Using elastic theory, the 
modulus of deformation isalso found. Refer to Goodman (1989);ASTM (2010) D 4729 andiSRM 
Method No. 33 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007) for further details. 
.. 
The borehole jack (or the Goodman jack) is inserted into a borehole in rock and expanded 
diametrically, sometimes in various orientations (to obtain an estimate of anisotropy). Applied pres-
sure and borehole diameter are observed and the modulus of deformation-calculated. Sometimes 
the boreh~le jack is called a stiff dilatometer. Additional details and test procedure are found in 
ASTM D 4971 and ISRM Method No. 38 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007). 
··· 
ISRM Method No. 35 (Ulusay and Hudson, 2007) is a procedure for determining the deforma-
bility of rock using a flexible dilatometer test. Other in situ tests for rock modulus include various types 
of plate load tests and radial jacking tests; see Wyllie (1999) for additional information. 
Finally, geophysical methods such as seismic refraction, electrical resistivity, and ground penetrating 
radar havebeen successfully used to supplement information provided by good old-fashioned geologic 
mapping for geotechnical site investigations (refer to Mayne et al., 2001, for a survey of these methods). 
PROBLEMS 
.... 
"' 
r,. 
11.1 Given an element with stresses as indicated in Fig. P11.L Find: 
· : 
(a) The major and minor principal stresses and the planes on which they act. 
(b) The stresses on a .plane inclined at 30° from the horizontal. : 
. 
(c) The maximum shear stress and the inclination of the plane on which it acts. 
• ! 
1o0kPa' 
.. 
,, 
'1:· 
35m·· 120kPa .... 
~. 
·.·. 
-·r. 
I . . , , . , 
, . 
•y HOoiOmal 
:~
1 
... 35kPa 
.'-', •.:;· 
•"·\ I 
: 
~ ~6~ kPa . 
;;I' 
. FIGURE P11.1 
, .. 
;· 
; 
11:f'W~rk Proble~ 11.1with the elem~~t rotated 30° clockwise fro~ th~ hori~onta( . 
, ;, . 
11.J . With'th~ element of Probl~m' l1.2 rotated 406, fl~d th~ magnitude a~d direction of th~ itr~~ses on the vertical 
· 
·plane. 
'· 
· · " 
· 
: · 
· · · 
· 
· 
·· 
11.4 i Work Exa~ple' 11.3 with the' el~ment rotated,30~ cl~ckwise from the' ho;izorital: i~ addition, fihd the stresses 
' 
(magnitude and direction) on the horizontal plane. 
. 
' : ; ·. 
Ci: . 
. . 
; 
' : 
. 
11.5 Eqllations(11:5) and {11.6) we~e derived' frorr; Flg.11.2, with u X imd u y as principal'stresse~. Derive the more 
·· ···.general equations for the_ Mohr circle when dxand u~ arenot acting 'on principal planes. : ,,,,. . 
11.6 'Jne st~te of pi~ne' ~tress i~ ab~dy isde;~rib~d ·t,y tlie 'roubwi~g stresses: a{= s5o6 kN!ni ~'ampression, 
' 0'3 ~ '1500 kN/m2 tension. Determine by means of the Mohr circle the normal stress and shear stress on a 
plane inclined at zoo to' the plane ori which the' minor principal stre'ss acts.' Check the re'sults analytically. 
(After A Cas'agrande.) '· · · 
' 
' 
' 
~ ' : . 
, " 
~ l-
) 
Problems 
537 
,11.7 At a certain critical point in a steel beam, on a vertical plane the compressive stress is 115 MPa and the shear-
ing stress is 31.5 MPa. There is no normal stress on the longitudinal (horizontal) plane. Find the stresses acting 
on the principal planes and the orientation of principal planes with the horizontal. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
11.8 A soil sample is under a biaxial state of stress. On plane 1, the stresses are. (13, 4), while on plane 2, the 
stresses are (5.8, -2). Find the rriajor aridminor principal stresses. 
11.9 For the element shown in Fig. P11.9: (a) Find the magnitude of the unknown stresses 'ah and Th on the hori-
zontal plane. (b) Find the orientation of the principal stresses; clearly indicate their orientation in a small 
sketch. (c) Show the orientation of the planes of maximum as well as minimum shear. 
_, _. -----#-7.~ 
~ 
Horizontal plane 
' FIGURE Pl1.9 
11.10 Give~ the element with stresses as shown in Fig. Pl1.10: (a) Find the magnitude and direction of aH and TH· 
(b) Find the magnitude and direction of a 1 and a 3 • Be sure to clearly indicate these stresses and their direc-
tions on a separate sketch. 
·, f· 
4.0 
3.0 
~· 
H-plane I 
(horizontal) 
. FIGURE P11.10 
11.11 Given the data of Example 11.5. (a) Find the magnitude and direction of the stresses on the horizontal plane. 
(b) Find the maximum shear stress, and determine the angle between the plane on.which it acts and the 
. , major principal plane. · 
11.U The state of stress on a small element is a v = 21 kPa, ah = 10 kPa, and the shear stress on the horizontal 
plane is +3 kPa. (a) Find the magnitude and directions of the major and minor principal stresses. (b) If the 
material is a loose sand, can you say whether the element is in a state of failure? If it isn't, how close is it? 
Why? State your assumptions clearly. (Assume 4J = 28° for the loose sand.) 
11.13 Given the vertical and horizontal normal stresses of Problem 11.12. Find the maximum values of shear stress 
on the horizontal and vertical planes to cause failure in a medium dense sand. Assume the angle of internal 
friction for the sand is 32°. 
\ 11.14 The state plane stress in a mass of dense cohesionless sand is described by the following stresses: 
Normal stress on horizontal plane = 296 kPa · 
Normal stress on vertical plane = 160 kPa 
Shear stress on horizontal and vertical planes 7 ;±= 6~ kP~ 
Determine by means of the Mohr circle the magnitude and direction of the principal stresses. Is this state of 
stress safe against failure? (After A. Casagrande.) 
538 
Chapter 11 
The Mohr Circle, Failure Theories, and Strength Testing of Soil and Rocks 
11.15 At a given point within a sand deposit the major;intermediate, and minor prinCipal stresses are 10, 6, and 
4 MN/m2, respectively. Construct the Mohr diagram, and from it scale the normal and shearing stresses and 
the obliquity angles on planes at 35°; sao, 65°, and sao from'tlle major principal plane. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
· 11.16 A 1-m 'cube within a mass of stressed soil has a stress of 2aa kPa on its top and bottom faces, 100 kPa on one 
pair of vertical faces, and 6a kPa on the other pair' of vertical faces. There is no shear stress on any face. Fill in 
the numerical values for each stress and angle in the following table. (After Taylor, 1948.) · 
Major prinCipal plane: · 
Intermediate principal plane: 
Minor principal plane: 
Plane of maximum shearing stress: 
Plane of maximum obliquity: 
; (kPa) 
+ 
(kPa) 
Note: a is the angle of orientation of the required plane with respect to the horiz?ntal plane. 
11.17 In Problem 11.16 what is <j>, assuming c = a? 
a 
11.18 Show that on a plane inclined at 45° with respect to the principal planes, the ratio ofT max to ( u 1 + u3)!2 is in 
fact less than T11tu11 .. (Hint: Assume a <j>, ub and u 3.) 
· 
11.19 Figure P11.19 shows stresses at apoirit. · 
(a) Draw the Mohr circle for this point, showing the pole location: 
(b) What are the stresses acting on a horizontal plane passing through this point? 
(c) The cohesion intercept for this soil is c = 5 psi, and the friction angle is <jJ = 3ao. If the major principal 
stress remains the same, what would the minor principal stress have to be. to cause failure? 
FIGURE P11.19 
20 psi \. 
v 
40 psi 
~-· 
· ..... 
10_p.si ... 
· 
. 
10pS1~ 
30° 
. ' ' 
:_' '. ' 
' 
.. 
'' .... ' 
15°' 
.. 
11.20 Figure Pll.2a shows an element of sbil at the interface betwee~ two dry sand layers on a 28° slope. The inter-
face is 1a ft below the ground surface; and for both sand layers the friction angle is 34° and K 0 = 0.44. 
Assume that the shear stress is zero on both the vertical and horizontal planes. 
(a) Draw the Mohr circle for this point; and determine the pole location.· '• 
(b) Determine the normal and shear stresses on the soil interface (i.e., on the 28° plane).· 
(c) For the same normal stress, u, found in part (b), what would be the shear stress at failure on the failure 
plane? 
\ t 
28° 
FIGURE P11.20 
11.21 Prove that Eq. (1l.la) is true, assuming th'at the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion is valid. Does it matter if 
c = 0? (Hint: Derive the equation first with c = a, then with c * 0.) 
11.22 Show that Eq. (1L13) is identical to Eq. (11:14): 
Problems 
539 
11.23 Equation (11.l4) is true if c = 0. Derive the expression for the principal stress ratio, including the strength 
parameter c. 
11.24 Show that Eq. (11.17) is true from Eq. (11.16) .. 
11.25 Show that Eqs. (11.16) and (11.17) are identical to Eqs. (11.14) and (11.15). (This is a good review of trigono-
metric identities!) 
11.26 In a direct shear test on a specimen of cohesionless sand, the vertical normal stress on the specimen is 
240 kN/m2 and the horizontal shear stress at failure is 160 kN/m2• (a) Assuming uniform stress distribution 
within the failure zone and a straight line failure envelope which goes through the origin, determine by 
means of the Mohr circle the magnitude and direction of the principal stresses at failure. (b) Explain why it 
is not possible to determine the principal stresses in a direct shear specimen for an applied horizontal shear 
stress which is not large enough to cause failure. (After A. Casagrande.) 
11.27 A specimen of sand is tested in direct simple shear. The stress conditions in the test are as shown in Fig. Ex. 11.9. 
Initial conditions: 
(]' v = 3.12 kg/cm2, 
K 0 = 0.5 
At failure: 
(]' v = 3.12 kg/cm2, 
Thv = 1.80 kg/cm2 
(a) Draw the Mohr circles for both initial and final stress conditions. 
(b) Show clearly the locations of the poles of these circles. 
(c) D~termine the magnitude and orientation of the principal stresses at failure. 
(d) What is the orientation of the failure plane? 
(e) If the. shear strain at failure is 10° as shown in the figure, what are the stresses a, and r, on the sides of 
the specimen at failure? 
· 
(Note: Ts ¢' Thv·) 
11.28 1\vo conventional CD. triaxial compression tests were conducted on a dense angular dry sand at the same 
void ratio. Test A had a confining pressure of 150 kPa, while in test B the confining pressure was 600 kPa; 
these stresses were held constant throughout the test. At failure, tests A and B had maximum principal stress 
differences of 600 and 2550 kPa, respectively. 
· · 
(~).Plot the Mohr circles for both tests at initial conditions and at failure. 
(b) Assuming c = 0, determine r/J. 
(c) What is the shear stress on the failure plane at failure for both tests? 
(d) Determine the theoretical orientation of the failure plane in each specimen. 
(e) What is the orientation of the plane of maximum obliquity?· 
11.29 1\vo consolidated-drained triaxial tests were performed on specim~ns of the same clay, with the following 
results at failure: 
· 
Test no.· 
1. 
2 
u3(psi) 
26.6 
12.0 
(]'1 (psi) 
73.4 
48.0. 
Determine the effective Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope (c' and</>') based on these test result~. 
11.30 A triaxial specimen of loose sand is first consolidated nonhydrostatically, with (]'1. = 15 kPa and (]'3 = 10 kPa . 
.. The sample is then failed by holding the vertical stress constant and decreasing the horizontal stress (this is a 
lateral extension test). The angle.of internal fricti~n is 30° ( c ':" 0). (a) Draw the Mohr circles for both initial 
and "at failure" conditions. (b) What will b~ the major and minor principal stresses at failure? 
11.31 Another sam~le of the same sand tested in Problem 11.30 is tested by holding the v~rtical stress constant and 
increasing the horizontal stress (this is a lateral compression test). Complete parts (a) and (b) requested in 
Problem 11.30 for this test. 
12.1 
),. ','' 
540 
'··'·. 
CHAPTE.R· 1 2 
! :, 
An Introduction to ·Shear 
Strength ·of Soils and Ro~~ 
INTRODUCTION 
The shear strength of soils and rock is a most important aspect of geotechnical engineering. The bearing 
capacity of shallow or deep foundations; slope stability, retaining wall design and; indirectly, pavement 
design are· all affected by the· shear strength of the soil in a slope, behind a· retaining wall, or supporting 
a foundation or pavement. Structures and slopes must be stable atid secure against total collapse when 
subjected to maximum antiCipated applied loads. The collapse or failure state is called the ultimate or 
limit state, and limiting equilibrium methods of analysis are conventionally used for the design of foun-
dations and slopes. These methods require determination of the' ultimate or limiting shear resistance 
(shearstrength)ofthesoilandrock. · 
: .... · 
.· 
.i. 
•· .. •· .• ,: 
.• 
• 
In Chapter ll, we defined the shear strength of a soil as the ultimate or. maximum shear 
stress .the .soil can withstand. We menti~ned that sometimes the limiting value of shear stress is 
. ' based on a maximu~ allowable strain or deformation. Very often, this allowable deform~tion actu-
ally controls the design of a structure, because, with the large safety factors we use, the actual shear 
stresses in the soil produced by the appped loads are much less than the stresses causing collapse 
or failure. 
. . . 
. -
The shear strength can be determined in several different ways; we described some of the 
more common laboratory and field tests in Sees. 11.5 and 11.6. We mentioned that laboratory tests 
give the shear strength directly, while in situ methods such as the vane shear test or penetrometers 
avoid some of the problems of disturbance associated with the extraction of soil sa~ples from the 
ground. However, in situ tests determine the shear str(mgth only indirectly through ·correlations 
·.with laboratory results or back calculated from actual failures. In addition, laboratory tests provide 
. valuable information about the stress-strain behavior and the'ctev~lopment of pore pressures dur-
ing shear; In this chapter, we illustrate the fundamental stress~deforn1ation m1d shear strength 
response of soils using the results of laboratory tests for' typical soils. In this way, .;,;e hope you can 
gain some understanding ofho"' soils -actually behav~ when sheared. Chapter 13 presents more 
advanced topics in shear strength, including specialized test methods, more complex soil behavior 
and stress paths, dynamic behavior, advanced analytical methods, and applications to engineering 
practice. 
Symbol 
'12.1 
Introduction 
541 
In this chapter we draw heavily on . the work of· our· teachers and: colleagues. We. gratefully 
acknowledge the important contributions by A. Casagrande, R C. Hirschfeld, C. C. Ladd, K. L. Lee, 
G. .A; Leonards, J. ·a: Osterberg, H. G. Poulos, and H: B .. Seed. Otherpioneers in' the field of geotechni- · 
'cal'enginee:r:ing are also cited in both this chapter and Chapter i3,'including'L. Bjerrum,T. W. Lambe, 
'J. K. Mitchell, R. B. Peck; and A. Vl Skempton. Our discussion .of ~near strength of soils starts with 
'sandsand is folli:nved by the strength properties of cohesi~e soils: : l . 
. • . . 
. f 
• • 
• • 
. . ; .· The following notation is introduced in this chapter. 
. . 
' ; " 
: ' ' ~ , 
~ ; ; 
' : 
. 
. 
Dimension 
Unit 
Definition 
A 
A,A,B, 
A,,A. 
L2 
M-1LT2 .. 
Particle angularity . 
, 
. Skempton'spore pressure parameters , . 
·:<·. 
·Initial specimen area and area at som~ strain, respectively 
c, c', cr 
ec 
ecrit 
ecd 
ec1 
ed 
et 
h 
Kv 
Ko-oc• Ko-nc 
JL 
a he 
Uvc 
a3c , 
U3crit 
a3t 
alfa3 
(al - a3) 
Tf 
cf>a 
cf>', cf>r 
.j )' 
L 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
L3 
L3 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T";2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML -lr-2 
ML-1T-2 
ML-1T'-2 
. . 
1/kPa 
kPa 
(decimal) 
(decimal) 
(decimal) 
(decimal) 
... (decimal) 
· (decimal) · 
kPa 
kPa 
m 
kPa 
· kPa 
. 
3 •. 
. m. 
m3 
(%) 
kPa 
kPa. 
kPa 
kPa .· 
kPa ·• 
. -Eq.(12.11) .. •:. ;: 
. 
. , 
: 
, Compressibility of the soil skeleton, pore fluid, and water, 
respectively- Eq. (12.15) . 
Intercept on T axis when a = 0 
Void ratio after consolidation 
Critical void ratio 
e~ricdense· 
eerie loose 
e-dense · 
e-loose 
, 
An empirical exponent- Eq. (12.9) 
Horizontal stress index for flat-plate dilatometer cEq. (12.7) 
Coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest, overconsolidated 
and normally consolidated soil; respectively - Eq. (12.9) 
Cone tip resistance- Eq. (12.6) 
Unconfined compressive strength 
Particle surface roughness 
Particle size 
Shear strength sensitivity- Eq. (12.12) 
Initial pore water pressure; back pressure 
· Residual (capillary) pore water pressure after sampling 
Initial volume - Eq. (12:4); · 
. Change in volume- Eq. (12.4) 
Vertical or axial strain 
Correction factor to vane shear strength 
. Total horiZontal consolidation stress 
Total vertical consolidation stress 
Effective consolidation pressure . 
Critical effective confining pressure 
Effective confining pressure at failure 
Principal effective stress ratio- Eq. (12.1) 
. kPa · ' 
. ' Principal stress difference··~ Eq.' (1i2) 
•· · .. 
: kPi{ · 
: ·. '. Undrainedshe.ar strength· .. ·· : •··· . 
. ,1 . 
.(degree) 
" 
·. Arigle of internal friction from CDtests 
. 
. . . 
. (degree)·. · . , Angle of internal friction iri terms ofeffeciive stress and 
\ \ ; tot~!' stress~ respectively 
; . 
.· . ' 
. : 
Note: A prime mark on an angle or stress indicates effective stresses. Subscripts ·o, c, and f indicate initial, consolidatio~, 'and fail~re' conditions, 
respectively. 
c.:.. 
542 
Chapter .. 12•: 
,An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
-12.2 
ANGLE·OF:REPOSE OF SANDS··· .. , 
;:l 
;· ., 
' ',_: 
!~;:;'~ 
.. -·;:- :.. 
..:. ' .. ·''-;''.":~·;_:·-< : ; . ':<". 
,~~::~; 
;;~,: .. : 
~ 
." •..• 
~· ,~:.·_:;; 
:<~ ', .:::;;'.'/:):~·; :, 
If ~e were.to deposit.a granula.r ~oil by pouring it hom a single point above the ground, it would form a 
. conical pile. As moieand·~~re granular material.was depositea on the piie,the slope.for·a short period 
''of time might appear to be steepe'i,.but'iheri the soil particles would slip and slide dowi{tlie 'slope to the 
angle ofrepo~e (Fig~ 12~1). This angl~of th'e sl~pe.~ith respect to.the horizontalplai:J'ewo~ld remain con-
stant at some minimum value. Since tliis iu1gle is 'the 's'teepes'r~iabl~ slope for .very lo~sely packed sand, 
the angle of repose represents the 'angle of intemal fri,ction of tli~ gram.ilar 'niaterial at its loosest state. 
. . Sand dune·s·are im example from iuitme of tlie angle· of repose. You riiayrecall from Sec. 3.3:6 
that sand dunes are.landforms resulting fr~rn wind as a geologic pr~cess. Figure 12:2'shows ho~both a 
stationary dune (SD) and a migrating dune (MD) are formed. On the leeward side (LS), the slope of 
the dune will have an angle(of repose) which varies from30° to 35°, depending on factors discussed 
·later in this chapter. If the slope on the leeward side becomes steeper than 30° to 35", then the slope is 
unstable and sand grains will roll down'the slop'e until the angle of repose is reached. An unstable con-
'.. . ' dition is shown on tlie slope at the far dght-himd side of Fig. 12.2; eventmilly a smooth sl~pe at the 
angle of repose will form~ · 
1 ' • 
( • 
• 
• 
''!I 
;l .:,; 
\ 
' 
i I 
: 
• 
, . FiGURE 12.1 
Illustration ofthe angle 'of repose (photograph by M. Surrendra). 
w -
,-•·' 
·~ 
-~ 
:. J.: 
()E 
'(),,,, 
FIGURE 12.2. Fo~mation o.f sancldu~es a~dHiust'r~tion of the angle ~f repose· 
(after von Bandat, 1962). Deposition 'of sand by wind, ideal structure of stationarY . 
or fixed dunes (SD) and migrating live·dunes (MD). The arrows indicate the direc-
tion of air currents (W). E shows eddies. WS is the windward slope of the dune, 
LS the'leewa'rd, or down-wind slope.' R mark ripples; arid Cr is the crest of the dune. 
Dashed lines show the former positions of live du.ne MD; B is the base rock 
•. :(after t.:. Holmes).· 
· -:. , 
.· ...... ;. - - · · · · ··· · · 
· · · ·· · · · · · · · · 
· · · 
·.:;, 
12.3 
· :. 12:3 
Behavior of Saturated Sands during Drained Shear 
543 
' 
.'The angle of iepose depends on the type of materials and other factors, and it represents. the 
angle of·-internal friction or shearing resistance 1> at its loosest state. Recall that the; terms loose or 
dense ar~ onlyrelative tenns(see Sec. 4.9), esp~cially:with respectto their beha.viodn·shear. As we 
shall s·oon see, the stress-strain and volume changeresponse depends on the confining pressure as well 
.a~ on the index density. Note thatiin SectiorL5.5.1 we!defined the.relative· density, D,:; sometimes 
.. ·_referred to as'the index density. 
· 
· · 
. 
· 
· 
BEHAVIOR OF SATURATED SANDS DURING bRAINED SHEAR 
' 
. 
. 
' 
... ' 
. . . 
. . ·, ...... ,. 
To illustrate-the b~ha'~ior of sands during shear; 16t's st~rt' by'taldng two spedm~ns or'sand:_one at a 
very high void ratio, the "loose" sand, ~nd the other at a ·very low void'ratio, the" dense" sancl. we could 
perform direct shear tests [Fig.1Ll4(a)], buttob'etter measure the voll.l.mechanges we shall Jse the tri-
axial apparatus, as shown in Figs. 11.15(a) and 12.31We will run' the two tests.urider consolidated 
drained (CD)conditions,\vhi~h means we will allow water to freely enter or leave the speCimen during 
shear with~ut interference. If we have a saturatea specimen, we can 'easily monitor the amount of 
water that enters. or leav'esit and equate this to the volume change and thus the void ratio'change in 
the specimen. Water leaving the specimen duriri{shear indicatesa vol~me decrease; a:ri'd vice versa. In 
both our tests the confining pressure, O'c equals'~3;is.held'constanfanci'the 'axialstress is increased 
until failure occurs. Failure ml_ly be defined as:. · 
:: 
_ .. , '. ; 
·. 
: ; · 
'·.; ;; . 
1. Maximum principalstr6~s diff~rence,'(~1 -:-;- ~3 )max-
.. 
• • . 
' 
2. Maximum principal effective ~tress ratio, '{;J.iu3)m~x· : . 
3. r ~ [(u1·_:_· d3)/2] at a presc~ibed strain>: · 
· 
~ 
,."': .. · 
·._·~ ·. 
:···· ··.- _. ::· .. , 
". 
;-:· 
·-r:····_ i;; 
·: 
,.,:·· . 
, , 
·:~·:' <'· ..-
.> .i. 
-~·: 
. 
r; 
· 
Most of the time, we will define failure as the 'iriaximurrz'"principal stress difference, which is the same 
·asthe compressive strength of the specimen. Typicalstie~s-strai~'cur~es.for':loose'anci_dens~·sand are 
: 1, shown in Fig. 12.4( a), while the corresponding stress 'versus void ~atio c~'rv~~ a~e' pr~sentecl in Fig. 12.4(b) . 
. , 
·· ..... When the loose simd is sheared, the prinCipal stress difference' g~a'dually incre~sesto a maxi-
mum or ultimatg:val~e ( ui'_,_. ii3)u1:. Concurrently; as ilie stress is.increase~, 'tlld:yoid_ratio decreases 
,~·-·~~- .... 
· ... ·~· 
,·_.:. 
.. ·--.-
···~····~-~·-· •... ~ 
•\• ·' 
~ '·'······ ''· 
.. 
'·'' ..... ,, ''"'"'. 
~~ .\,.-...... 
~. 
' : > • •• ~ l ' ! 
wai~r~~·~el . 
change: 
·'! 
1[} 
.· t Volume decrease 
~ .. -Volume increase 
, ... 
(Example:.'sample decreases, .. · · 
1iri voiume; water leaves sample;' 
'water rises in vertical tube) 
; ,,, 
FIGURE 
112.3:· Consolic:iated~drained t(iaxial test with volume change measurements.:<~ 
544 
Chapter 12 · :· l An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
:1 
~ ', 
from e1 (e-loose) down to eel ( ec-loose ), which : 
is very. close' to':the :critical' void ratio; e~rit'•' · 
. :which Casagrande (1936a) defined as the ulti- ·· 
' mate void ratio at which continuous deforma-
, tion 'occurs with no change in principal stress ' 
difference. 
· 
When the d~nse specimen is sheared, the 
principal stress difference reaches a peak or 
maximum, aft~r which if decreases 'to, i· value 
very closeto (u1 -
u 3)u11,for the;loose 'sand. 
, ' ' .. The void ratio-stress curve sh~ws that the 
. dense. sand decreases in volume slightly at first, .. : ; . 
. then expands or dilates. up to. ecd ( ec-dense) .' 
. Notice that the_ void ratio at failure ecd is very 
. ,close to eel. Theoretically, they both, shquld be 
. equal , to the critical void ratio ; ecrit., Similarly,; 
.. the values of ( u 1 -
u3)uit for both tests should 
.' be the same. The differences are usually attrib-: 
uted to difficulties in precise measurement of . 
ultimate void ratios as well as nonuniform. · 
stress distributions in the test specimens 
(Hirschfeld, 1963). Evidence of this latter · 
"' 
, phenomenon is illustrated by the different g eel 
ways in which the specimens usually fail. The 
~ ecrit 
'':loose specimen just bulges, while the dense g ecd 
·specimen often fails along a 'distinct plane 
oriented approximately 45° + ¢' /2 from the·· 
horizontal(¢' is, of course,the effective angle, 
' of shearing resistance of the dense sand). 
:,;, 
Principal stress difference, (u1 - u3) 
1.;1. 
il 
:' :;:; 
(a) .:. : •': . 
;,;: 
.. I·' I' 
I 
I 
1:11, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I' 11 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I ., 
I 
Principal stress difference, (u1 - u3) 
'(b), 
Note that it is at least theoretically possible to 
set up a sample at an initial void ratio such 
that the.volume change at failure would be 
zero. This void ratio would, of course, be the 
critical void ratio ecrit. 
. 
FIGURE 12.4. Triaxial tests on "loose" and "dense" speci-
mens of a typical sand: (a) stress-strain curves; (b) void 
ratio changes during shear {after Hirschfeld, 1963) . 
Example 12.1 
. '.f 
Given: 
An apparatus shown in Fig. Ex. i2.1 
consists of a rubber squeeze b~lb filled with 
dense sand connected to a ghisstube;The bulb 
and sand are completely saturated with water. · 
Required: 
If the bulb is squeezed, describe what 
happens to the water level in the glass • tube.' 
Will it go up, down, or remain the same? 
; i 
I-~ 
FIGURE Ex. 12.1 
! ! 
Initial 
' : water .level 
"t' 
,. 
12.4 -Effect of Void Ratio and Confining Pressure on Volume Change 
545 
Solution: Because the sand is dense, it tends to dilate or expand when sheared. This action creates a 
slightly negative pressure in the water, which draws water into the voids and causes the level in the 
glass tube to move downward. 
' · 
·Example 12.2 
.;,· 
Given: : 
r' ~ 
' ; _, 
·The same apparatus as for Exampie 12.l, only now the bulb is filled with /oo;e sand ... ; 
Required: 
Predict the behavior of the water levei in the glass t~be wheri the bulb is squeezed (Fig. Ex.12.1). 
Solution: .When loose.sand is sheared, the soil tends to decrease· in volume. This action creates a 
.. 'positive pressure in the water, which squeezes water out of the voids. Thus the water level in the tube 
will move upward. 
. · 
' 
1 
It f~thatif the sand in the bulb is at its critical'void ratio, then upon squeezing (shearing) 
the bulb, the water level may at first decrease slightly, but with e<>ntinued squeezing it will return to its 
original level; that is, no net volum~ change will occur when the sand is ·at ecrit. 
' 
12.4 
EFFECT OF VOID RATIO AND CONFINING PRESSURE ONVOLUME,CHANGE 
Thus far, in describing the behavior of the two dr~ined triaxial tests on loose arid dense sands shown in 
Fig.12.4, we have mentioned the following-parameters: 
·· ·· 
. 
· 
• principal stress difference 
• strain 
• volume change 
• critical void ratio ecrit and indirectly, 
• relative or index density [Eqs. (5.4) and (5.5)] 
We hilVe purposely avoided defining the terms ·loose and 'dense because the. volume change behavior 
during shear depends not oniy on the initial void ratio a~d relative density but also on the confining 
pressure. In this section we consider the effect of confining pressure on the stiess-strain arid volume 
change characteristics of sands in drained shear. 
. .. · . 
. 
. 
We can assess the effects of o-3 (and, remember, in a drained testa3 = a3, as the excess pore 
water pressure is always zero) by preparing several samples at the. same void ratio and testi~g them at 
different confining pressures. We will find that the shear strength' increases with a 3 • A convenient way 
to plot the principal stress difference versus strain data is to normalize it by plotting the principal stress 
ratio a 1/a3 versus strain. For a drained test, of course, dila3 = aia3. At failure, the ratio is ( aifa3)max· 
From Eqs. (11.14) and (11.16),: ... 
· · 
. ~-:{:Dmax ~ -~ ~ :!::; ~ tan2 (45 +~'). 
(12.1) 
where ¢' is the effective angle of internalfriction. The prinCipal stress difference is related to the prin-
~~~~ 
. 
. 
546 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
At failure, the relationship is 
. (al- a3)f = a3r[(a~) -1] 
. 
. a3 max 
(12.3) 
Let's look first at the behavior of loose sand. Typical drained triaxial test results are shown for 
loose Sacramento River sand in Fig.12.5(a). The principal stress ratio is plotted versus axial strain for dif-
ferent effective consolidation pressures a3c· Note that none of the curves has a distinct peak, and they 
have a shape similar to the loose curve shown in Fig.12.4(a). The volume change data is also normalized 
by dividing the volume change .:1 V by the original volume v;, to obtain the v~lurrietric strain, or 
volumetric str~in, % = ~ 
.x 100 
0 
(12.4) 
To better appreciate what is going on in Fig. 12.5(a), let us compute the principal stress difference 
( a 1 - a3) at a strain of 5% for a3c = 3.9 MPa and a3c = 0.1 MPa. The principal stress ratios for these 
4.0r---~-----.-----.----~~--------~--~r---~ 
·~ 
~ 3.0 
~ 
iii 
Cij 
·§' 2.0 
c 
(t 
1.00 
5 
10 
All samplesloose .. 
· ,ec = 0.87, D, = 38% 
15 
20 
25 
Axial strain, e (%) 
(a) 
30 
35 
40 
+2.5r-----.-----,-----,-----~-----r----~-----.-----. 
~ 
c 
• ';::.0 
::> 
<I 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Axial strain, e (%). 
(b) 
Compression 
a3c(MPa) 
2~99ZJ 
13.7 
' 30 
35 
40 
FIGURE 12.5 Typical drained triaxial test results on loose Sacramento River sand: 
(a) principal stress ratio versus axial strain; (b) volumetric strain versus axial strain 
(after Lee, 1965). 
12.4 Effect ofVoid Ratio and Confining Pressure on Volume Change 
.547 
.conditions are 2.0 and 35, respectively, as indicated by the arrows in Fig.125(a). U!ilizing Eq. (12.2), 
· \Ve obtain thefollowing results: . 
. . 
· 
. 0.1. 
3.9 
:. uJ. 
• (MPa) 
It is • interesting to look· at the shapes of the volumetric strain versus axial strain curves in 
Fig. 125(b ): As the strain increases, the volumetric strain for the nicist part decreases. This is· consistent 
with the behavior' of a loose.sarid, as shown in Fig: 12.4(b). Howeveratlow confining pressures (for 
example, 0.1 and 0.2 MPa), the volumetric strain is positive, or dilaiion is taking place! Thus even anini-
. tially loose sand behaves like a dense sand; that is, it dilates if u3c is low enough! 
' 
:Now; let's look at the behavior of dense sand. The results of several drained triaxialtests on dense 
Sacramento.River sand an~ presented in Fig.12.6:Although the. results looklike tho.se in Fi~.125, there 
Axial strain, e (%) 
(b) 
Dilation 
Compression 
FIGURE 12.6 Typical drained 
triaxial test results on dense 
Sacramento River sand: (a) princi-
pal stress ratio versu·s axial strain; 
(b) volumetric strain versus axial 
strain (after Lee, 1965). 
548 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
... 
are some significant differences. First; definite peaks are seen in the ( alfd3)-strain CUrVes, which are 
typical of dense sands [compare with Fig. 12.4(a)]. Second, large increases of vohurietric strain (dila-
tion) are observed. However, at higher confining pressures, dense sand exhibits the behavior of loose 
sand by showing a decrease in volume or compression with strain. · 
By testing specimens of the same sand at the same void ratios or densities but with different 
effective consolidation pressures, we can determine the relationship between volumetric strain at 
failure and void ratio or relative density. We could define failure as either the maximum· (cf1 - a 3) 
or maximum alfa3. For drained tests, failure occurs at the same strain according to both criteria . 
. , Points at failure are shown as small arrows in Fig. 12.6. Volumetric strain at failure versus void ratio 
at the.endof consolidation, from the data in Figs.12.5(b)and 12.6(b) for various confining pressures 
(other data have been added as well), are shown in Fig. 12.7. For example, point 1 in Fig. 12.6(b) is 
plotted as point 1 in Fig. 12.7. It c~n be seen that for a given confining pressure the volumetric strain 
decreases (becomes more negative) as thedens'lty decreases (void ratio increases). By definition, the 
. critical void ratio is the void ratio at failure ,when the volumetric strain is zero. Thus. for the various 
values of a3c in Fig. 12.7, ecrit is the void ratio when ~ VIV0 = 0. For example, ecrit for a3c = 2.0 MPa 
is o.sss: 
We can see how ecrit varies.with confining pressure by taking the critical void ratios of Fig. 12.7 
and plotting them versus a3c, as in Fig. 12.8. Here we have called a3c the critical confining pressure 
a3crit> because this is the effective confining pressure at which zero volumetric strain occurs at failure 
for a given void ratio. 
+5 
. -- -
--
--
~-
--
-
~ 
a.. 
';::.0 
Ol '•, 
.... , 
'oc::""a::: 
=:::,,L ::::::.,...::::--o.....--
<-
I 
S; 
<I 
!II 
::I 
~ 
1ti -5 
c: 
·~, 
1i5 
0 
·;:: 
a; 
E-10 
::I g 
· All specimens: 
· Sacramento River sand 
~ 
2.
9 
.....____ 
' (MPa) 
U3c 
-15 
' 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
Void rati~ at end of co~solidation; e~ 
FIGURE 12.7 Volumetric strain at f~ilure versus void r~tio at end of consolidation for 
drained triaxial tests ai: various confining pressures (after Lee, 1965). 
·,," 
! ~ >' 
12.4,r Effect ofVoid Ratio and Confining Pressure on Volume Change 
549 
, r.·· . 
,'; 
All specimens: 
Sacramento River sand;, 
data from Fig. 12.7' 
· 
·,,. 
; '/' 
.• ... :.·'',\'. 
''•:i .. '. 
•.;. 
FIGURE 12.8 Critical void 
ratio versus pressure condi-
tions from drained triaxial 
"'3.5 · :,tests: Dai:a from Fig. 12.7 
' i 
:· (after'Lee, 1965): · 
,·;' ~ ':; ~ ._, t 
r 
~ 
! 
• 
' 
',, 
,\•; 
:·. 
,.. 
; ':·:.-
,·.··' 
.. A CD, triaxial testis conductedona granular soiL At failure;uifu3 =·4.0. The effective minor 
:principal stress at failureislOO kPa. 
..,. 
. . 
,. 
·,:Required:.·,.' 
. ;' 
a: 'Compute¢< 
1 •• •.. 
" 
' 
' 
.;1) 
:. ·' 
, .. '' 
·,, 
.• , ' 
l'' .. 
. b. ·. Determine the principal stress difference at failure. 
' '' '·c~ Plot th~ M~h~ cir~le and th~.Mohr failure env~iope. 
'>, .. ' 
Solution: 
a. From Eqs. (11.14), (11.16), or (12.1), we know that 
I 
, 
' 
(' 
') 
ulf . 1 + sin¢' 
¢' 
-, = 1 
. ¢' = tan2 45° + -2 
=4.0_· 
u 31 
-, sm 
· 
.. 
; Solving for tfJ', we obtain¢'.= 37° .. / 
b. From Eq. (12.3), 
.··(uit ) :·. 
(ul -~- ?.:3)/= .u~ 0'31 - 1 
= 100kPa (4- 1) 
= 300kPa 
T (kPa) 
' 
. 
,;, 
:c. See Fig. Ex. 12.3. 
; FIGURE Ex. 12.3 
550 
Chapter 12. 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock . 
Example 12A 
Given: 
Figure12.7. 
Required: 
What is the critical void ratio for Sacramento River sand when the confining pressure is 1.5 MPa? 
' 
~ ' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
-. 
l 
Solution: From Fig. 12.7, interpolating between thecurves for a3 = 1.3 and 2.0 MPa, we find that ec 
, (fo_r u3 ,~).5) is.about 0.61 for Sacramento River sand:. 
.. .. 
• . '. . · .. ,A s~c~ncl'ahd equally i~teresti~g-approach to looking at v~lume changes during shear is to ~se 
the 'data showri.in Figs. l2.5(b) and 12.6(b) (plus other data at inte~mediate void ratios) and plot the 
relationship bet~~en volumetric strain 'at failure and con,fining pre~sure for various values of void ratio 
after consolidation. Such a graph is shown in Fig.12.9, although the void ratios indicated are initial void 
ratios and not those after consolidation. Note that the value of u3c at AVIV0 = Ois th~ critical confining 
pressure, u3 crit·. Since they are drained tests, .u3c = CTJf• This relationship could also be obtained from 
Fig. 12.7 by noting the values of volumetric strain at constant void ratios and plotting A V, f.Vo iversus u3c· 
We show the relationships of Figs.12.7 and 12.9 idealized with straight lines in Fig. 12.10. 
. 
Since both Figs.· 12.7 and 12.9 have a' common axis, it ispossibh! io combine them in a single 
three-dimensional graph known as the Peacock diagram (after William Hubert Peacock, who first con-
structed such a diagram in 1967), as shown in Fig.12.11. 
With the Peacock diagram, we are able to predict the behavior of sand at any void ratio after 
consolidation ec and at any confining pressure u). For example, if the effe.~ti,v~. confining pressure is 
given at point c in Fig.12.11, which is higher than CTJcrit for this given void iatioec;'then we would 
expect a decrease in the volume or a' negative AV/V0 , which is equalto the ordinate BS. On the other 
hand, if u) is less than u3 cfit> such as point A fo·r the given value of e;, then a dilation or positive volume 
change will take place equal to the ordinate RD. As the ·void ratio after consolidation varies along the 
·-
" ~-~: ,_ 
·. ~ L' 
'· 
FIGURE 12.9 Volumetric 
strain at'failun~ versus :. ' 
effective consolidation 
stress for different initial 
void ratios (after Lee, 1965). 
·'" 
+5~~~--~--~--~~~~~~~r.7~~~------~ 
~ 
~ 
,.e..... 
'':::>0 s 
<l 
ai 
~ 
~ 
Cii 
c 
·~; 
(ij 
.. g .-5 
a;'. 
E 
::J g 
• 
0.5 
1.0 
All specimens: 
Sacramento River sand 
u'~;crit = 1.64 . 
.1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
Effective consolidation stress, u3c (MPa) 
3.0 
12.LV; EffeCt of Void Ratio and Confining .Pressure on Volume Change 
551 
(a) 
FIGURE 12.10 Idealized volumetric strain data from drained triaxial tests: (a) a VIVa versus e~; (b) a VIV0 versus u). 
i,', 
;.; 
: 
_ 
1 ,, 
:./'·': ;''-
;•~( 
'
1
, 
f'~,:i.r 
, 
I~ 
.··:;;~,-?' 
·,~ 
' '. \ ... t 'j ::' ) ~ .. ' 
· .. , 
FIGURE 12.11 
Peacock diagram, 
. which combines Figs. 12.1 O(a) 
' ,and(b) in.an idealized graph to 
show the behavior of drained 
triaxial tests on sand. 
·•, void ratio axis, u3 ~rit varies, and so will the volume changes at faih.ire: For a re'al sand, the Peacock dia-
gram has curved surfaces. For example; the line KP in Fig .. ii.i1 should look iike.one ~f the curves in 
Fig. 12.9. The line PW in Fig. 12.11 is also curved. See line PW in Fig. 12.8; here you are looking at a 
plane on the Peacock diagram where ~ V /V0 = 0. 
, ··.,·.,.. . 
', / .. . 
. 
,, 
Given:· 
Figure 12.9. 
Required: 
~ ' ' ,' '· 
.· 
'• . 
. 
. 
. 
. ' 
. 
' 
. 
: 
. 
. 
: 
. 
What is the critical confining pressure for Sacramento River sand if the void ratio equals 0.75? 
. 
. 
. 
SolutiQn:..Erom Fig. i2.9, we cari interpolate between the curves fore;= 0.7hind 0.78 for the value of 
u3 ;h~n ~ V IV; is zero. We obtain a u3 of ~bout 0.1' MP~~ · 
·· · · · 
. . . . 
· '" 
· · · · 
· 
552 
Chapter 12 '<An lntroductio.n to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
~ ·, ,-
Example 12.6 
Given: 
'-·~, 
Figure 12.11, but scaled to the idealized behavior of Sacramento River sand (a combination of 
Figs. 12.7 mid l2.9); a3 crit · = 0.4 MPa and ec = ecri~ = 0.8. 
· 
. . 
. 
. 
1
' 
.Required: 
Describe the drained behavior of this sand if the test void ratios after consolidation at· a3c = 
0.4 MPa are (a) 0.85 and (b) 0.75. 
· 
Solution: Since a3; and ec are at critical, there is bydefi~ition no volume change during shear. Thus our 
test plots at point H in Fig. 12.11, with the values of a3 crit and ec as given. (You can verify these values 
in Figs.12.7 and 12.9.) 
. 
. 
. 
a. When ec > ecrit (0.85 > 0.8), then at a3c = OA MPa the coordinates of our test would have 
to plot below the WOP plane, which means AVIV0 is negative. During drained shear, a3 is 
constant (no excess pore pressure develops), and the.specimen would consolidate' and 
decrease in volume during shear. Its coordinates would be on the extension of plane WKP. 
b. When ec < ecrit (0.75 < 0.80) the opposite of (a) happens. During drained shear, a3 is again 
constant and equal to 0.4 MPa, so, for the coordinates of our test to remain on plane WKP, 
the A V IV0 must increase. 
. · 
· 
· 
Example 12.7 
·Given: 
. Figur~ 12.11 is scaled to the behavior of Sacramento River simd (Figs. ·12.7 and 12.9), with 
ec~;l :=:, 0.6 'and aj crit = 1.6 MPa. 
. 
. 
. 
Requir~d: · 
Describethe behavior in drained shear if we maintain this voidratio of 0.6 but test the specimen 
witlJ. a3c of (a) 1.5 MPa and (b) 1.7 MPa., 
Solution: 
a. When a3c < aj crib the specimen will dilate and a positive A V IV0 will occur. This behavior is 
similar to wliat happens to point A in Fig. 12:11: Tlie dilation is measured by the. ordinate 
RD, so that the coordinates of our test remain on plane WKP. 
· · ' · 
· 
· 
b. When a3c > a3 crib the behavior would be similar to path BS in Fig. 12.11 in .d~ained shear. 
Example 12.8 
Given: 
:{,': 
',-] r; 
) 
(, 
;, ... 
A drained triaxialtest ori sand 'with. 0"3 .::: ·150 kPa and ( alfa3)~a~· ~ 3.7. '. ,. 
' 
'' 
' 
. 
,, 
''}') 
12:5 :'Factors that ·AffeCt-the Shear Strength of Sands 
553 
Required: 
~ 
a. a11 
b. (at - u3)j' 
c: ¢'. 
Solution: 
a. Since we know a3 and (alfa3)1 ==;; 3.7, we can solvefor a11 · a!1 = 3.7(150) .;, 555 kPa. 
b._ (at - a3)f =: (a! - a3)t = 555 - 150 = 405 kPa. 
. 
. 
c; Assume for sand that c' = · O.So, from Eq. (11.13), · 
· 
(a' -u' ) 
· 
, :.::. 
. . . . lf 
. 3/ 
.:_· 
. 405 -
0 
¢ - arcsm 
, 
. ,_ 
- arcsm 705 - 35 
. 
av + a3f 
' 
> 
1 
: 
Note: We could also determine ¢' graphically from the Mohr circle plotted for failure conditions, as 
shown in Fig, Ex. 12.8. 
-
-· ·- · 
· 
T (kPa) 
300 
-.· 200 
100 
Center at 352 
' FIGURE Ex. 12.8 
12.5 
FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE SHEAR STRENGTH OF SANDS-
. 
' 
Since sand is a "frictional" material, we would expect those factors th~t in~~eas~ the frictional resistance of 
sand to lead to increases in the angle of internal friction. First, let us summariZe the factors that influence¢. 
1. Void ratio or relative density. 
: 2. Particle shape. 
· 3. , Grain size distribution. 
, 4. Particle surface· roughness: --
5. Water. 
6. Intermediate principal stress. 
7. Particle siz~. 
, 8. Overconsolidation or prestress. 
Void ratio, related to the density of the sand; is perhaps the most important single parameter that 
affects the strength of sands. Generally speaking, for drained tests either in the direct shear or triaxial 
test apparatus, the lower the void ratio (higher density or higher index, or relative, density), the higher 
.the shear strength. The Mohr circles for the triaxial test data presented earlier are shown in Fig.12.12 
; ,. 
554 
Chapter 12 ... An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
6.-----~----------~----~~--~----~----~----~----~ 
Extrapolation from 
4 
i 
Sacramento River sand, 
Loose, D, = 38% -------
le; = 0.871 
.. 2 ~ 
Th~+-~---,~d~.--~1 
ro 
a. 
~ 
0 
2 
4. 
'6 -. 
8 
10 
'12 
14 
16 
.--~~~TL1f:=r··~·-
1 
I 
i 
D37o 
; 
' 
: 
River sand, 
6 
! 
! 
1/ ~ 
L ~~~~~~~: .. D, ~ 60% 
] 
I 
/(~L 
____ L~ 
e,~o.7a 
/.._·--······· 
·······- ····· .L. ..•...... 
4 
2 
18 
i 0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
~ 
; 
61 
! 
I 
j ;< 390 I 
I 
.r: 
I 
' L...l:: 
. 
00 
i 
' 
/ 
, 
);//.~~ [ 
-----~~~ 
-
-----~~-- ···· ~~~i~~e2!~=~~r ~~~% 
4 ·--··-··-·· 
r·n-··-··· 
..-'1 
I . 
~ 
1 e; = 0.71 
2 
i 
/ 
/ ..&--7---
--lz"' 
--
+-
-\ +--
--! --\ 
- + --
-+-- - ---1 
~ 
0 
14 
' 16 
18 
6 
• 
-i 
I 
, 
, 
_ , 
. 
Sacramento River sand, 
~T~----r--~~--- Dense, o, = 100 --------
e; = 0.61 
2 
0 
18 
Normal stress (MPa) 
• ·.FIGURE 12.12 Mohr circles and failure envelopes from drained triaxial tests; illustrating the effects 
of void ratio or relative density on shear strength (after Lee, 19~5; also after Lee and Seed, 1967). 
12.5 Factors that Affect the Shear Strength of Sands 
555 
for vari~us confining pressures and four initial void ratios. You can see that, as the void ratio decreases, 
or the density increases, the angle of internal friction or angle of shearing resistance <P increases. 
Another thing you should notice is that the Mohr failure envelopes in Fig. 12.12 are curved; that 
:is, <P' is not a constant if the range in confining pressure is large. We usually speak of <P' as if it were a 
constant, but we understand that tlie Mohr failure envelope really is curved (Sec. 13.9.2). In practice, 
we approximate the curved envelope by a straightline and thus a constant</J' over the range of 
working stresses anticipated in the field.· 
, 
. 
The effects of relative density or void ratio, grain shape, grain size distribution, and particle size 
on <Pare summarized by Casagrande in Table 12.LValues were determined by triaxial tests on satu-
rated specimens at moderate confining pressures. Generally speaking, with all else constant, <P 
. .increases with increasing angularity (Fig. 2.7). If two sands have the same relative density, the soil that 
is better graded (for example, an SW soil as opposed to an SP soil) has a larger <fl. (As a reminder, two 
sands at the same void ratio may not necessarily have the same relative density.) Particle size, at con-
stant void ratio; does ~ot seem to influence <P significantly. Thus, a fine sand and a coarse sand at the 
same void ratio will probably have about the same. <fl. Casagrande also published a very useful graph of 
.the effective angk of friction .versus the void ratio in Fig. 12.13, as cited by Means and Parcher (1963) . 
.. Notice the limits for natural granular soils indicated on the figure. As e~pected, the ciata given in 
Table 12.1 fit nicely in the figure. 
. 
Figure 12.14 shows the correlation between the effective friction angle from triaxial compression 
test results and the dry density, relative density, and Unified Soil classification. The scales for porosity, 
void ratio, and dry density are based on a specific gravity of 2.68. (Note that the three scales also act as 
a nomograph for these three interrelated parameters.)· 
' 
· 
TABLE 12.1 
Angle of Interim! Friction of Cohesionless Soils 
Loose 
Dense 
No. 
_General Description · 
'1 
Ottawa standard sand 
2 
Sand from St. Peter sandstone 
Beach sand from Plymouth, MA 
Silty sa~d from Franklin Falls Da~ ~ite, NH 
Silty sand from vicinity of John Martin 
Dam, CO 
Slightly silty sand from the shoulders of Ft. 
PeckDam,MT 
7 
Screened glacial sand, Manchester, NH 
8 
Sand from beach of hydraulic fill dam, 
Quabbin Project, MA 
.9 
Artificial, well-graded mixture of gravel 
, • .with s:mds No: 7 and No.3 
. 
, 
10 
· Sand for Great Salt Lake fill (dust gritty) 
.11 
Well-graded, comp~cted crushed rock 
DlO 
Grain Shape 
'(mm) 
Cu 
e 
Well rounded 
o:s6 
1.2 
0.70 
Rounded 
· -. 0.16 
. 1.7 
0.69 
Rounded 
0.18 · 
1.5 
0.89 
Subrounded 
' 0.03 · 
2.1 
0.85 
Subangular to 
0.04 
4.1 
0.65 
.subrounded 
Subf!!lgular to 
0.13 
1.8 .. ·· . 0.84 •·· 
subrounded 
Subangular 
0.22 
1.4 
0.85 
Subangular 
O.D7 
2.7 
0.81 
Subrounded to 
0.16 
68 
0.41 
subangular 
Angular 
0,07 
4.5 
. 0.82 
Angular 
-
4> 
(deg) 
e 
28. 
0.53 
. 31 
0.47 
29 
33 
: :0.65 
36 
0.45 
34 
0.54 
33 
35 
42 
38 
0.60 
0.54 
0.12 
0.53 
0.18 
4> 
(deg) 
35 
37" 
37 
40 
42 
57 
47 
60 
0The angle of internal friction of the undisturbed St. Peter sandstone is larger than 60°, and its cohesion is so small that slight finger pressure or 
rubbing, or even stiff blowing at a specimen by mouth, will destroy it. 
bAngle of internal friction measured-by direct shear test for No.8, by triaxial tests for all others ... 
_.: ·' 
:' ) . 
. 
. 
' 
" 
. / 
/....-' 
~ 
After A. Casagrande (Hirschfeld, 1963). 
,'7 ,: 
·:;-
Jt' 
'·,j 
556 
FIGURE 12.13 
Range of angle 
of internal friction of natural, 
granular soils as a function of the 
, void ratio (after Casagrande as· 
cited by Means and Parcher, 1963). 
Void ratio, e 
45 
-
Ci) 
C]) 
~ 
. Cl 
C]) 
:3. 
40 
~ 35 
c 
0 u 
E 
(ij 
E 
2 30 
.!: 
0 
C]) 
OJ. 
1:: 
<( 
25 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
1.7 . 
1.8. 
1.9 
2.0 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
Dry density (Mg/m3) .. 
2.4 
FIGURE 12.14 Correlations between the effective friction angle in triaxial compression and the dry density, 
relative density, and soil classification. Approximate correlation is for cohesion less materials without plastic 
fines (after U.S. Dept. of the Navy, 1986). 
:; , .. 
-, . ' 
12.5 Factors that Affect the Shear Strength of Sands 
557 
We have combined Figs:12:13·and 12:14;-aiitliey are related by: the angle of internal friction and 
void ratio. This combined new figu~e look~ diffe~erit,be~ause Fig. 12.i3 is now reversed, as the void 
ratio scale is different between the. two original graphs: Figure 12.13, was replotted using the void ratio 
scale ~n Fig. 12.14 into the new Fig,' 12.15, ..... 
· · 
· 
In this figure it is interesting to note that the right half of Fig.12.14 does not contain any void ratio 
e data less 'than about 0.4 from the Casagrande plot as shown in Fig.12.13. There are two reasons for this 
absence. One may be that the Casagrande plot deals with ~'many.natural (soil) grains" and the second is 
that we usually don't find.many soils in nature with void ratios lesstlian 0.4. Further, many dumped 
granular soils have relative densities ~80%, and it is unusual for S()ilS in situ to have dry densities 
greater thanl25lbf/ft3 (or ~2 Mg/m3). (With dry density that high, it will be difficult, for example, to 
drive a pile into this soil formation.) A quick glance at Fig. 5.2 will show you that the void ratio at that 
dry density will be about 0.35. Tough stuff! 
w '. 
>il 
• 
Another parameter, not included in Table 12;1; is surface roughness, which is very difficult to 
measure. It will, however, have an effect on¢. Generally, the greater the surface roughness, the greater 
:will be ¢ .• It: has also been found that wet soils show a¢ value 1 ':to 2° lower than if the sands were dry. 
•'' 
•,' I 
Dry de~sity (Mg/m3) 
' FIGURE 12.15 .. Correlations between-the effe~tive friction angle in triaxial compres'siortand Hi'e dry 
density and soil classification (after U.S. Navy, 1971, 1986) with th·e reverse(:!' Fig: 12.13 superimposed. 
Note the scale change due to the nonlinear relationship between dry density and void ratio. 
558. 
Chapter) 2 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
' 
\'1, 
:>;; 
l 
:, ~ '. 
/ i 
1 ~ ; (. y 
I 
,·).-
~~ !( ;._ ;:_1 • 
.? ,-1 
'/.: 
'· :TABLE 12.2 suinni~i~'omictorsAffectirigcf> 
. 
~ ~ ' ,"' ' _l 
• : ' 
; 
' ; ~ :. , : ,, 1 
• I ' • 
, 
-'' 
• 
, 
- • 
1 ) . 
• ; 
' 
' { ; ·_, 
' I ,1 : I 
Factor 
J :_;Void ratio; e" i! ;i: l 
Angularity, A:. 
.. Grain-size distribution 
. 
. 
. • ' l'. Surface roughness, R i 
,Water content, w 
Intermediate prinCipal stress 
Particle size, S 
Overconsoli1 
1··. 
~ 'I' . 
.::ei, 4>!'. 
·Ai;cpj. 
Cu j, cpj 
Ri,cpj .. : ::' 
wi, cf>hlightly: 
' '· cf>ps ;;::: cf>rx (see Sec.13.11) 
· • '•J :-,Noeffect(withconstimte)· 
Little· effect 
J' 
·,f 
,.,., "\ 
· . ; ., :;;All the factors mentioned above are summarized in Table 12.2. Some correhitions between cf/ and 
d~y density, relative density, and soil classification are shown in Fig. 12.13. This figure and Table 12.1 are 
. very us~f~l for estilllat_ing the_ fri~tion(ll_<;har~acteristics .9f granular materials. If you have. a complete 
visual classification of_ the_ materials at your site, together with some idea of the in situ relative density, 
you already have a pretty good idea about the shear strength behavior of the soils in advance of a labo-
ratory t~sting program~ For small projects, such estimates may be ail you need for design. 
12.6 ·. ·sHEAR STRENGTH oF SANDSLisfNG lr·.fSITU TESTS 
i 
~- ; . 
' 
12.6.1 
Our discus;ion so far o~'the sheaf_;~t~~ngth dfs~nds has been largelY based on th~ir behavior as 
observed in triaxial tests.Yqu may recall from our aiscussion of in situ tests in Sec. 11.6.1 that tlie Stan-
dard Penetration Test (SPT); Dutch cone, penetrometer test (CPT), and flat plate dilatometer test 
(DMT) canbe'used.to obtain the drained fiict~on'angie cf>',of sandy soils. Empirical correlations have 
' :been' developed for cf>' \vith·the SPT blow count (N)~ CPT cone tip'resistance qc, and horizontal stress 
index Kv determined by the DMT. This section 'gives some of these correlations .. 
-., . ' 
.• 
• 
> \ 
~. . . 
•• 
.. 
-
. ; .· : '. ' 
~ . ) 
-· ~ ' ·; 
i •• ' -' 
SPT· . r 
··. 
The SPTbl~w count N correlates rather wellwitli relative d~risity and friction angle, aslong:as proper 
corrections are made for applied energy, rod length, and.boreliole diameter (Sabatini et' al., 2002). One 
common relationship is shown in Table 12.3 for clean sands, For ciayey sands the cf>' in the table should be 
reduced by about so, and for gravelly sands, increased by so. If the SPT_ N~value is determined in very fine 
or silty sands below the groundwater table and if it is greater than about N = 1S, then the measured 
' 
'""""' 
"'' 
'; 
TABLE 12.3 Correlation between Relative Density, SPT N, and Friction Angle 
Relative Density Descriptors 
, Very 16ose 
''Loose · 
~-;·..,-\' 
Relative Density(%) 
SPT N (blows/300 mm) 
.·<4 
~10 
.. ~ 
- -·Medium 
,.<20 
20-40 
40-60· 
10-30 
35-40 
1'." 
'-Dense 
Very dense 
11.:· 
;'60-so ··' 
After Meyerhoff (1956) and Sabatini et :~1: (200Z). 
,,'.'.,l;• 
• 
. 1 ~! : 
'30-50 ' 
'--··' 
40-45 
>50 
>45 
,·, 
,, 
.,, 
.·,'.•, : 
12.6 Shear Strength of Sands Using In' Situ Tests 
559 
<? 
c.. 
6 
0 
-~ 
b 100 ---
~ 
::::l 
rn 
rn 150 -
~ 
c. 
c 
Q) 
"E 200 
::::l -e 
Q) > 
0 
SPT blowcount (N-value) 
1 0 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
I 
I 
I 
[l 40 
~ 
Ol 
Q) 
~ 
:e- 35 
30 
\ 
: / 
3QQL-~~~~~~~~--~ 
FIGURE 12.16 Correlation between cf/ and 
N corrected for effective overburden stress 
(after Schmertmann, 1975). 
FIGURE: 12.17. · Correlation between .p•, and corrected 
· · -- N value (Terzaghi et al., 1996). . 
. 
; 
~ 
. 
\ . 
' 
· •. 
:· 
j / 
-:·! 
, 
~ 
, 
,.:. i :.·: I 
-N value must be c<;mected for dilatancy: One approach is to use N _;:,_15_ + (N_' ::::.· 15)/2 where, the 
measured N' > 15. 
· 
· · 
· 
Because theN value depends on overburden stress~ Schinertinann(i975) proposed' thecorrel~~ 
; :tiori shOwn in Fig.12.16, based on' calibration chamber tests:AccorCiirig io Kuihawr and Mayne (1990), 
·.· thiscoriehitioncanbeapproximatedby 
·· 
· 
· 
··· 
· 
·· .:.;:_·--
· 
::: \); 
·-
• 
, 
< 
• 
, 
•' 
) 
f 
.I 
·.'~ • 
,. 
0.34 
(12.s) 
i-}' 
i 
N 
cf/ f'::J tan-1 --.------
.·- ·: 
~ . : . ~l2.Z+ 20.3 a~~), 
'• 
-
' \ 
· ' ·.. 
Pa · 
'•' 
:where Pa '= referenc~ pres~ure (atmospheric~ f'::J,l0-0 kPa)~·: :;; 
· -' '· ·: · ,·. 
• · ; 
: 
· 
Teizaghi et ·al. (1996)state that this figure underestimat~s the,(!>' for calcareous sands (Sec.4.11.2) 
with crushable particles and overcmisolidat~d 'sal1as:' Figure' 12.17 shows an' improved correlation 
between¢' and the blowcount, (N1) 60,which is theN-value_ corrected for applied energy, rod length, 
and borehole diameter '(Sabatini et al., 2002). 
· 
· 
12.6.2 CPT 
Because the CPT is a quasi~static test, it is especially.effective in .loose sands without much gravel. 
Probably the best known correlation betweeri conejtip iesisia~~e-'qc an'd th:e drained friction angle¢' is 
shown in Fig. 12.18 for normally consolidated uncemented clean quartz sands. According to Sabatini 
1 . •et al. (2002) the correlations in Fig. 12:18 can be approximated by 
. 
. 
. 
¢' f':j ian-{ ?r~ .o.3.~~~~(:~J J. 
,.,, 
(12.6) 
560 
Chapter-12 ~:<·An lntroduction.to,ShearStrength of Soils and Rock 
Cone bearing, q0 (MPa) . 
10 
' 20 
30' 
40 
~co 1oo· 
a.. 
==-
~· 
0 
"b' 150 1-\1\\ \ I\ · · '\1 
X 
I . -........1 
i 
• 
,(/) 
Cll 
~ 
·~ 200·-· 
'> 
-~ 
.:a3 250 
1400 I' 
.:>G I".. 
" 
'' 
I 
. 
. 
! ,• 
. ·,' 
. Ko 
.i; 
FIGURE 12:18 . Drained friction angle cf/ as a· 
function of cone tip resistance q, and effective 
've'rtical o\ierburden stress. (Robertson and : ··. '. 
FIGURE 12.19 
Corr~la~ion ~f cp; with the ho~izontal stress index K0 
for dean sands (after Campanella and Robertson,1991; Marchetti, 
1997; and Sabatini et al., 2002): 
. ' 
· . . . 
. 
· 
Campanella, 1983). 
12.6.3 DMT 
• ! ~ 
DMT results are used to develop material and lateral stress indices that have been correlated to vari-
ous soil properties includi~g the friction a~glefor sands and silts.One correlation for clean sand is 
through the horizontal stress index Kvproposed by Campanella and Robertson (1991), and modified 
by Marchetti (1997). According to Sabatini .et · al. (2002), Eq. (12.7) is the lower bound proposed by 
.... Marchetti (1997). It is plotted in Fig. i2.19. and according to the. correlation by Campanella and 
.. :Robertson (i991) appears to befo.r overconsoiiCi~ted. sands. . , . . 
. .· 
'. : 
• ~ 
.. ' '' ~ 
' 
' 
• 
. 
' 
d,. ,-
,·,. ''' I 
' 
,. 
' 
_.,,; ' 
' 
•' < -' 
' >. "' < 
··· 
_,. 
· · 4>'<=·zsof-'14.6i6g'K 
2.1log2'K<'' 
. . 
. 
. 
D 
. 
,.. . 
,_.D, 
,;• 
(12.7) 
12.7 
THE COEFFICIENT OF EARTH PRESSURE AT REST FOR SANDS 
:,:;, 
:·l 
·-'; 
'' in Sec'.' 6:it' we defined ih~ 'coeffici~nt ~f e~rth pressu;e· at rest as 
·· :,!:; 
: : ·t.~;:-· 
:,;,1· ·' ··.,-.:::,~;· .; r;;; 
.;~·< ··.··;· ~~ ····:~:.:: .... , 
··:; 
-::· ... ,, · 
[(od~J:~ri 
·, 
. '~! ) ; 
where. aj,0 = the horizontal effective stress in situ, and 
a~;, ~·the vertical~ffe'ctive st~e~s in situ! 
.. 
(~ 
._;;: 
' . :·: ;·' . ,·, ' (6._19) 
12.7 The Coefficient of Earth Pressure at Rest for Sands 
561 
We mentioned that a knowledge· of K 0 is.very important for the design of earth-retaining structures 
and many foundations; it also influences liquefaction potential, as we shall see in Chapter 13. Thus, if 
your assessment of the initial in situ stresses in the soil is inaccurate, you can be way off in your predic-
tion of the performance of such structure!'\. 
You already know from Sec. 6.9 how to estimate u~0 from the densities of the overlying materials, 
the thicknesses of the various layers, and the location of the groundwater table. Accurate measurements 
' of uho are not easy, especially in sands. It is virtually impossible to install an earth pressure cell in situ, for 
example, without causing some disturbance and densification of the sands around the cell, and this 
changes the stress field at the very point of measurement. Consequently, the approach usually taken is 
to estimate K0 from theory or laboratory tests, and then calculate uho from ·u~0 from Eq. (6.19). 
The best known equation for estimating K 0 , derived byJaky.(1944, 1948), is a theoretical rela-
tionship between K 0 mid the angle of internal friction¢', or 
.. 
K0 = 1- sin¢' 
(12.8) 
This relationship, as shown in Fig. 12.20, seems to be an adequate predictor of K~ for normally consol-
idated sands. Since most of the points lie between 0.35 and 0.5 for these sands, K0 of 0.4 to 0.45 would 
be a reasonable average value to use for preliminary design purposes. 
· 
If the sand has been preloaded, then K0 is somewhat greater. Schmidt (1966, 1967) and Alpan 
(1967) suggested that the increase in K 0 could be related to the overc:onsolidation ratio (OCR) by 
Ko-oc = Ko-nc (OCRl 
where Ko-oc = K 0 for the overconsolidated soil, 
0.8 
~-0.7 
Cii 
~ 
cu 0.6 
~ 
::J 
"' "' 
~ 0.5 
.s:: 
t:: 
Cll 
C]) 0.4 
0 c 
C]) 
·u 0.3 
:E 
C]) 
0 
() 
Ko-nc = K 0 for the normally consolidated soil, and 
h = an empirical exponent. 
0 
K0 = 1 - sin ¢J' 
o Sangamon sand (subangular) 
• Wabash sand (subangular) 
<> Chatahoochee sand (subangular) 
• Brasted sand 
· 
o Sand (Simons, 1958) 
• Belgium sand 
t>. Minnesota sand (rounded) 
... Pennsylvania sand (angular) 
<> 
• 
Angle of internal friction, ¢J' (degrees) 
FIGURE 12.20 Relationship.between K0 and ¢J' for normally consolidated sands 
(after AI-Hussaini and Townsend, 1975). 
(12.9) 
562 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
Values of h range between 0.4 and 0.5 (Alpan, 1967; Schmertmann; 1975) and even as high as 0.6 for 
very dense sands (Al-Hussaini and Townsend, 1975). Schmidt (1966) suggested that h =sin cf/. Ladd 
· et al. (1977) pointed out that this exponent itself varies with OCR, and it seems to depend on the direc-
tion of the applied stresses. For example, Al-Hussaini and Townsend (1975) found a significantly lower 
. K 0 during reloading than during unloading in laboratory tests on a uniform medium sand. Thus K 0 
appears to be very sensitive to the precise stress history of the deposit. 
Kulhawy. et al. (1989) provide a tentative· evaluation of cone penetration tests in· a calibration 
chamber where the relative density is known; Figure 12.21 shows how the cone tip resistance qc vanes 
with horizontal effective stress a/10 .for a given relative density. Notice that both a/,0 and tid (also a 
stress) are normalized with respect to atmospheric pressure Paso as to give dimensionless parameters. 
·The value of Pain SI units is 101.3 kPa, but using 100 kPa is sufficiently accurate. Knowing the normal-
ized tip resistance and the relative density, we ftnd the normalized effective stress. The value of K 0 is 
computed according to Eq. (6.19). Equation (12.10) gives the interrelationship in the figure 
I 
(q fp )1.25 
aho 
c 
a 
-;; 
Pa =;· 35e(v•/1o) 
where a/,0 . = horizontal effeCtive stress, 
qc = cone tip resistance, 
. 
I 
"' 
~ 
c 
-.c: 
b 
<Ji 
en 
~ 
1ii 
(ij c 
2 
"§ 
.c 
-~ 
0 
Q) [i 
Pa = reference pressure (~tmospheric, ~100 kPa). 
We will have more to say about this subject when we discuss K 0 for clays in Sec. 12.13. 
5r------r--~--~,-.-~-rr---~~---,--.--r-r.-rT> 
20 sands 
NC 
0 
oc 
p • 
./!> ., 
0,(%} 
20 to 40 
40 to 60 
6o to 8o 
80 to 100 
0(01) . 
. r to = 20 , . . 40 .· 
.·· /. I 
•. 
~ 
/ 
.... / 
/ 
~· 
. 
0 . 
··. ·. // 0 
•. {!>j 
80 
/, .... (o "• ol'.l<'f'l'>l'. "/ 
0/. . 0 
. ' /0. .··. • i'<.N7. 
Jf / 
/ 
& 0·· ./(.! ?t;,.f\,. ~/ 
/ 
op 
.·. / pg .r~_f\..•'l:::. 
/!> ~..,/.., 
o /. I -.;:;• ~ !!> ~., . 
. //O O ·/o• )' •:/t;,./:,.A,t,LJf [:,..$%.,; 
· .. 10.0 
. 
0 . 
0 
• '" 
'-'!SrtJf !.<0 ... -I 
p p 
Ppo / 
• ~ _i l'> 
l'>" / 
¥., 
-
/c
. o o P 
o_Po_ ~o FJ . f\. f\.t;,.7J'., ~ / 
o 
o/ ..,o>-:' o • • .&•~ 
-, ~ 
00,. 
/ 
0 
. f\./. tF i7~~ 
/y 
0 /. 
•• /.~ [:,.[:,. 
.., 
T. 
t 
. 
o 
;? So 
:!>" 
l'> 
l'> 
~l'>l'> 
T / 
.... :./ 0 
/ 
[:,.. 
/. 
[:,..., 
. "'/"' 
o I 
-
"" 
.1 
. 
/· 
I 
. 
/ 
T . ... ". 
10 .. _, 
• 
I 
I 
. 
/"' ... 
20-
' (.!. • I 
.. zT 
50 
1oo· .. ·--
1 
1 
.. ~-200 
I 
' I 
500 
1000 
Cone tip resistance, q0 1Pa 
,'0 
'--
·. 
·.· 
FIGURE 12.21 
Normalized cone tip resistance versus.normalized horizontal effective 
stress as a Junction of selative_ density (after Kulhawy et al., _198~} .. 
(12.10) 
\ 
12.8 Behavior of Saturated Cohesive Soils during Shear 
563 
12.8 . ' BEHAVIOR OF SATURATED COHESIVE SOILS DURING SHEAR 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
· What happens when shear stresses are applied to saturated cohesive .soils? Most of the remainder of 
this chapter addresses this question. But first, let's briefly review what happens when saturated sands 
are sheared. 
· 
· 
· 
From our previous discussion, you know that volume changes occur in a'drained test, and that 
the direction of the volume changes, whether dilation or compression, depends on the relative density 
as well as the confining pressure. If shear takes place undrained, then the mechanisms that produce 
volume change under drained conditions tend to produce corresponding changes in pore pressures in 
the sand. When sands are loaded statically, because they have such a high permeability as compared to 
silts and clays, sands drain as fast as the load is applied, so undrained loading under static conditions 
happens only in the laboratory. Dynamic loading is. another matter. The behavior of saturated sands 
under dynamic loads, for example, due to blasting, pile driving, or earthquakes, can be quite dramatic 
. under certain conditions, as we explain in Chapter 13. 
In the laboratory triaxial test, by simply closing the drainage values (Figs. 11.15 and 12.3) during 
axial loading, no volume change is allowed and the sand is sheared undrained. However, unless the con-
fining pressure just happens to.be at a3 crit• the sand will tend to change volume during loading. A loose 
sand specimen would tend to decrease in volume, but it cannot; so as a result; a positive pore pressure is 
induced, which causes a reduction in. the effective stress. The opposite happens with dense specimens. 
They tend to dilate, so a negative pore pressure is induced, which causes an increase in the effective stress. 
Basically, the same things happen when clay soils are. sheared. In drained shear, whether the vol-~_ 
ume changes are.dilation or compression depends not only on the density and the confining pressure · 
but also on the stress history of the soil. Similarly, in undrained shear the pore pressures developed 
depend greatly on whether the soil is normally consolidated or overconsolidated .. 
Typically, engineering loads are applied much.faster than the water can escape from the pores of 
a clay soil, and consequently excess pore pressures are produced. If the loading is such that failure does 
not occur,· then the pore pressures dissipate and. volume changes develop by the process we call 
consolidation (Chapters s' and 9). The. primary difference in behavior between sands and clays, as men-
tioned when we discussed the compressibility of soils (Chapter 8), is in the time it takes for these volume 
changes to occur. The time aspect strictly depends on, or is a function of, the· difference in permeability 
. between sands and clays. Since cohesive soils have a much lower permeability than sands and gravels, it 
. ; takes'im.ich longer for the water to flow inor out of a cohesive soil mass. 
. 
. . 
Now, what happens when the loading is such that a shear failure is imminent? Since (by defini-
tion) the pore water cannot carry any static shear stress, all the applied shear stress mu~t be resisted by 
· · the soil structure. Put another way,' the· shear strength of the soil depends only on the· effective stresses 
· and not on the pore water pressures. This does not mean that the pore pressures induced in the soil are 
unimporfant.'on the contrary, as the· total stresses are changed because of some engineering loading, 
the pore water pressures also chimge; and until equilibrium of effective stresses occurs, instability is 
possible. These observations lead to two fundamentally different approaches to the solution of stability 
problems in geotechnical engineering: (1) the total stress appmach and (2) the effective stress approach. · 
' . . . ' In the total stress approach, we allow no drainage to occur during the shear test, and we make 
the assumption, admittedly a big one, that the pore water pressure and therefore the effective stresses 
in the test specimen are identical to those in the field. The method of stability analysis is called the total 
stress analysis, and it utilizes the total or the undrained shear strength r 1, of the soiL The undrained 
shear strength can be determined by either laboratory or field tests. If field tests such as the vane shear, 
Dutch cone penetrometer, or pressuremeter tesf are used, then they must be.conducted rapidly enough 
so that undrained conditions prevail in situ: 
. · 
·· 
· · · ·· 
. 
· 
The second approach to calculate the st~bility of foundations, embankments, slopes, ~tc., uses the 
shear strength in terms. of effective stresses. In this approach, we have to measure or estimate the pore 
pressures, both in the laboratory· and in the field. Then, if we know or can estimate· the initial· and 
564 
Chapter;12 . , An Introduction to Shear Strength. of Soils and Rock 
applied total stresses, we can calculate the effective stresses acting in the soil. Since we believe that shear 
strength and stress-deformation behavior of soils is. really controlled' or determined by the effective 
stresses, this second approach is philosophically more satisfying. But it does have its practical problems. 
For example, estimating the field pore pressures during design and before construction is not easy. This 
method of stability analysis is called. the effective stress analysis, and it utilizes· the drained shear 
strength or the shear strength in terms of effective stresses. The drained shear strength is ordinarily 
determined only by,labonitory tests. 
· 
'· 
· ~ 
You probably recall, from our description of triaxial tests in se·c. 11.5, that there are limiting 
conditions of drainage in the tests that model real field situations; We mentioned that you could have 
consolidated-drained (CD) conditions, consolidated-undrained (CU) conditions, or unconsolidated-
undrained. (UU) conditions. It is also convenient to describe the behavior of cohesive soils at these 
. . limiting drainage conditions. It is not difficult to translate these test conditions into specific field situ-
ations with similar drainage conditions'. 
· · ·· · 
·: • 
We mentioned in Sec.11.5 that the unconsolid~ted-drained test (UD) is not a meaningful test. First, 
it models no real engineering design situation. Second, the test cannot be interpreted, because drainage 
occurs during shear, and you cannot separate the effects of the confining pressure and the shear stress. 
1 , . . 
. ·As we did with sands, we shall discuss the shear behavior of cohesive soils with reference to their 
· ... behavior during triaxial shear tests. You can think of the specimen in the triaxial cell as representing a 
typical soil element in the field under different drainage conditions and undergoing different loading 
. or stress paths. In this manner, we hope you will gain some)nsight into how cohesive soils behave in 
rshear, both in the laboratory and in the fieldoKeep in mind that the following.discussion is somewhat 
· · simplified; and that real soil behavior is much more complicated. In Chapter 13, we shall explore some 
of these complexities. Our primary references'are Leonards (1962); Hirschfeld (1963), and Ladd (1964 
and 1971 b), as well as the lectures of Professors R B. Broms, H. B. Seed and S. J. Poulos.' 
: ,' 
.. , 
.,,, 
. ' .· ~ \ ' 
·;' .. '' 
12.9 
CONSOLIDATED-DRAINED STRESS-DEFORMATION AND STRENGTH. 
CHARACTERISTICS , 
',, ' 
12.9.1 . Consolidated-Drained (CD) Test Behavior 
>:;',' 
· We des~ribed th~ CD t~st ~hen we .di~cussed the strength of ~ahdsearlier in thisch~pier.B;riefly, the 
procedure is to consolidate the, test specimen under some state of stress' appropriate to the field or 
' ;' design situation. Th,e consolidatioil stresses can either be hydrostatic (c;:qual in all dire'ciions, sometimes 
' .. called. isotropic) or nonhydrostatic (different in. different·. directions,·. sometimes called anisotropic) . 
. , Anotherway of looking atthis seco'ndcase is that a stress difference'or (from the Mohr circles) a shear 
, stress is applied to the soil. When consolidation is over, the. "C" pa~i of the CD test is co~plete. 
·, . 
·. During the "D" ·part, the ctr'ainage valves re'mainopen and the stress differe'nce is applied 
very slowly, so that essentially no excess pore water pressure develops during the·. test. Professor 
A.Casagraride termed this test theS-tesi (for ''slow" tes't). . 
· .· · 
, 
·,· . • , . 
'' . 'Figure 12.2i,shows the total,'porej:>ressure,and effective stress conditions in an ~xial compres-
. · si~n CD test at the end of cop.solidation; during application of axial load, ·arid at failurfo. Th~ ~ubscripts 
. v and h refer to vertical and horizontal, respectiv,ely; c means consolidation. For ~ial 
.. compression tests, the initial cons~lidation stresses,are hydrostatic. Thus a-~ =; uh = o{ (cell pressure), 
. which is usually held constarit,during the application of the axial stress.Au. In.theaxial compression 
test, .f\a = Ut .-:-: 0'3, arid at failllre Aur= (al ~ UJ)/:The axiat'stress can be applied either by 
increa~ 
on the· piston incrementally (stress~controlled, loading) or through a system that 
deforms the specimen at a constant rate (called a constantrate of strain :or def<mnation test). 
,. . . 
Note.thai at all the .times during the'CDtest the pore water pressure is essentially. zero. This 
' means that the total stn!sses' in.· ihe drained test are ~[ways equal to • the effective stresses. Thus 
. 
. 
---...:.__·· 
~·· ~ 
,. 
. • 
r 
. 
ll I 
12.9 
Consoliciated-Drained'Stress~Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
565 
At the end of consolidation ' • · 
(hydrostatic consolidation, 
' 
uhc = uvc• or non-hydrostatic~. 
consolidation, uhc ¥- Uvc): '.' 
During axial stress increase: 
Assume axial compression 
(AC) test, with u he held 
constant: 
At failure: 
·'Total, u 
tllu .· 
Vvc 
D-·~ B 
Effective; u' 
.. 
. 
Stress difference is applied very slowly so that excess 
'pore water pressure flu"" 0 through the test. 
,,.,.••""-· 
t 
fl~t = (u1 ~ u3), 
.t Uvc 
t 
u~r= ~vc + t:.u, = u'1t 
D-·~ G . 
0-·o,~u\,~uo, 
FIGURE 1 h2 ' Stre~~ conditi~ns i~ the con~olidated:drained (CD) axial co~pression triaxi~l test .. ' 
. C[3c = u3c = U3f = ~· and uv = u1r = u3c + 
• t:.u1. If-nonhydrostatic consolidation stresses 
were applied to the specimen, then u11 = u1r 
.. 
· · ·· •' 
·.would be equal to u!c + !:.ur .. 
u!Jc =,constkni ' · 
rypical stress-strain cu~ves and volume 
.. _:----
change versus strain curves for. a remolded or 
FIGURE 12.23 . Typical stress-strain and volume-change-· 
versus-strain curves for CD axial compression tests on · 
compacted clay at the same effective confining stress. 
compacted clay. are shown in Fig. 12.23. Even 
though the two specimens were· tested at the 
same confining pressure; the overconsolidated 
'specimen has a greater strength than the nor-
mally consolidated clay. Note also that it has a 
higher modulus and that failure [the maximum 
t:.u, which for· the triaxial test is equal to 
(~I - u3)f] occurs at a much lower strain than 
for the normallyconsolidated specimen. Note, 
too, the analogy to drained behavior of sands. 
The overconsolidated clay expands during 
shear, while the normally consolidated clay 
compresses or consolidates during shear. Thus, 
normally consolidated clays behave similarly to 
loose . sands, whereas . overconsolidated 'clays 
behave like dense sands. , 
, Dilation and: expansion of normally and 
overconsolidated clays in drained shear is shown 
566 
Chap~er 12 .. · : .An lntroductib,n to Shear Strength of Soils.and Rock,.:· 
· .. 
. cu·-
• a.. 
·c. 
~ 
I 
b 
\I ~ "' 
Axial strain e; (%)',' 
.. ·'·',') 
. 
~~(%)-~:m 1·1~ 1 
0 
. 5 ' 
1 0 
15 
20 
25 
Axial strain ev (%) 
(a) 
. 
~··· 
.,., . 
b' 
I 
I 
b.; 
1 
.105 
, ~ ; ::; 
. '5 
. 10 
1 15 
20 
·25 
·Axial strain Ev (%) 
. 5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Axial strain ev (%) 
(b) 
·' 
FIGURE 12.24 Conso1idated-d;ained tria~ial tests ata co~stant: iate of strai~ on(a) normally c~nsolidated,' 
and (b) overconsolidated (OCR'~ 24) remolded and resedimented samples of Weald clay (after Henkel, 1956). 
in Fig: 12.24 for tests on rem'olded andresedimented, specimens of Weald day (Henkel, 1956). The 
.. 'normally consolidated specimen' was consolidated to 210 kPa and sheared with the drainagevalves open . 
. ' The other specimen was first consolidated to 840 kPa; then' rebounded and tested'll;t a ceil pressure of 
35 kPa (OCR= 24). Note the· strongly dilative behavior in the overconsolidated specimen and the 
'different shapes of the stress-strain curves} Aiso note that 'when failure occurs in the 'overconsolidated 
' . ,, · specimen [shown by the small arrows in Fig.12.24(b)],defined ~~the peak of the stress-strain curve or the 
maximum ( a 1 --' a 3), this point coincides with the inflection point in the volume-change curve: Although 
we don't show any small arrows in Fig. 12.23, · :·· 
. , ,, 
... 
' ' you can see that the same thing occurs in the 
stniss-strain' and. volume change-strain curves 
.:; ·for theoverconsolidated specimen.· 
'' · ; •: 
: ·; The Mohrfailureenvelope for a CD test 
. ori a normally consolidated day soil is shown 
. in Fig.12.25. Even though only one M~hr cirde 
"'' (representing the stress conditions at failure in 
•••Fig; 12.22) is shown, the results ofthree or 
more CD tests on identical specimens-at differ~ · 
ent consolidation pn!ssures would ordinarily 
be required to plot the complete Mohr failure .. 
.. ::envelope. If the consolidation stress.range 'is 
·· large or the specimens do not have exactly the 
0'3c = u3r 
u,a' 
u1r= u;, 
saine. initial water· content;· density, and stress .>'FIGURE 12.25. ·Mohr. failure envelope for a normally 
·r.:,'·· 
' history, then the three failure cirdes will not' '· consolidated day in drained shear. , .• \ 
. 
:; 
', 
. 
. 
12.9 Consolidated:-Drained Stress~Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
567 
exactly define a s!raighUine, and an aver-
e (or w, if s = 100%) 
age best-fit line by eye is drawn. The slope 
of the line· determines the Mohr..:.Coulomb 
' ''strength parameter ¢'' of course, in terms 
. of effective stresses. When the' failure enve~ 
'· · 
lope is extrapolated to the shear axis, it will 
show a surprisingly small intercept. Thus it 
is usually assumed that the ( c' parameter 
for normally consolidated non-cemented 
· clays is essentially· zero for • all practical 
purposes. 
The behavior . of overconsolidated 
clays is a little more complicated, as ill us-'' 
trated in Fig. 12.26(b ). To make things easier 
to see, we show the Mohr failure envelope 
without the Mohr circles: The c' ·parameter · 
T 
' '. 
(a) 
is greater than zero, because the overconsol~ 
1+--.:....:....:....:....:....:....:....:...o.c .. _;_.:....:..._.;_:____:-'--+-f--
idated portion of the strength envelope·' ' 
(DEC) lies above the normally consolidated · 
envelope (ABCF). Thisportion (DEC) of 
the Mohr failure envelope is sometimes 
called' ;the· preconsolidation hump. The 
explanation for this behavior is shown in the 
e versus a' curve of Fig. 12.26(a). (Recall 
from Fig. 8.4 that the virgin compression 
curve, when plotted arithmetically, is con-
cave upward.) To understand the entire 
behavior shown in.Fig. 11.24, assume that 
we begin consolidation of . a sedimentary , 
clay at a very high water content and high,, 
' ~. j ' . 
(b) 
FIGURE 12.26 (a) Compression curve;.(b) Mohr failure 
,envelope (DEC) for an overconsolidatedclay. 
' 
.. 
. '•. 
\·' 
a' 
a' 
void ratio. As we continue to increase the vertical stress, when we reach point A on the virgin compres-
sion curve, we conduct a CD triaxial test. (We could, of course, do the same thing with a CD direct shear 
test.) The strength of the specimen consolidated to point A on the virgin curve corresponds to point A 
on the normally consolidated Mohr failure envelope in Fig. 12.26(b ). If we consolidate and test another 
otherwise identical specimen that is loaded to point B, then we obtain the strength, again norm~lly con-
. solidated, at point B on the failure envelope in Fig: 12.26(b ). 
If we repeat the same process to point C (a~, the preconsolidation stress), then rebound the 
specimen to D and shear it, we obtain the strength shown at point D in the lower figure. If we repeat 
the process to point C, rebound to D, and reload toE and shear, we obtain:the strength shown at 
_pointE in the lower figure. Note that the shear strengths ofspecimensD and E are greater than their 
·corresponding normally consolidated strengths,· even though they are .tested at the same effective 
· consolidation stresses. The reason for the greater strength of, for example, E than B is that E is at a 
.lower water content, has a lower void.ratio, and thus is denser than B, as shown in Fig. 12.26(a). If 
·another specimen were loaded to C, rebounded to D, reloaded back past E and C and on up to F, it 
would have the strength shown in the figure at· point F. Note that at this point it is now back on the 
virgin compression curve and the normally consolidated failure envelope .. The effects of the 
rebounding and reconsolidation have been in effect erased by the increased loading to point F. Once 
the soil has been loaded well past the preconsolidation pressure a~, it no longer "remembers" its 
stress history. 
· 
· · 
' 
· 
· 
568 
Chapter 12 
·An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
" 
12.9.2 Typical Values of Drained Strength Parameters for Saturated Cohesive Soils 
'· 
For the Mohr failure envelopes of Figs.l2.25 and 12.26, we did not indicate any numerical values 
for the effective stress strength parameters¢'. Average values of¢: for. undisturbed clays typically 
range from around 20° for normally consolidated highly plastic clays up to 30° or more for silty and 
sandy clays. The value of ¢'.for compacted clays is typically 25° or 30° and occasionally as high as 
35°. As mentioned earlier, the value of c' for normally consolidated non-cemented clays is very 
small and can be neglected for practical work. If the soilis overconsolidated, then ¢' will be less, 
and the c' intercept greater, than foi the normally consolidated part of the failure envelope [see 
Fig.12.26(b) again].Accordirig to Ladd (1971b), for natural, overconsolidated, non-cemented clays 
with a preconsolidation stress of less than500 to 1000 kPa, c' will probably be less than 5 to 10 kPa 
at low stresses. For compacted ciays at low stresses, c' will be much greater due to the prestress 
caused by compaction. For stability analyses, the Mohrc-;Coulomb effective stress parameters ¢' 
and c' are determined over the range of effective normal stresses likely to be encountered in the 
field. 
· 
· 
.· . 
. .· . 
. 
. 
. 
, 
It has been observed (for example, Kenney, 1959) that there is not much difference between ¢' 
determined on undisturbed or remolded specimens at the same water content. Apparently, the devel-
- . opment of the maximum value of¢' requires so much strain that the soil structure is broken down and 
almost remolded in the region of the failure'piane. . .· 
.. • . -.·• , . __ . 
. 
Empirical correlations between¢' and the.plasticity index for normally _consolidated clays are 
shown in Fig.12.27.Thiscorrelation is based on work byKenney(1959), Bjerrum and Simons (1960), 
U.S. Dept. of the Navy (1986), and Ladd et al. (1977). Since there is considerable scatter around the 
"average line," you should use this correlation withconsiderablecaution. However Fig.12.27 is useful 
for preliminary estimates and for checking laboratory_ results. . 
12.9.3 Use of CD Strengt~- in Engineering Practice_ 
. Where'do we use the ~trengths determinedfrom the CD test? As mentioned previously, the limiting 
drainage conditions modeled in the triaxial test refer to real field situations. CD conditions are the 
most critical for the long-term steady seepage case for embankment dams arid the long-term stability 
of excavations or slopes in soft and stiff clays. CD conditions are very critical in Clays with higher 
• overconsolidation ratios, typically OCR >' 4. This is because overconsolidated stiff clays tend to 
expand and take in water over time, thus reducing their shear strength. Examples of CD analyses are 
shown in Fig. 12.28. Explanations of how you actually go about making these analyses for stability can 
be fomid in textbooks on foundation and embankment dam engineering. 
You should be aware 'that, practically speaking, it is not easy to actually conduct a CD triaxial 
· · test on a clay in the laboratory. To e'nsure that no pore pressure is really induced in the specimen 
during shear for materials with very low permeabilities, the rate of loading must be very slow. The 
time required to fail the specimen ranges from days to several weeks· (Bishop and ·Henkel, 1962). 
' Such a long time leads to practical problems in the laboratory such as leakage of valves, seals, and 
the membrane that surrounds- the specimen. Consequently, since' it is possible to measure the 
inducedpore pressures in a consolidated-undrained (CU) test and thereby calculate the effective 
stresses in the specimen, and because CU tests with pore pressures-measured ·can be·conducted 
' ·. 
more rapidly than CD tests and still give reasonable results, they:are more·practicalfor obtaining 
• ; • ·· · · the effective· stress strength parameters. Therefore, CD. triaxial tests on clay soils are very rarely, if 
ever, performed in practice: 
· 
· · !' ·· 
'' 
'0 ' 
,, ,0 
12.9 Consolidated-Drained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
569 
o Soft clays 
A. Soft and stiff clays 
• Shales 
*·Clay minerals .·. 
0 
.6. 
o Kenney(1959) 
o Bjerrum and Simons (1960) 
.t:. 
Ladd etal. (1977) 
---~"-
_) 
' 
0------~------------
--.;.... ___ _ 
-------
' 
0 
< -----o----
Average (Bjerrum·and Simons, 1960) 
± 1 standard deviation , 
Plasticity index, PI 
•, 
(a) 
Plasticity index, PI 
(b) 
' 
1 Mexico city "clay~ 
, 2 Attapulgite . . 
· 
100 
200 
FIGURE,12.27 , Empirical correlation between</>' and PI: (a) from triaxial compression tests on normally consolidated 
undisturbed clays (after U.S. Dept. of the Navy, 1986, and Ladd et al., .1977); (b) for a wide range of clay minerals 
and different soHs (afterTerzaghi et al., 1996). 
' 
' 
570 
Chapter 12 · ; 'An Introduction to Shear Strength of.Soils arid Rock 
· ' · 
m 
m 
(a) 
~ 
0 
. 
~-------
~-~--:-.,.----,--
or 
~"\ 
~ 
T 
~ 
.. -(c) .• 
T = in situ drained 
shear strength 
T = drained shear 
strength of 
clay core 
" 
. 
-
~ = in situ drained 
shear strength 
FIGURE 12.28 Some examples of CD stability analyses for clays (after Ladd, 1971b): (a) embank-
ment constructed very slowly, in layers, over a soft clay deposit; (b) earth dam with steadycstate 
seepage; (c) excavation or "natural slope in clay. 
· 
,. 
12.10 
CONSOLIDATED-UNDRAINED STRESS-DEFORMATION AND STRENGTH.· 
CHARACTERISTICS 
, , 
12.10.1 Consolidated-Undrained (CU) Test Behavior ... 
~. 
"\ 
? 
As the name implies, a consolidated-undrained (CU) triaxial test specimen is first consolidated 
(drainage valves open, obviously) under the desired consolidation stresses. As before, these stresses 
can. either be hydrostatic or nonhydrostatic. After consolidation is complete; the drainage valves are 
dosed, and the specimen is loaded tofailure in undrained shear. Often, the pore water pressures devel-
oped during shear are measured, and both the total and effective stresses may. be calculated during 
shear and at failure. Thus this test can either be a total or an effective stress test. This test is sometimes 
called the R-test (for "rapid" test), but only if total stresses are measured. 
Total, pore pressure, and effective stress conditions in the specimen during the several phases of 
· ·.the CUtest are shown in Fig.l2.29. The symbols are the same as we used before in Fig.12.22. The gen-
) 
' eral case of unequal consolidation is shown, but typically for routine triaxial testing the 'specimen is 
. consolidated hydrostatically under a cell pressure which remains constant duiing sliear.Thus, . 
O"cell = O"vc = <The = uJ.c = O"Jc = 0"3[ * u3r 
Aut = (ul - u3)f 
12.10 Consolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
571 
At the end of 
consolidation 
(hydrostatic or 
non hydrostatic): 
During shear (axial 
compression test 
with uh constant): 
At failure: 
t'avc . 
. 
,o.·.~'" 
' 
:' 
-
Uhc 
. . 
' 
' 
' 
. 
·~ !:lu, = (~1 - us)t 
t Uvc 
D-u,, 
+" 
± !:lu.: ,, 
±!:lu, 
·. Effective, u' · · 
t U~t=Uvc+!:lu,+!:lu, 
D 
=u'1t 
-
u~,= uhc::;: !:lu, 
= u3, 
•In practice, to ensure 100% saturation, which is necessal)' for good measurement of the pore water pressure, a back 
pressure is applied to the pore water. To keep the effective consolidation stresses constant,' the total stresses during 
consolidation are accordingly increased by an amount exactly equal to the applied back pressure, which is the same as 
raising atmospheric pressure by a constant amount-the effective stresses on the clay do no! change;. 
· · 
Example: Initial conditions with back pressure: 
t u vc = U~c + Ua 
D::~u\o+u, 
•.. [;] 
FIGURE 12.29 Conditions in specimen during a consolidated-undrained axial compression (CU) test. 
Like the CD test, the axial stress can be increased incrementally or at a constant rate of strain. At failure, 
then, th~ test illustrated in Fig. 12.29 is a conv~ntional axial compression test in ,that the axial stress is 
increased to failure. 
· 
· 
Note that the excess pore water pressure ~u developed in the specimen during shear can be 
either positive (that is, increase) or negative (that is, decrease). This happens because the specimen 
tries to either contract or expand during shear. Remember, we are not allowing any volume change (an 
undrained test), and therefore no water can flow in or out ofthe specimen during shear. Because vol-
ume changes are prevented, the tendency toward volume change. induces a pressure in the pore water. 
If the specimen tends to contract or ·consolidate during shear, then the induced pore water pressure is 
positive. It wants to contract and squeeze water out of the pores, but cannot; thus the induced pore 
water pressure is positive. Positive pore pressures occur in normally consolidated chiys. If the specimen 
tends to expand or swell during shear, the induced P()re \Vater pressure is negative. It wants to expand 
and draw water into the pores, but cannot;. thus the pore water pressure 'decreases and may even go 
negative (that is, below zero gage pressure1 or bel()w atmospheric pressure). Neg~tive pore pressures 
572 
·\; 
ChapterJ2:: · An lntroduction.to.Shear.Strength of.Soils and Rock 
occur in overconsolidated clays. Thus, as noted in Fig. 12.29, the direction ( ±) of the induced pore 
water pressure l::!.u is important, since it directly affects the magnitudes of the effective stresses. 
. 
·' You might note also that in actual testing the initial pore water pressure typically is greater than 
zero. In order to ensure full saturation, a back pressure u0 is usually applied to the test specimen. Back 
pressure not only compresses the air in the soil voids but also causes the air to go into solution in the 
pore water,so that the space previously occupied by air bubbles is filled with water. As explained in 
the footnote iri Fig. 12.29, when a back pressure is applied to a specimen, the cell pressure must also 
be increased by an amount equal to the back pressure, so that the effective consolidation stresses 
remain the same. Since the effective stress in the specimen does not change, the strength of the speci-
men is not supposed to be changed by the use of back pressure. In practice this may not be exactly 
true, but the advantage of having 100% saturation for accurate measurement of induced pore water 
pressures far outweighs any disadvantages of ~~ing back pressure; 
· · 
· 
Typical stress-strain, l::!.u, and u]lu3 
· 
curves for CU tests on compacted clays are 
shown in Fig. 12.30 for both normally and 
overconsolidated clays. Also shown for 
comparison· is a stress-strain curve for an 
. overconsolidated clay at low effective con-
solidation stress. Note the peak, then the 
drop-off of stres's as strain increases (work-, 
softening material, Fig. 11.4). The pore 
pressure versus strain curves illustrate 
what happens to the pore pressures during 
, shear. The normally consolidated specimen 
t1a 
develops positive pore pressure: In the 
overc6nsolidated' specimen;. after. a. slight 
initial increase, the· pore pressure goes 
"negative" -in this case, negative with 
respect to the back pressure u0 • Another 
quantity useful for analyzing test results is 
the principal (effectiv~) stress ratio, u]lu3. 
Note how this ratio peaks early, just like the 
stress 'difference curve, for the overconsoli-
dated ,clay. Similar test specimens having 
similar behavior on an effective stress basis 
.will have. similarly shaped u]lu3 curves. 
!They are simply a way of normalizing the ' a11a3 
stress behavior with respect to the effective 
. minor principaL stress, during .the test. 
Sometimes, too, the maxinmm ofthis ratio 
is used· as a criterion of failure. Ho~ever, , 
we will continue to ·define failure ·as ·the · 
. maximum principal· s'tress difference. Note , 
........... ----- Overconsolidated 
at low a;,c 
Ev 
Normally 
consolidated 
Ev 
Normally 
consolidated 
. that. this' value is 'also . the compressive 
. strength of the test specimen. . 
. 
· 
. 
. . 
. .. . 
. 
, . 
, . 
. . Figure12.3l shows results from con~ , 
Note: For hydrostatic consolidation, a;t a3 = .1 at the start 
Ev 
solidat~d-undrained. tests on remolded and 
of the test; for .~onhydro~tatic consolidation, a1f a3 > 1. 
. 'resedimented speCimens. o{ Weald, clay .· FIGURE 12.30 Typicale, f1u:and a\la3 curves for normally 
~ (Henkel, l956). These data; are 'from com-,.·· a~d overconsolidated co~pacted Ciays in undrained shear 
. pa~ion tests on the same soil as the. CD 
(CU test). 
. 
. 
. 
. . 
. . 
. 
. 
12.10 Consolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
573 
140r----r----r----r~--r---~ 
fa~ure 
35~'---r--~----+----+--~ 
QL---~--~----~~~--~ 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Axial strain (%) 
140r---.---~----.----,--~ 
· u 3 = 210 kPa 
, Axial strain (%) 
(a) 
J'. 
~70L---~--~----~~-L----~--~ 
. 0 
' . 5 ' 
1 0 
' 15 
20 
25 
30 
Axial strain(%) 
(b) 
FIGURE 12.31 
Consolidated u~drained triaxial tests at a;constant rate of strain on remolded and 
resedimented samples of Weald clay: (a) normally consolidated; and (b) overcon.solidated, OCR = 24 
'(after Henkel, 1956}. 
' 
· · 
· 
· · 
tests in Fig. 12.24. Test specimens wen! prepared in exactly the same way ~s'those tests, with one speci-
men normally consolidated and the other heavily overconsolidated. Then the CU tests were, of course, 
sheared undrained with pore pressures measured. You can see the similarities with the curves in 
Fig. 12.32. Another thing to note is that the shapes of the stress-strain curves may be very different, 
depending on the soil structure and whether tile test specimens were compacted or undisturbed natural 
clays:CU stress-strain behavior can be complicated, and we discuss this further in Chapter 13. 
What do the Mohr failure envelopes looklike for CU tests? Since' we can get both the total and 
effective stress circles at failure for a cu test when we measure the induced pore water pressures, it is 
possible to define the Mohr failure envelopes in terms of both total and effective stresses. This is illus-
. trated in Fig. 12.32 for a normally consolidated clay. For clarity, only one set of Mohr circles is shown. 
These circles are simply plotted from the stress conditions at failure in Fig.12.29. Note that the effective 
stress circle is displaced to the left, toward the origin, for the normally consolidated case. This is because 
the specimens develop positive pore pressure during shear arid 'u' = u -: Au: Note that both circles 
have the same diameter because of our definition of failure at maximum ( u1· - u3 ) ·= ( u1 - u3). You 
should verify that this equation is true. 
· 
At least three triaxial tests are usually conducted on identical specimens over a range of stresses 
in order to define the Mohr failure envelopes. From these envelopes the Mohr-Coulomb strength 
574 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
FIGURE 12.32. Mohr circles 
at failure and Mohr failure 
envelopes for total (T) and 
effective (E) stresses for a 
normally consolidated clay. 
T 
Uhc 
f- au, . ·I· ·_ 
.... ·a;, --------1 
u,u' 
parameters are readily determined in terms of both total ( c, ¢ or sometimes cr, ¢r) and effective stresses 
( c'' ¢I). Again, as with the CD test, the envelope for normally consolidated clay passes essentially through 
. the origin, and thus for practical purposes c' can be taken to be zero. The total stress c parameter is also 
rather small for a normally consolidat~d clay.NQte.that ¢r is less tha~ ¢',and often it is about one-half of 
¢'. Also, when you plot the total stress circle, you must be sure to subtract the back pressure from the 
measured total stresses. In other words, this "T" cirCle in Fig.12.32 is really the (T - u0 ) circle. 
Things are different if the day is overconsolidated. Since an overconsolidated specimen tends 
to expand during shear, the pore water pressure decreases or even goes negative, as shown in 
Fig. 12.33. Because u31 = u 31- (- D.J1) and u11 = ulf - (- D.u1 ), the effective stresses are greater than 
the total stresses, and the effective stress circle at failure is shifted to the right of the total stress circle, 
as shown in Fig.12.33. The shift of the effective stress circle at failure to the right sometimes means that 
the¢' is less than ¢r· Also note that in this case both the c'_ and c parameters are not small. As men-
·. tioned above, the complete Mohr failure envelop~s are determined by tes.ts on thr~e or more speci-
mens consolidated over the working stress range of the field problem. . . ' 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
, Figure 12.34 shows the Mohr failure envelopes over a wide range 'of stresses sparmingthe precon-
solidation stress. Thus some of the specimens are overconsolidated and others are normally co~solidated. 
Notice that the "break" in the total stress envelope (point z) occurs at about twice the u~ for typical clays 
. (Hirschfeld, 1963). The two sets of Mohr circles at failure shown in Fig.l2.34 correspond to the two 
tests shown in Fig.1230 for the "normally con- . 
solidated" specimen and the specimen marked 
7 
·_"overconsolidated at low uhc·" 
.• . 
.You may have noticed that.an angle a1 
~cp' 
was indicated on the effective stress Mohr cir~., : .. · 
: .. des of Figs. 1232, 12.33, and _12.34. Do you 
, recall the Mohr failure hypothesis, wherein the 
. point oftangency of the Mohr failureenveiope 
with the. Mohr. circle at failure defined the .. 
angl~ ofthe failure plan~ in the specimen? .If 
· not, reread Sec. 11.4. Since we.believe that the. 
< shear, strength is controlled by the· effective 
stresses in the specimen at failure, the Mohr 
failure hypothesis is valid in terms ofeffective 
stresses only. 
u, u' 
-4-·au,~au, ------.j 
·FIGURE 12.33 Mohr circles at failure and Mohr failure 
envelopes for both total (T) and effective (E) stresses 
for an overconsolidated clay: 
12.10 Consolidated-Undrained Stress~Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
575 
T 
~.c:---f:.·. 
···. ·. ··· .... ·.··.·N.C .. 
·. 
:;:: ''_'· - :' 
. 
. 
. 
,l 
' 
.- .::. 
·, 
: ·-,, 
: 
. 
' 
I 
Uhc, Uhf 
H -flu, 
' 
• . 
. FIGURE 12.34 Mohr faiiure ·~nvelopes over a range of str~s;es spanni~g· the 
. pre~c()nsolidation stress a~. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
12.10.2 Typical Values ofthe Undrained Strength Parameters 
. In Sec. 12.9.2, we gave some typical values for c' and ¢' determined by CD triaxial tests. The range of 
values indicated is also typical for effective stress strengths determined in CU tests with pore pressure 
measurements, with the following reservation. In our discussion so far, we have tacitly assumed that 
the Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters iri terms of effective stresses determined by CU tests with 
pore pressure measurements would be the same as those determined by CD tests. We used the same 
symbols, c' and ¢', for the parameters determined both ways. Although this assumption makes sense 
from a theoretical point of view, it may not be strictly correct-for a number of reasons. First, as we 
mentioned in Sec. 12.9.3, it is very diffiCult to run a CD test on a saturated clay. Second, companion 
CD andCU tests on the.same soil not only are very rare but also are always suspect because of small 
differences in soil structure, possible sample disturbance, and differences in testing procedures. The 
• problem is complicated by alternative definitions of.failure and yielding in undrained triaxial tests. 
These factors are discussed in more detail in Sec. 13.8.2: 
Figure 12.27 showed empirical correlations for¢' and PI for many different soils, most normally 
· . consolidated. In fact most of the tests used fb develop this figure were CU tests with pore pressures 
. measured. Figure 12.27 still can be used for preliminary estimates and for checking laboratory test 
results, because the differences in¢', depending on how failure is defined, etc., are less than the scatter 
in the figures. 
For the Mohr..:.coulomb strength parameters in terms of total stresses, the problem of defining 
failure doesn't come up. Failure is defined at the maximuni compressive strength ( u 1 -
u3)max· For nor-
mally consolidated clays, ¢seems to be about half of¢'; thus, values of 10° to 15° or more are typical, 
~nd the total stress c is very closeto zero. For overconsolidated and comp~cted clays, cf> may decrease 
and c will often be much greater than zero. When the failure envelope straddles the pn!consolidation 
stress, interpretation of the strength parameters in terms of totalstresses is,difficlllt. This is especially 
true for undisturbed samples that may have some variation in water content and void ratio, even within 
the same geologic stratum. 
· 576 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength.of Soils and Rock 
12.10.3 Use of CU Strength in Engineering Practice 
Where do we use the CU strength in engineering practice? As mentioned earlier, this test, with pore 
pressures measured, is commonly used to determine the shear-strength parameters in terms of both 
total and effective stresses. cu strengths are used for stability problems ,where the soils have first 
become fully consolidated and. are at equilibrium with the existing stress system. Then, for some rea-
son, additional stresses are applied quickly, with no drainage occurring. Practical examples include 
rapid draw down of embankment dams and the slopes of reservoirs and canals. Also, in terms of effec-
tive stresses, cu test results are applied to the field situations mentioned in the earlier discussion of 
CD tests. Some of these practical examples are illustrated in Fig. 12.35. 
As you might expect, there are some problems withCU tests on clay. For proper measurement of 
the pore pressures induced during shear, specialcare must be taken to see that the specimen is fully sat-
urated, that no leaks occur during testing, and that the rate of loading (or rate of strain) is sufficiently 
slow so that the pore pressures measured at the ends of the specimen are the same as those 6ccurring in 
the vicinity of the failure plane. As we mentioned, the use of back pressure is common to assure 100% 
saturation. The effects of the other two factors can be minimized by proper testing techniques, which are 
described in detail by Bishop and Henkel (1962). 
·· 
· 
· 
Another problem, not often mentioned, results from trying to determine the long-term or effec-
tive stress strength parameters and the short-term or CU-total stress strength parameters from the same 
test series. The rates of loading or strain required for correct effective. stress strength. determination may 
FIGURE 12.35 Some examples 
of CU stability analyses for clays ·· 
(after Ladd, 1971b): (a) embank-
merit raised (2) subsequent to 
consolidation under its original 
height, (1); (b) rapid drawdown 
behind an earth dam. No drainage 
of the core. Reservoir level falls 
from (j) -4 @; (c) rapid construc-
tion of an embankment on a 
natural slope. 
' 
. 
r-----, 
/ 
2 
' 
.·~ 
~~ ~ 
----
. 
~. 
·(a) 
lj, 
1' T1 
~ 
T 1 ';' in SitU undrained 
shear strength after 
consolidation under 
layer 1 
g 
CD 
~ 
=-
I 
1 
i 1ol core 
corresponding 
to consolidation 
understeady 
state seepage 
prior to draw 
down 
,---, 
/ 
' 
./Fill. 
/ 
/ // 
~ 
T1 
(c) 
.T 1 ,; in SitU Undr~ined Shear 
strength of clay in natural 
slope prior to construction 
of fill 
··,;, 
12.10 
Consolidated~Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
577 
not be appropriate for the short-term or undrained loading situation. As discussed in Sec. 13.14.7, the 
stress-deformation and strength response of clay soils is rate dependent; that is, usually the faster you 
load a clay, the stronger it becomes. In the short-term case, the rate of loading in the field may be quite 
rapid, and therefore for correct m9deling of the field situation, the rates of loading in the laboratory 
specimen should be comparable. Thus the two objectives of the CU-effective stress test are really 
incompatible. The best thing to do, though rarely done in practice, would be to have two sets of tests, one 
set tested under CD condition's modeling the long-term situation and the other CU set modeling the 
short-term undrained loading.. . . 
,· < 
' 
• 
• 
• 
Example 12.9 
Given: 
0 
' 
~· 
• 
• 
l 
A normally consolidated clay is _consolidated under a stress of 150 kPa, then sheared undrained 
in axial compression. The principal stress diffen!nce at failure is 100 kPa and the induced pore pressure 
at failure is 88 kPa. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Required: 
Determine the Mohr-Coulomb strength paranieiers ill tenns 'of b~th:t~t~l a~d dfective.stresses 
(a) analytically and (b) graphically. Plot the total and effective Mohr circles and failure envelopes. (c) Com-
pute(ul/u3)r and (u1/a3)1. (d)Deteimine the theoretical angle of the failure plane in the specimen. 
' '7 " 
~ 
"' 
~ 
·~·'"' 
•• ""' ' 
' 
~" 
Solution: To solve this problem we need to assume that both c' and cr are negligible for a normally 
consolidated clay. Then we can use the obliquity relationships [Eqs. (11.14) through (11.17)) to solve 
for cf/and cf>r· 
. . 
. . 
··",". " 
' 
, , 
" 
;~ I,' 
, > •, l 
3 : • '• 
i.. 
a. To use these equations, we need uv, u11, u31 , and u)1. We. know u31 ':"" 150 kPa and 
(ut - u 3)1 = 100 kPa: Therefore 
~·,; 
Utt =(at- u3)f + ~;! = ;100+150'~ ZSOkPa 
· h-11 
~ ~. ·a~j'- .~/ = ·2~0 ~· :gg ~ 1?2 kPa ·· 
· -
. u3;·~·;u~r:- ~f,; JSO ~--.8~:, 62 kPa ,' 
From Eq. (1U3), ' 
. ' ... ·. 
. 
.· 
..... 100 . 
cf>' = arcsin- = 26.SO 
' 
224 
. . 
. 
.. 
.· 
100 ... :. 
cf>r =: <lrcsin 400 = 14.5° 
. ,; 
: ' b: For the graphical solution, we need to plot the total and effective Mohr circles, and to do this 
we need to calculate ulf, u11, and u)1. The centers of thecircles are at (200, 0) for total 
. stresses and at (112, 0) for effective stresses. The graphical solution. including the failure 
'' 
envelopes is shown in Fig. Ex.12.9. . 
·, : 
c. Thestress ratios at failure are. 
u~ = 
·162 = 2.61 
'0'3 
62' 
'<Ttii 
250 ' .' 
' 
0'3 = 150 = 1.67 
-.:; 
!• 
'", 
578 
Chapter 12, . An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
T 
·' 
FIGURE Ex. 12.9 · 
Another way to get these values wou.~d be to use Eq. (11.14). 
I 
a1 ,, 
· a3 
a1 
a3 
..,..1-'-+_s..,..in_2.,...6.,....5:-:-
0 = 1.45= 2 61 
1 - sin 26.SO 
0.55 
· 
1 + 'si~ 14.5° = 1.25 = '1 67 
1 - sin 14.5° 
0.75 
· 
d. Use Eq. (11.10), in terms of effective stresses:· 
• 
~ 
I 
; ' . 
' ' 
' 
' 
,· 
·,.':i·::· ·;: ¢' '. 
. 
· ..... ·.· 
. : , 
a 1 = 45° +, 2 = 58°fromthehorizontal .. · 
:.:: 
-:;· 
a, a' 
12.11 
UNCONSOLIDATED-UNDRAINED STRESS-DEFORMATION AND STRENGTH 
· CHARACTERISTICS 
12.11.1 Unconsolidated-Undrained ,{UU) Test Behavior 
In the unconsolidated-undrained (UU)test, the specimen is placed in the triaxial cell with the drainage 
valves closed from the beginning. Thus, even when' a confining pressure is applied, no consolidation can 
occur if the specimen islOO% saturated: Then, as with the CU test, the specimen is sheared undrained. 
The specimen is loaded to failure in about 10 to 20 min; usually pore water pressures are not measured 
in this test. This is a total stress test and it yields the strength in terms of total stresses: A. Casagrande 
first called this test the Q~test (for: "quick"), since' the specimen was loaded to failure much more 
quickly than in the S-test. 
· · 
' 
· · 
' 
Total, neutral, and effective stress conditions in the specimen during the several phases of the 
UU test are shown in Fig. 12.36. The· symbois are as used before in Figs. 12.22 and 12.29. The test 
illustrated in Fig. 12.36 is quite conventional in that hydrostatic cell pressure is usually applied, and the 
specimen is failed by increasing the axiallmid, usually at a constant rate of strain. As with the other tests, 
the principal stress difference at failure is ( ai - a 3)max· 
Note that initially, for. undisturbed samples; the pore pressure is negative, and it is called the 
residual pore pressure, u, which results from stress release during sampling. Since the effective stresses 
initially must be greater than zero (otherwise the specimen 'Yould simply disintegrate) and the total 
stresses are zero (atmospheric pressure = zero gage pressure), the pore pressure must be negative. 
(See Sec. 13.13.4 for insight into the sampling process.) When the cell pressure is applied with the 
drainage valves closed, a positive pore pressure !l.u is induced in the specimen, which is exactly equal 
to the applied cell pressure a c. All the increase in hydrostatic stress is carried by the pore water, 
12.11 
Unconsolidated7Undrained Stress-Deformation and.Strength Characteristics 
579 
. . 
_.., 
~ 0. 
Immediately after.'·· D: 
sampling; before 
· ' 
.•. ·_ .__ 0 ·. 
application of cell 
. 
. 
. _ pressure: 
· 
· · ·. . 
After application 
.. -of hydrostatic cell 
pressure 
, (S = .100%): 
Pore pressure, u 
' Q 
u-'. 
-· 
. 
r 
residual (capillary) 
pressure, after · 
sampling 
[l--
., · 
.. L~J 
·-
-. 
+ 
-u;+'iluc = -u,+ uc.'' 
·:(100%S,.:.B=:1) .. · 
:During application 
of axial load: , 
At failure: 
~.· 
-u, + uc::!:: !lu · ·, 
> t~cr,}(a,-1 :_ u3)t 
l:!Tc ,.:· 
: .'· .. 
D:Uo 
Q 
-u, + uc::!:: !lu, 
'·. ·l .u~c ,.;,· Uc + ~r- !Tc ~ Ur 
·o·· -·-
' :_ ir/,c ~ ~~· 
. 
. : 
' 
'•, 
, 1 u~,;= !lu,+ Uc + u,- Uc :;: !lu, 
l 
~: = u1t' '.·,· i., 
:. 
• 
Doi:~ uo:u,- Uo+ •u, 
= u3, 
· 
. 
'' .· 
," 
; 
i, 
. 
', 
' 
. 
FIGURE 12.36 · Conditions in the specimen during the unconsolidated-undrained (UU) axial compression test. 
'; 
. 
·, 
. 
) 
: 
.: 
. 
·, 
' 
, 
• 
. . 
:c 
, 
, 
• 
. 
'r 
because (1) the soil is 100%_ saturated, (2) the compressibility of the water and individual soil grains is 
small compared to the compressibility ofthe soil structure, and (3) there is .a unique relationship 
between the effective hydrostatic stress and the void ratio (Hirschfeld, 1963). Number (1) is obvious. 
Number (2) means that no volume change can occur unless water is allowed to flow out of (or into) the 
specimen, and we are preventing that from occurring. N;umber (3) means basically that no secondary 
compression (volume change at constant effective stress) takes place. You may recall from the discus-
sion of the assumptions of the Terzaghi theory of consolidation '(Chapter 9) that the.same assumption 
. was required__:_ that is, that the' void ratio and effective stress were uniquely related. Thus, there can be 
· no' change in void ratio without a change in effective stress. Since we prevent any change in water con-
, tent, the void ratio and effective stress remain the same. · 
, 
· 
: 
_. 
. _ . 
Stress conditions during axial loading and at failure are similar to those for the CUtest (Fig.12.29). 
They may appear to be complex, but if you study Fig. 12.36 you will see ·that the UU case is as readily 
understandable as the CU case. 
580 
Chapter 12 • · An Introduction to She'arStrength of Soils and Rock· 
\1 
Typically, stress~stniin curves ·for. UU 
· !::.u 
tests are not particularly different from CU or 
CD stress-strain curves for the same soils. 
For undisturbed sampl~s, the initial portions 
of the curve (initial tangent modulus) in par-
ticular depend strongly on the quality of the , 
undisturbed samples; Also, the sensitivity 
(Sees. 2.7.3 and 12.12) affects the shape of 
these curves; highly sensitive clays have " 
sharply peaked stress-strain curves. The max-
. imum stress difference often occurs at very 
low strains, usually less than 0.5%. Some typ-
ical UU stress-strain curves are shown. in ' ·· 
Fig.12.37. 
The Mohr failure envelopes for UU 
tests are shown in Fig. 12.38(a) for 100% sat- · 
urated clays. All test specimens for fully satu-
rated clays are presumably at the same water ·. 
content (and void ratio), so they will have the 
~ (%) 
FIGURE 12.37 Typical UU stress-strain curves for 
(A) remolded and some compacted clays; (B) medium 
sel"!sitive undisturbed clay; and (C) highly sensitive 
undisturbed clay. 
•' same shear strength, since no consolidation is allowed. Therefore all Mohr circles at failure will have 
the same diameter, and the Mohr failure envelope will be a horizontal straight line [see Fig. 11.9(c)]. 
This is a very important point. If you don't understand it, refer again to Fig. 12.36 to see that in the UU 
test the effective consolidation stress is the same throughout the test. If all the speCimens are at the 
same water 'content and density (void ratio), then they will have the same strength. The UU test, as pre-
viously mentioned, gives the shear strength in terms of total stresses, and the slope ¢T of the UU Mohr 
failure envelope is equal to zero. The intercept of this envelope on the T-axis defines the total stress 
strength parameter c,,or Tf = c, where Tf is undrained shear strength. 
For unsaturated soils, a series of UU tests will define ari initially curved failure envelope 
[Fig.12.38(b)] until the clay becomes essentially 100% saturated due simply to the cell pressure alone. 
,. 
FIGURE 12.38 Mohr failure . 
envelopes for UU tests: 
(a) 100% saturated clay; 
(b) unsaturated clay. 
T 
T 
· Tr= c 
1 
',"' 
T 
\ ··-
Mohr failure envelope 
(total stress) 
t 
--~--~~,---~--~~~~~~~~~~r=O 
f---t::.u,~ 
f--- !::.u, ---j' ~(total u) 
'., 
(a) 
~+---s < 1oo% __ 
__,~_..:.. __ 
~"---~ 
u 
(b) 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
581 
Note: a/,1 is the same for all three total stress circles! 
FIGURE 12.39 UU test 
resultS, illustrating the 
unique effective stress 
Mohr circle at failure. 
Even though the drainage valves are closed, the confining pressure will compress the air in the voids and 
decrease thevoid ratio. As the cell pressure is increased, more and more compression occurs. Eventu-
ally, when sufficient pressure is applied, essentially 100% saturation is achieved. Then, as for initially 
100% saturated clays, the Mohr failure envelope becomes horizontal, as· shown on ·the right side of 
Fig. 12.38(b ). The. str~ngth of unsaturated soils is very complex,. and we briefly discuss this topic in 
Sec. 13.i4. See Fredlund and Radharjo (1993) fdr a comprehensive treatment of this subject. 
In principle, it is possible to measure. the induced pore water pressures in· a series of UU tests 
although it is not commonly done, because it is very difficult to dci. Since the effective stresses at failure are 
independent of the total cell pressUres applied to the several specU:Uens. of a test serie~ th~re is only one uu 
effective stress Mohr circle at failure. This point is illustrated in Fig.1i39. Note that nomatter what the con-
fining pressure (forexample, acb acz, etc.), there is only one effective stress Mohr circle at failure. The 
minor effective principal stress at failure ( u;.1) is the same for all total stress circles shown in the figure. 
Since we have only one effectivecircle,aUailure, strictly speaking, we need to know both cf>' and c' in 
advance in order to draw the Mohr failure envelope in terms of effective stresses for the UU test. We could 
perhaps measure the angle of the failure planein the failed UU specimens and invoke the Mohr failure 
hypothesis, but, as discussed in Sec.11.4, there are practical problems with this approach. It should also be 
I).Oted that the angle of inclination of the failure plane (X[ shown in Fig.12.39 is defined by the effective stress 
envelop~.Othe~se, as indicated in .fig.11:9.( c) and Eq. (1p0), theory ":o~ld predict a1 to be 45°. Since the 
strength ultimately is controlled or governed by the effective stresses, we believe that the physical condi-
tions controlling the formation ~fa failure plane in the test sp~cimen must ill some fashion be controlled by 
·the effective.stresses acting in the specinien at fahuie. Thus, Eq. (1i.lO) should be in terms of cf>' instead of 
cf>r,oraf=45°+4>'12~ 
"' 
· · 
· 
· · ·· 
· 
·· · 
· 
1 • 
•• 
~ 
' 
' 
' 
' 
• 
. 12;~1:2 Unconfin~d .Compressio'nTest' 
) !; 
l 
'' 
' The' unconfined compression test is a special case of the UU test, but with the confining or cell pressure 
equal to zero (atmospheric pressure). The stress conditions in the unconfined compression test speci-
men are similar to those of Fig. 12.36 for the UU test, except that ac is equal to zero, as shown in· 
Fig.' 12.40. If you compare these two figures, you will see that the effective stress conditions at failure 
. are identical for both tests. And if the effective stress conditions are the same in both tests, then the 
strengths will be the same! 
.. , 
· ' 
582 
Chapter 12 , . An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
Total, u 
= 
Pore pressure, u 
+ 
Effective, u' 
After sampling. 
~0 
~ O"~o = u, 
and specimen 
Do 
Q 
D~"., 
setup; before 
application of 
axial load: 
-u, 
~Au 
~0 
t 
u~ = Au + u, + AU 
During application Do 
Q 
D-
of axial load: 
uf, = +u,+ AU 
-u, ::':AU 
tAut= U1f 
~0 
~ U~f = AUt + u, :i: AUt 
Q. 
0,,,,, . 
At failure: 
D-" 
~· 
... 
0 
. ' 
G-;,1 = +u, +AUf 
= u3t 
-u,:': AU1 
FIGURE 12.40 Stress conditions for the unconfined compression test. 
Practically speaking, for the unconfined compression test to yield the same strength as the UU 
.. test, several assumptions must be satisfied: Thes'e are as follows: 
' ! 
~ 
1.: The specimen must be 100% saturated; otherwise compression of the air in the voids will occur 
· and cause a decrease in void ratio and an increase in strength. 
· 
2. The specimen must not contain any fissures, silt seams, varves, or other defects; this means that 
the specimen must be intact, homogeneous clay. Rarely are mitural overconsolidated clays intact, 
and often even'normally consolidated clays have some fissunis and other defects. 
3. ,The soil mu~tbe~ery fine gmined; nit!initial'effective confining stress as indi~ated in Fig. 12.40 
is' the residual capillary stress, ~hich: is a fun'ctiori'of the' residual pore press{ir~,·u~; this usually 
means that only clay soils are suitable for testing in unconfined compression. 
4. The specimen must be sheared rapidly to failure; it is a total stress test and the conditions niust 
be undrained throughout the test. If the time to failure is too long, evaporation and sui-face 
drying will increase the confining pressure, and too high a strength will result. Typical time to 
failure is 5 to 15 min;', 
: . 
'Be sure to distinguish between unconfined compressive strength (u1 -
u 3)r and the undrained 
· shear strength, which is Tr = lf2(u1 - u 3)1. You can see this in Fig.12.32, where the far left total stress 
circle starts at the origin, which means that it is an unconfined compression test:' 
~ 
,:I' 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
583 
Example 12.10 
Given: 
' 
• 
' 
I 
·An unconfined compression test is conducted on a soft daY: The' specimen is trimmed from the 
undisturbed tube sample and is 35 mm in diameter and 80 mm high. The load on the force transducer 
at failure is 14.3 Nand the axial deformation is 11 mm . 
. :1 
Require&· 
Calculate the unconfined compressive strength and the shea~ strength of the speci~en. 
Solution: To calculate the stress at failure, we have to know the area of the specimen As at failure. 
However, As at failure is not equal to the original area A 0 , but is somewhat greater because in 
compression, the specimen decreases in height and increasesin diameter as long as Poisson's ratio 
[Eq. (10.12)] is greater than zero. For soft clays in undrained shear, Posson's ratio =:= 0.5, because there 
is no volume change, and since the volume is unchanged, we assume that the specimen deforms as a 
right circular cylinder. Thus As at any strain e is 
c'.'•. 
• 
0 
' 
,. Ao 
As= -1--
-e 
(12.11) 
Now we can calculate the area of the specimen As. The strain at failure is I:J.LIL0 = 11 mm/80mm = 
0.1375, oi ii-8%; Thus As = 1115 mm2. Now the compressive stress at failure is 14.3 N/1l15 mm2 "" 
12.8 kN/m2 (kPa). If w'ehad- si~ply divided .by the original area of the 'specimen, we would have 
obtained14:9 kN/m2, a significa~i error. 
; .. ' : 
' 
' 
' 
: .. · 
__ · _· 
, , . 
The shear strength for the unconfined compression test is one~halfthe compressive strength, 
or 6.4 kPa. 
It should be noted that the actual shear ~tress on the failure plane at failure r ff is somewhat less 
than the undrained shear strength~ r 1 = c, because r ff occurs on a failure plane whoseinclination is 
,. determined by t~e effective. stresses, as expl~ined previquslyfor the UU test. The conditions and the 
approximate magnitude of associated error are indicated in Fig. 12.41(a) for thespecimen at failure in 
, . Fig: 12.41(b ). The magnitude ofthe ~rror depends on cf>', as indicated by the calculations in Example 12.1. 
• 
r 
' 
'· 
, 
• 
, 
• 
• 
; r 
, 
1 
• 
• 
·' 
· 
~ • , 
' 
• 
• • 
• 
' .. ' 
·T 
' cr tt not shown 
(a) 
' '(b) .. 
• FIGURE 12.41 
(a) Difference between Ttt and Tf ="c in (b) an unconfined co-mpression-test specimen 
(after Hirschfeld, 1963). ·· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
· 
584 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
Example 12.11 
Given: 
The stress conditions for the unconfined compression test shown in Figs.12.41(a) and (b). 
Required:' 
Find the error in assuming the undrained shear strength Tf = c = lt2t.a1, rather than Tff for a 
normally consolidated clay where cf>' = 30°. 
Solution: From Eq. (11~6), 
at-:- a 3 • 
. Tff = 
2 
sm 2a1 
tl.ar 
~ 2sin2a1 
From Eq. (11.10), ar = 45° + cf>'/2. So, ar = 6oo:'fherefore 
tl.ar 
Tff =-2-sin 120° = 0.433 t.a1 
ButTj=c=0.5t.a1. 
. 
, 
. 
Conclusion: Tf = c (strength) is about 15% greater than Tff for cf>' = 30°. Thus the actual shear 
strength on the failure plane is overesiiniated by using one-half the unconfined compressive strength. 
Note that the erroris less for smaller cf>' angles. Also note that 
· 
· · · .. · · · · 
I 
• 
, 
' 
' 
' 
' r 
• • 
' 
' 
' 
, I 
~ 
tl.ar 
·(at -
a3)f 
Tt.= c·= 2 
= 
2 
= Tmax 
For most of the twentieth century, the unconfined compression test was probably the most com-
' inon laboratory strength test used in the United States for the design of shallow and deep foundations-
in clay, as well as other soft ground engineering problems. Remember the four conditions given in the 
previous section that must be satisfied for the UCC test to yield the same strength as the UU test? Many 
times in geotechnical practice .those conditions are not met, because clays above the groundwater table 
are unsaturated. Also, clay deposits are rarely homogeneous, intact, and without fissure or defects. In 
many cases, however, the UCC test seemed to give good results, probably because of compensating 
errors. Sample disturbance especially tends to reduce the undrained shear strength. Anisotropy also is a 
factor, as is the assumption of plane strain conditions for most design analyses, whereas the real stress 
conditions are more three-dimensional. These factors tend to reduce the undrained shear strength so 
that the difference between Tf = c and Tff becomes negligible in engineering practice. Several of these 
· points are discussed by Ladd et al. (1977) and in Chapter 13. 
· • · • · 
12.11;3 Typical Valuesof UU and UCC Strengths 
The undrained strength of clays varies widely. Of course, cf>r is zero, but the magnitude of T 1 can vary 
from almost zero for. extremely soft sediments to several MPa for very hard soils and soft rocks. Often, 
. we normalize the. undrained shear strengths measured at a site with respect to the vertical effective 
overburden stress a~0 at each sampling point. Then the T1 1a~0 ratios are analyzed and compared with 
other data. This point is covered in more detail in Sec. 12.11.5 below and in Chapter 13. 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress~Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
585 
TABLE 12.4 Consistency or Strength Terms for Cohesive Soils 
Standard ' 
Unconfined • 
Penetration 
Compressiv.e 
Field ilentification · ·· 
Consistency 
Resistance,• 
· 'Strength,b 
Te~m··· · 
. NsPT (blows/ft) 
qu (kPa) 
· Undisturbed Soil 
Visual-Manual· 
Very soft 
<2 
<25 
Easily penetrated several inches 
Extruded between fingers 
by the fist 
when squeezed 
Soft 
2 to 4 
25 to 50 
Easily penetrated several inches 
Molded,b)llight finger 
by the thumb 
pressure 
Medium 
4to 8 
·so to 100 
Can be' penetrated several inches by 
Mold~d by strong. 
the thumb witli moderate effort 
finger pressure 
Stiff (or firm) 
8 to 15 
100 to 200 
Readiiy indented by thumb' b~t penetrated only with great effort . 
. Readjly indented by thumbnail 
Very stiff 
15 to 30 
200to 400 
Hard 
>30 
>400 
Indented by thumbnail ,with difficulty 
•The SPT is very unreliable in soft, ~emitive cl~ys and is ~o~ recom~ended. 
bUnconfined compressive strength qu = (u1 -
~3)/ = 2"-rt.· 
; ·'' 
After U.S. Dept. of the Interior (1998); U.S. Dept. of the Navy (1986) .. 
When we d~~cribecl the visual-manual classification of soils in Sec. 2,9.1, we mentioned that 
' co~;i~t~ncy :offin~~g~~ir{~d ~~ils 'in' th~ ·n.aiUral state was lisually ~valuated by. n~ting the ease with 
(which the deposit could be penetrated by one's fingers, etc. Such terms as very soft, soft, medium, stiff 
(or firm), very stiff, and hard were employed to describe consistency. Table 12.4 presents the relation-
ship between consistency, standard penetration resistance (blmv count), unconfined compressive 
strength, and a field identification test that is often used in practice. Notice that the terms "stiff' and 
"firm" are used interchangeably. 
12.11.4 Other Ways to Determine the Untirained Shear Strength 
We mentioned above that drainage conditions in the triaxial test are models of specific critical design 
situations for stability in geotechnical practice. For example, for the design of foundations on clay soils 
the critical drainage condition is the unconsolidated-undrained (UU) condition. Besides the UU triaxial 
test and its variant the unconfined compression te.st (Sec. 12.11.2), the.undrained shear strength Tf of 
cohesive soils can be estimated by some very simple laboratory tests on undisturbed samples. Some of 
these tests can also be used in the field in test pits and on field samples. Because the test occurs very 
quickly, we assume that undrained conditions exist in the soil being tested. The explanation for how this 
shear strength Tf is equivalent to the UU strength is given in Sec.12.11. 
. 
Table 12.5 summarizes the four tests and provides limitations and references. The results of these 
simple tests havebeeri ·correlated with the undrained shear strength T 1, as indicated in the table . 
. Although not as popular inNorthAmerica as it is in Northern Europe,. the Swedishfalkone test is. 
'.. . ' very useful f~r deteirnining the undrained shear strength of soft and sensitive clays, sludge deposits, and 
···soft oozes from the ocean bottom. The fall-col1e test is very quick and simple to perform. A schematic of. 
the test is shown in Fig.12.42 along with the shear strength ranges for the four standard Swedish cones. 
'.. 
.The cone mass and angle are selected according to an estimate of the magnitude of the shear strength . 
. The 'cone is position~d just touching the top of the soil specimen and then released. The amount of pene-
tration is measured and correlated with the shear strength of the soil, which is proportional to the mass of 
the cone and inversely proportional to the penetration squared. Hansbo's (1957) calibration for Swedish 
586 
Chapter 12 . ; An Introduction to Shear Strength ofSoils and Rock 
"·' 
TABLE 12.5 Simple Laboratory and Field Tests for the UU Strength of Clays 1 
Test 
Use 
Swedish 
Lab 
fall-cone 
Pocket 
Lab, 
penetrom-
field 
eter 
' 
Torvane 
Vane 
shear 
test 
~ l ; 
,• 
Lab, 
'field· 
Lab 
Remarks 
Quick; used on tube samples; requires 
calibration; 7-1depends on cone angle, 
and mass; specimen observable. 
· 
Hand held; piston imd calibrated spring 
in compression; results in unconfined 
compressive strength(:= 27-1); quick; .. 
used on tube samples or sides of' ' 
explonitory trenches, etc.; specimen . 
observable. 
· 
Hand held; calibrated spring in torsion; 
quick; used on tube samph!s or the 
sides of exploratory trenches, etc.;· · · 
specimen observable. 
Torsion from calibrated spring; most 
common vane sizes are 12 X 12 mid 
25 X 12 mm; specimen observable. 
Millimetre' 
scale for·· 
measuring 
penetration 
Sample~ 
tube 
FIGURE 12.42 Schematic of the 
Swedish fall-cone test and the 
shear strength ranges for the 
four standard Swedish cones .. 
Best For, 
Very soft 
to soft 
clays. 
Very soft 
to stiff 
clays 
Very soft 
to stiff .. 
clays 
Soft to 
stiff 
clays 
Cohesive soil~ ~lthout 
pebbles, fissures, etc .. 
Tests only a small amount . 
of soil near the surface; 
good correlation with Tf 
on soft, sensitive clays. 
Same as above, except very 
rough calibration with r1. 
Same as above; slightly 
Detter COrrelation With Tf 
·on soft days. 
· · 
References 
Hansbo 
'(1957) 
Unreliable if vane 
encounters sand layers, 
varves, stones, etc., or if 
vane rotated too rapidly. 
·•.ASTM 
(2010) 
D4648 
' 
. 
' 
''' 
-
Mass 
Range of 
Tf 
(g) 
(kPa) 
400 
! 10-250 
'100 .. 
25-63 
60 
0.5-11 
10 
0.08-2 
' ~ . •' ~ 
.' 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress-Deformation·and Strength Characteristics 
587 
glacial and postglacial clays is commonly used evenfor 
other soils. The test is also useful to obtain the sensitivity 
of the soil (Sec.12.12): There is a good correlation with 
the strength obtained with the field vane shear test dis- · 
cussed"inS~c.11.6.1. 
'· ,,, '·· · · · 
. The three . other simple strength tests listed in 
Table 12.5 · are the pocket penetrometer, Torvane, 'cmd 
(laboratoryrvane sheariesi (Figs.12.43, 12.44, andl1.19, 
respectively). The first two tests maybe used in the hibo-
ratory on undisturbed (or remolded) specimens aswell 
as performed in test pits imd on samples iri the field. The 
lab vane shear test, as the name implies, is only a labora~ · 
tory test. The 'pocket penetrometer (Fig. 12.43) lias a 
small piston about 6 rnrn in diameter that reacts against a 
calibrated spring when pushed about .6 rnrn into the soil . 
surface. The readings on the scale are iii unconfined corn~: . 
pressive strength, which is twice the undrained shear 
strength r1) Both the Torvane (Fig.l2.44) and lab vane 
(Fig. 11.19) are rotated against a torsional spring, and the 
angle of the rotation at failure is correlated with the 
torque in the spring. In the.Torvane, the scale on the 
torque heag. is multiplied or divided . appropriately, 
depending on the diameter of the · vanes,' as shown in 
Fig.12.44. In the lab vane, the torque on the spring at fail-
ure is used in one ()f the theoretical equations.· shown i~ .. 
··':-l 
Undrained compressive 
. 
strength read directly from 
scale a! prescribed 
penetration 
Prescribed penetration into 
cohesive soil sample , 
. . 
. 
FIGURE 12.43 
Pocket penetrometer, 
a hand-held device which indicates uncon-
fined compressive strength (photograph 
courtesy of So!ltest, Inc., Evanston, Illinois). 
. ' 
~ ... 
Torvane, a hand-held 
device which indicates undrained shear 
. strength: (a) standard.model shown on its 
side. The.other two vanes, which can be 
'ai:tachedto the' standard Toivarie, are for 
very soft or ~ery stiff days; (b) specifica-
tions for the three vanes (photograph 
courtesy of Soiltest, Inc./Evanston, Illinois). 
588 
Chapter 12 · • An Introduction to Shear Strength of. Soils and Rock 
:·{I Cu"""'h;..l l I 
Reference 
0 •• Bjerrum (1972} 
'1 
1.4r' ------.-,----.----t---,---,---+--
/::,. .... Milligan (1972) , • 
·_] 
D 
Ladd and Foot! (1974) 
1.2 
'1 
,., Flaate and Preber (1974) 
... I 
I 
o· 
LaRochelle et al. (1974) · 
X 
Holtz and Holm (1979) 
::!. 
c5 1.0 
0 
.l!! 
c: 
:§ 
~· 
I 
I~ 
8 0.8 ' 
0.4~--~--~--~--~--~--~~--~--~--~--~--~--~ 
0 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
100 
1~ 
PlastiCity index, PI 
FIGURE 12.45 Correction factor for the field vane test (VST) as a function of PI, based 
on embankment failures (after Ladd, 1975, and Ladd et al., 1977). 
~ l : 
Fig.' 11.19( c) to give the undrained shear strength. The beauty of all these tests is that they may be per-
formed within a few centimetres of each other so as to obtain a statistical representation or a continuous 
profile of shear strength with position or depth. 
· 
Several other in situ tests have been used to determine the UU shear strength through correla-
tions, and these weredescribed in Sec.11.6.1. One of the best for soft clays (Table 11.1) is the field vane 
shear test (VST). Properly calibrated by correlations based on back-analyses of failure and field tests 
·. (e:g., Cadling and Odenstad, 1950), the VST can give a good estimate of the undrained shear strength 
of these materials. Theoretical formulas [Fig. 11.19(c)] are less reliable. Another possibility is to apply 
an empirical correction factor for very soft clays based on back-calculation from embankment failures 
(Bjerrum, 1972). An example of this is shown in Fig. 12.45. , 
The Dutch cone penetrometer test (CPT) and its close relative the piezocone penetrometer test 
( CPTh) can also be used at sites with soft to stiff clays. Through correlations, both can provide very useful 
information about the variability of the soil profile, the UU shear strength, and other useful properties of 
soft clay sites. 
· 
· 
. , 
. · 
. . , 
' Although the pressuremeter test (PMT) has been used in soft clays, it is prob~bly more suitable 
for stiffer'day sites. It can' provide good estimates of the in situ soil modulus, but it tends to' greatly 
overpredict the undrained shear strength in'comparison with the results of laboratory strength tests 
and other in situ tests. Similarly, the dilatometer test(DMT) isless successful at softclaysites, but it 
· · appears to provide a good ~stimate of the modulus, especially in stiffer soils. 
' 
'' 
' 
' 
.. 
'• .. 
, 
,. 
. 
12.11 
Unconsolidated-Undrained Stress~Deformation and Strength Characteristics 
589 
··The screw plate compressometer (SPC) can be used in both soft and stiff clays to give the shear 
strength and compressibility properties at several test points throughout the soil profile. As mentioned 
in Sec. 11.6.1, one big advantage of the screw plate compressometer over the pressuremeter and 
dilatometer. tests is that it loads the soil in the same direction as common foundation loading. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
12.11.5 Use of uu Strengthin Engineering Practice · 
' 
' 
! • 
' 
' 
. 
'' 
' 
' 
'~' 
' 
' 
' 
. 
, Like the CD and CUtests,the undrained or UU strength is applicable to certain critical design situa-
tions in engineering practice. In these situations the engineering .loading is assumed to take place so 
rapidly that there is no time for the induced excess pore water pressure to dissipate or for consolida!ion 
to occur during the loading period. We also assume. that the change in total stress during construction 
does not affect the in situ undrained shear strength (Ladd, 197lb ); Examples shown in Fig.12.46 include 
foundations for embankments, compacted clay cores of embankment dams, and footings on soft clays. 
Another example (not shown in the figure) is the stability or bearing capacity of deep foundations such 
.. as piles in soft clays. For all these cases, often the most critical design condition is immediately after the 
.. ·application of the load (at the end of construction), .when the induced pore pressure is the greatest but 
Soft 
. clay 
""-
/---.-:-.- ..... 
/ 
' 
/ 
' 
/ 
' ' 
/-
. ' 
. r 1 c= in situ undrained 
· 
shear streng~~ . 
-r;,;, undrained shear strength 
of the compacted clay 
.::,. 
core 
· 
j
·. ultimate bearing pressure, 
a function of r 1 
. . 
~~~~hLJ~W 
(c) 
\"· 
FIGURE 12.46 Some examples of UU analyses for clay: (a) embankment constructed rapidly 
over a soft clay deposit; (b) large earth dam constructed rapidly with no change iri water 
content of clay core; (c) footing placed rapidly on clay deposit (after Ladd, 1971b). 
590 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
'before consolidation has had time to take place. Once consolidation begins, the void ratio and the water 
C()ntent .naturally decrease and the strength increases. So the embankment or foundation should 
become increasingly safer with time due to consolidation. 
In Sec. 12.8 we briefly described the two different approaches to· the solution of stability prob-
lems in geotechnical engineering: (1) the total stress approach and (2) the effective stress approach. We 
mentioned that the appropriate shear strength for these cases is, respectively, in terms of total and 
effective stresses. For the cases in Fig. 12.46, because no drainage. arid therefore no consolidation. is 
assumed. to occur during construction, a total stress analysis using shear strength in terms of total 
stresses' is carried out, and the undrained shear strength r1 normally is used . 
. There are, however, some of exceptions that you should be aware o£ The first involves founda-
tion loading [Fig.12.46(a)] of lightly overconsolidated days. They may exhibit dilatant behavior when 
sheared, and this has been observed both in laboratory tests and in the field, for example in offshore 
structures in the Canadian Beaufort Sea (Crooks and Becker, 1988). This case is described in detail in 
Chapter 13 as part of our discussion of stress paths and their use in geotechnical practice. 
The other exception is the example of an earth dam [Fig. 12.46(b)] constructed of a well-
.compacted silty clay as described by Humphrey and Leonards (1986). They investigated the failure of 
the steep upstream face of an embankment dam constructed without the granular shells shown in 
Fig. 12.46(b ). They found that a total stress 
analysis was unreliable because the calculated 
factor of safety using the UU strength was on. 
the unsafe side. While the case history is inter-
esting from a number of viewpoints, it is the 
shear behavior of the material that is relevant 
here. Well compacted silty clay tends to dilate 
when sheared, and this causes negative pore 
water pressures during shear. Thus the shear 
strength in the embankment increases, but it is 
temporary. Conditions in the dam do not 
remain undrained for long, and the effective 
~ 
c 
~ 
Q)-
~~ 
(/)~ 
[{l b 
~~ 
Ciib 
a.~ 
"(3 
.§ 
a. 
~ 
:J 
Confining pressure: 
o u 3 = 1.0 ksf 
0 u 3 = 3.0 ksf 
<> u3 = 6.0 ksl 
t;. u 3 = 12.0 ksl 
normal stress active on a potential failure sur-
face will decrease, be~ause the pore pressures 
become less negative r'ather quickly. And this 
means that the effective stresses correspond-
ingly decrease rather quickly. 
~Ui 
~.>£ 
a.::i 
~ 
2.0 
What happens in the. UU laboratory 
test on compacted silty clay? The shear stress 
is usually applied rapidly, often reaching fail-
ure within 20--JO min. If the pore pressures 
0 a. 
were m~asured, they would decrease after * 
~ 
the strams exceed a few percent, and lower. 
~ ~· 
pore pressures mean higher effective stresses 
Cii ~ 
' 
a. 
and thus higher undrained· shear strengths. 
·u 2 
This effect is shown in Fig. 12.47. Therefore a 
~ e 
total stress analysis of a dam of compacted 
silty clay using UU strengths is not reliable 
1~----~----~------~----~ 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
Axial strain (%) 
and may be unsafe. Humphrey and Leonards 
(1986) recommend instead using an effective 
stress • analysis. The effective stress strength 
parameters c' and ¢' used in the· stability 
FIGURE 12.47 Typical stress-strain and pore pressure-
strain behavior for a UU test on compacted silty clay 
(LL = 19; PI = 7) (after Humphrey and Leonards, 1986}. 
· 12.12 Sensitivity 
591 
analysis should be evaluated· at large strains and at slow strain rates. For compacted clays of low to 
medium plasticity, use a CD test-either a direct shear or a CD triaxial test-conducted slowly enough 
that D.u · r:::J 0. 
One of the more useful ways to exp~ess the undrained shear strength is in terms of the r11a~0 
ratio for'normally consolidated clays. In natural deposits of sedimentary clays, the undrained shear 
strength has been found to increase with depth, and thus it is proportional to the increase in effective 
overburden stress with depth. The background and use of this ratio are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 13. 
12.12 
SENSITIVITY 
Earlier, in Sec. 2.7.3, we mentioned very generally the concept of clay sensitivity. We were vague 
because we had not yet discussed shear strength. Now. we can define sensitivity more precisely, at least 
within the precision limits of the strength measurements themselves. Usually, sensitivity is based on 
some measure of the undrained shear strength r 1 :as· determined in the laboratory or the field. 
Sensitivity S1 is therefore 
· 
r1 (undisturbed) 
s = --'-------
1 
r1 (remolded) 
(12.12) 
It sh~uld be noted that the.remolded strength determination must be at the same water content-the 
natural water content Wn-as the water content of the undisturbed specimen. Table 12.6 indicates 
the range of sensitivity values commonly used in the United States, where highly sensitive clays are 
not as common as they are in eastern Canada and Scandinavia; Other sensitivity scales are available 
besides those listed in Table 12.5 (for example, Skempton and Northey, 1952; Bjerrum, l9S4b ). 
Figure 2.11 showed what happened to a sample of Leda clay from eastern Cariada before and 
after remolding. Leda clays are often very stiff in their natural state~ Their unconfined compressive 
strengths may be greater than 100 kPa, but their liquidity indices [Eq. (2.39)], are often 2 or more. No 
wonder that their strengths are so low when they are thoroughly remolded! The sample shown in 
Fig. 2.11 had a sensitivity of about 1500 (Penner, 1963), which definitely qualifies it as quick accord-
ing to Table 12.5. Note that with such days you have to use either. a very sensitive laboratory vane or 
fall-cone test to obtain the remolded r1 (Eden and Kubota,l962). 
. . . 
· Correlations between sensitivity and liquidity index have been made by several researchers, as 
shown in Fig. 12.48. 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
. TABLE 12.6 JYpical Values of Sensitivity 
' 
y 
•' 
I 
. Range of S1 
Condidoli 
u.s. 
Canada 
Sweden 
Low sensitive 
2-4 
<2 
<10 
Medium sensitiv~·· 
4-8 
2-4 
10-30 
Highly sensitive 
8-16 
4-8 
.>30 
'. 
Extra sensitive 
16 
'8--'16 
>50 
'. >16 
'• 
Quick 
>100 
Greased lightning . 
>>16 
· 592 
ChapterJ 2 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
:;; 
' 
FIGURE 12.48 The relationship 
. between sensitivity and liquid~ 
: ity index for Scandinavian, 
British, Canadian, and some 
U.S. clays. 
. 1000.-~----.-------.-------~----~~------, 
;; 
~ 
'iii 
c: 
Q) 
rJ) 
• 
I 
I 
' ' 
rl ' 
Eden and, Kubota (1962) 
,' 
.. ·.: 
. 
.~c. 
• 
I 
. . 
' ,. 
+ 
I 
+ eo•O ,'0 
+ 
+ 
I 
0 
• 
I 
o\al ODD I 
o 
I 
• + ~. ,' 
~.~oo/o 
·, •. ' 
cv' 
tO~ '/0 
• 
. -t-
I 
• 
o•i!i ,' 
+. 0 f 
e 
I 
1.1 
'/, 
• 
Bjerrum (1954b) 
0 
• Skempton and Northey (1952) 
o Bjerrum (1954b) 
,,' '\ 
~ Bjerrum and Simons (1960) 
· • Eden (1971) ' 
o Bozozuk and Leonards (1972) 
+ Eden (personal communication) 
Liquidity index, Ll 
5 
12.13 · THE COEFFICIENT OF EARTH PRESSURE AT REST FORCLAYS 
As is true for sands, a knowledge of the coefficien't of ~arth p;~ssun~ at rest, K0 ,for a clay deposit is 
often very important for the design of earth:retaining structures, excavations, and some foundations. In 
Sec. 12.7 we gave some typical values of Ko for sands. We said that K0 was empirically related to ~· 
[Eq. (12.8) and Fig. 12.20], and we also mentioned that the ~oefficient for overconsolidated sand 
deposits is greater than for normally consolidated sands [Eq. (12.9)]. 
Correlations between K 0 and ~· have been made for clays by Brooker and Ireland (1965) and 
others. Their data for normally consolidated clays are shown in Fig. 12.49. Brooker and Ireland (1965) 
also found a tendency for the normally consolidated K 0 to increase with plasticity index. Massarsch 
(1979) collected the results from 12 investigations, including the compilation by Ladd et al. (1977), and 
they are shown in Fig. 12.50. The equation of the best fit line is 
' 
· 
Ko = 0.44 + 0.42(PI/100) 
(12.13) 
Note that the intercept of the best-fit line, or 0.44, is .very close to the average of K 0 for normally 
consolidated sands, as shown in Fig. 12.20. ·,' 
· · · · · · • · 
The effect of increasing the overburden stress andsubsequent unloading on aj,· and K 0 is shown 
in Figs.12.51(a) and (b), respectively. During sedimentation; the effective horizontal stress a}, increases 
in proportion. to the increase in effective vertical stress, so. K 0 . is constant. If unloading occurs-for 
.12.13 . The Coefficient of Earth Pressure at Rest for. Clays 
593 
Remolded Undisturbed 
Reference 
0 
Brooker and Ireland (1965) 
0 
R. Ladd (1965) 
® 
• 
Bishop (1958) 
• 
Simons (1958) 
... 
Campanella and Vaid {1972) 
© 
Compiled by Worth (1972) 
* 
Abdelhamid and Krizek (1976) 
~c 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3~------~------~------~------~------~----~ 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
32 
36 . 
Friction angle, cf>' (degrees) 
FIGURE 12.49 
K0 ver~us ~· for normally consolidated clays (after Ladd et al.; 1977). 
0.8 
'IJ'J 
0.7 
&8 
0 • 
0.6 
,\i' '•: 
0.5 
0 
0. 
K0 ~ 0.~4 + 0.42(PI/1 00) 
~ 0.4 
:0.3 
• Undisturbed ' 
. 0.2 
·o Disturbed or laboratory 
reconsolidated from a · 
··sediment 
0.1 
00 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 110 
;;· 
Plasticity index, PI 
FIGURE 12.50 Correlation between K0 from laboratory tests · 
· and plasticity index PI (after Massarsch, 1979). 
594 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
u~0 (kPa) .. 
':::t:.o 
0.41 
d • 
~ 
' 
,,'' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I ; 
I 
I 
I 
.,.e:__ Reloading 
-----_..~..-''"' 
frorri OCR= 10 
FIGURE .12.52 
Effect of overconsolidation on Ko of 
20 
FIGURE 12.51 
Relationships showing the effect of 
a changing overburden stress during sedimentation, 
erosion, and reloading on (a) horizontal stress u;, 
and (b) coefficient of earth pressure at rest K0 
(after Morgenstern and Eisenstein, 1970}. 
a sensitive day during unloading and reloading. The · 
. 'data by Campanella and Vaid (1972) was replotted by 
Ladd et al. (1977). 
ex~mple, because of erosion-then thereis a hysteresis effect, and the value of K 0 increases. Depend-
ing on how much unloading actually takes place, it is possible for the lateral stresses relative to a~ to 
approach a state of failure;1 that is, the ratio ai.la~0 could be 3.0 or 3.5, which corresponds to 4>' = 30° 
or 35° [Eq; (1Ll4)]. If there is subsequent reloading, then the K 0 !ends to decrease;· as shown in 
Fig.12.51(b ). The effectof overconsolidation on the K 0 of a sensitive clay is shown in Fig.12.52. Again, 
there is some hysteresis when the clayis rebounded from a high OCR. 
.. 
. 
Brooker and Ireland (1965) suggested that the relationship between K 0 and OCR depended on 
the plasticity of the clay, and this was confirmed to some extent by Ladd (1971a), as shown in Fig. 12.53. 
But when Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) plotted data on 135 clays in Fig.12.54, there was no apparent trend. 
The relationship between K 0 and OCR may be better estimated using'¢' from laboratory triaxial 
cdmpression tests rather than PI This was shown by Mayne and KulhawY (1982) from data on 48 clays 
as reproduced in Fig.12.55. Their relationship is given by 
/; ··,.::"' 
Ko = (1- sin¢') OCRsinc/>' 
(12.14) 
. where Ko ,;, coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest; 
,. 
. 
.) 
' 
OCR = over consolidation ratio. 
1In terms of lateral earth pressures, this is called.·~ pa~~ive state of failure. '!he sties; ratio ,KP is 'called the coefficient 
of passive earth pressure, and KP = uhtfu~f (and notrelated to the military term). 
. 
12:13 ·The Coefficient of Earth Pressure at Rest for Clays 
595 
Brooker andlr~land (1965), 
Symbol, 
PI 
10 
20' 
30 
60 
OCR 
FIGURE 12.53 K0 versus OCR for soils ofdifferent plas-
ticities. The data by Brooker and Ireland (1965) on five 
clays and one sand was replotted byLadd,(1971a). , 
. Equation (12.14) is basically a combination of 
Eqs. (12.8) and (12.9) with the exponent h.=. , 
sin c/J'. Ladd · et al. (1977) also determined the 
exponent h in Eq; (12.9).for several clays dur-
ing unloading and recompression. For clays with 
a PI of about 20, a value of h = 0.4 is reason-
able. Then h decreases slightly as PI increases, 
with the lowest .value,of h = 0.32 at PI=:o 80 . 
. These . values of h are somewhat lower than 
those for sands (Sec. 12.6). Keep in mind, too, 
·, that all these data are for laboratory consoli-
dated specimens: , 
· 
· . 
· 
Field behavior. is much more erratic than . 
laboratory· data, as shown by Massarsch. et al. 
(1975) and Tavenas et al. (1975). These authors 
and Wroth (1975) describe techniques for esti-
mating the in situ K 0 in deposits of soft clays. 
Wroth (1975) also discusses, the effects of ero-
sion and a fluctuating groundwater table on the 
·variation of K 0 with depth. Generally, the upper.·· 
few metres of a soft clay deposit are overconsol-
idated (the drying crust), and K 0 can be quite 
high. Then it will decrease with depth as the 
OCR decreases, until it is equal to the normally 
, consolidated value when OCR = 1. 
FIGURE 12.54 
Kane versus PI on ,135 clays 
(tc = triaxial compression) (Kulhawy and 
Mayne, 1990; Kulhawy, 2005). 
' 
K0 = (1 - sin c/>\c) OCR sin</>'., 
2 
5 
10 
20 
OCR 
'5( 
FIGURE 12.55 K0 versus OCR for 48 clays compiled 
by Mayne and Kulhawy (1982) and plotted by 
Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) and Kulhawy (2005). 
596 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
-..'' 
' 
-
" 
. 
' 
. 
' 
. 
' 
. 
. 
.. 
In summary, the coefficient of earth pressure at rest K 0 is very dependent on the stress history of the 
deposit, ~and especially for overconsolidated clays with complex stress histo'ries it can be very difficult to 
accurately measure in the field or estimate based' on laboratory tests: Simple -correlations based on PI and 
the results of in situ tests ani often the only feasibleapproach, but they seem to work best in recenfdeposits 
with overconsolidation caused by one unload-reload, cycle (Kulhawyand Mayne, 1990; Kulhawy, 2005). 
' 
' 
12.14 
STRENGTH OF COMPACTED CLAYS 
<(c. 
· We discussed co~pactioii in some detail in Chapter 5 but did not say much about the specifi~ properties 
of compacted soils. That discussion was left to the individual ~hapters on soil properties. From our earlier 
discussions of shrinkage and swelling characteristics, hydraulic' conductivity, and compressibility of com-
pacted clays, you probably have the idea that compacted clays are not simple· materials. The ~trength of 
compacted clays is no exception, and their behavior is rather complex both in the field and in the labora-
tory. In general, samples compacted dry of optifi?.um have higher stre~gths than those compacted wet of 
optimum. The wet of optimum strengths also depend somewhat on the type of compaction because of 
' differences in soil structure induced by different compaction methods. If the sainplesare soaked, the pic-
ture changes due to swelling, especially if they were initially dry of optimum. Because the structure of 
··compacted 'clays so strongly affects their soil properties including their strength, a quick review of Sec. 5.4 
, on the stru2ture offine-grainedsoils will help you understand the present section. Note particularly 
Fig.5.5, showing the effect of compaction on soil structure. 
· 
Figure 12.56 is an example of the influence of molding water content on the soil structure and on 
the stress-strain behavior of kaolinite~ Samples were compacted at diffen!nt water contents but at the 
same compactive effort, and the resulting compaction curve'isshowri in Fig. 12.56(c). As the' com-
paction water content increases, the degree of particle orientation increases [Fig.12.56(b)]. The stress-
strain curves [Fig. 12.56(a)] determined by UU triaxial tests show a great difference in stress-strain 
respo'nse, depending on whether compacted wet or dry of optimum; The difference is due to the differ-
ences in soil structure between the wet and dry samples. Samples 1 and 2, compacted dry of optimum, 
',. are more flocculated in comparison' with those compacted wet (samples 4 to 6);.The dry samph!s are 
- stronger, have a higher modulus, and develop their maximum strengths at lower strains than the wet 
samples. The two samples 5 and 6 compacted very wet have very flat stress-strain curves, and their 
strengths continue to increase even at high strains. 
' 
: ··-
·'' 
A common misconception is that increased density at the same water content must result in 
greater shear strength. However, this is not necessarily true, as shown by the undrained test results 
in Fig. 12.57 on a silty clay compacted by kneading compaction at three different compactive 
efforts. In Fig. 12.57(a), the stress required to cause 25% strairi is plotted versus molding water con-
tent, while Fig.12.57(b) shows the stress required to cause just 5% strain for the three compactive 
efforts. Note that the "strengths" are about the same forspecimens compacted wet of optimum but 
increase significantly ori the dfy side of ()ptimurri: Note, too, that at a given water content wet of 
optimum, the stress at 5% strain is actually less for the higher compaction energies.· 
. 
_ In Sec. 5.7.5 we discussedovercompaction; the condition when lower shear strengths are obtained 
at higher water contents, e.g., wet of optimum, even with higher compaction energies. A good example 
is shown in Fig.12.58; where strength is measured by the CBR (California bearing ratio) test. In this test, 
the resistance to penetration of a 3 in.2 piston developed in a compacted specimen is compared to that 
developed by a standard sample of densely compacted crushed rock, The CBR is a common pavement 
design test. In Fig. 12.58 a greater compactive effort produces a greater CBR dry of optimum, as you 
would expect. But notice how the CBR is aCtua'Ily less wet 'of optimum for the higher compaction 
energies. As we explained in Chapter 5, this faCt is important iri the proper design and construction of 
, a compacted earth filL } 
-. 
' · 
-A comparison of the effects of four different methods of compaction on relative strength of a silty 
clay is shown in Fig. 12.59. As expected, the method of compaction has little effect on the strength of 
~ 600,--,--,-~r--,--.-~---.--,--,--, 
ll. 
6 
"'; 92 
;;:, 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
Axial strain (%) 
(a) 
(b) 
~ 90~-+--~-+~-+~~~ 
·u; 
c 
Q) 
"tl 
~ 
Cl 
88-
84~~L-~~--~--~~--~~ 
20 
22 
24 ,26 
28 
30 
32 
34 
Molding'water content (%) 
(c) 
FIGURE 12.56 Influence of molding water content 
on the structure and stress-strain of kaolinite at the 
same compactive effort: {a) stress versus strain from 
UU triaxial tests; {b) degree of particle orientation 
versus water content; {c) dry density versus water 
content {after Seed and Chan, 1959). 
12.14 Strength of Compacted Clays 
597 
&' 
6 1200,--,---,--,---,---r--.---r--. 
·c 
-~ 1000~-4---+~4---+---~-4---+--4 
(ij 
~ 
~ 1200r--,---r--.---~--r--.---r--. 
c 
-~ 1000 ~-4---+--4---+--~-4--+--4 
(ij 
Tamps per Foot 
layer 
pressure 
15 
276 psi 
15 
136 psi 
15 
65 psi 
1- \o···-··--r·--·--···-t··-·····-·-t·---·-·-·· ·--·-·-· 
100~~---L~~--~--L-~~~~~ 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
Molding water content (%) 
(c) 
FIGURE 12.57. :Relationship between dry density, water 
content, and stress required to cause {a) 25% strain and 
{b) 5% strain, as a function of compactive effort and 
molding water content; {c) dry density versus water con-
tent. Data are from unconsolidated-undrained tests with 
confining pressure= 100 kPa {after Seed and Chan, 1959). 
samples compacted dry of optimum. However, for specimens compacted wet of optimum, the method of 
, compaction has considerable influence on the strength, especially at large strains [Fig. 12.59(a)]. The 
reason for this is the effect of soil structure induced by the compaction method. Methods such as knead-
ing and impact produce a more oriented soil structure than vibratory and static compaction because of 
the shear deformations induced during compaction. Specimens dry of optimum experience small shear 
598 
Chapter .12 , , / An Introduction toShear Strength ofSoils and Rock 
(/) 
(/) 
FIGURE 12.58 Strength as measured by 
,the CBR and the dry density versus water 
content for laboratory impact compaction 
(after Tu'rnbull and Foster, 1956). ' 
Molding water content(%) 
; 
(a). 
~ 
.c 
a: 
CXl 
(.) 
'-o 
~ 
<1l 
0 
(/) 
c 
::J 
100,-----~~----~~----~-, 
6 blows per layer 
Water content(%) 
Note: 10 lb hammer, 18 in. drop (modified Proctor) 
(/) 
(/) 
Q)~ 
~-ffi 
C!;: 
0CI) 
-g~ 
Cl)lO 
'<1l Q) 
.CCI) 
~::J 
'.s:: <1l 
-u 
Olo 
~~, 
(;)~ 
Q)·-
>::J 
·- 0" 
(ij~ 
Qi 
a: 
Molding water conten_t (%) 
(b) 
Fl~lJRE 12.59 
lnflue~c~ of method of compaction on the relati~e strength of a siltyday: (a) stress required to 
cause 5% strain; (b) stress required to' cause 25% strain (after Seecfand Clian, 1959). , 
' 
·.. 
. 
", ':, ' 
' 
, 
' 
; 
' 
• 
' " 
', 
\ 
I 
• ' 
~ 
,. 
' 
• 
·,12.14 Strength ofCompacted Clays 
599 
strains during compaction, so the specimens have a flocculated soil structure. This is not the case for 
specimens compacted wet of optimum, in which the compaction methods such as kneading and impact 
induce shear'deformations during compaction that results in a more oriented soil structure: Specimens 
compacted statically are still flocculated even wet of optimum, so are relatively stronger, especially at 
·small strains [Fig. 12.59(a)]. But at large strains, the·differences are small, as shown in Fig: 12.59(b), 
because the structures of all specimens become more oriented atlarge shear strains: . . ' 
Now let's look at the influen'ce of the compaction method on different soiltypes. Figure 12.60 
shows the relative "strengths" of samples of three soils prepared by static and kneading compaction. As 
before, the "strength" is relative to the stress required to cause low (5%) and high (20%) strains. Note 
that the effect of the method of compaction 'can vary significantly depending on soil type, whether the 
specimens are wet or dry of optinmm, and the strain at which "strength" is defined. Some differences are 
· huge, as much as 400%', due to the differences' in soil structure produced by the compaction method. 
An interesting design problem related to compacted Clay properties is that of clay liners 
required for municipai solid waste landfills. These are compacted soil layers used on the slopes and 
· base of the "bowl" created to store such waste and to prevennhe leachate caused by the decompo-
sition of the waste from getting into the groundwater. These liners are at h:;ast 0.9 to 1.2 m thick, and 
·they must have hydraulic conductivity of less than 10-9 m/s. As shown in Fig. 7.8; compacted clay 
permeability reaches a minimum close to Wop~> and remains close to that minimum even at water 
· contents higher than Wopt· So, from a hydraulic barrier point of view,'it is best to compact at or 
··slightly above optimum. However, this also leads to lower shear strengths; ari important property 
for slope stability. This paradox requires careful slope stability analyses to be performed, as there 
have been several failures ofliners due to low shear strengths on the slopes. · 
Cl 
4.0 r---.-..,.----.,.---,---:-1 -/"""""'-.:r-,---,1---r---, 
I 
~ 3.5 f---t---t--t--t--·i-: _·,
1
-Jt-i _--_.-t-N_· 
-+j"';· _-_,· 1----t 
"C <:I~ 1/\ 
@ 2 
Silty clay 
\. 
(.) (.) 30 
I 
~ ~ . f---t---t--t---t---rl-+--+--t--t-,,,-
~ E 
I 
~ 
~8 
: 
al.~ 2.5 ----· -·····-
-··-····· ·-·+---~:-J---1--····j-----..... +---.. -+ ... --... 
Oial 
I 
c. a> 
I 
~.2 2.0 ------- --········· ----- ........... J .. J.· .. +- .. ·-+--.. -·--1--·---+ 
~ .c>-
I 
: 
yandyclay 
~~ 1.5 
I 
:.--
I 
0~ 
~-
~ 
§,§ 1.0 
·~ 
_.-::. 
~--1--
--l!:"~ 
~ ~ 
F"""' 
m 1 • Highly plastic clay 
; ~ 0.5 ---- ~:--- ___ : ----1 ~ 1---~J----- ----1-----------
~ (.) 
~ ": ··I 
~ I 
.. 
a: 
0 
. I 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
DrY of optimum ~Wet 
of optimum 
' Molding water content(%) 
(a) 
.. 
,{;·, 
g> 
4·0 ,..---,1,.--,i-'1--rl -.,-1 -,-1. --,-,1.--,--, 
'6 
Unconsolidated-undrained 
"'~ 
:g ~ 
test confining 
,_ 11 
3.5 
pressure = 100 kPa . --t-~-t---1,--t---J 
~~ 
! ' 
I ,_: 
I 
uu 
' 
I 
1 
'I 
l 
i 
1 i 3.0 f---1----t---f-.--t-1--.T-i -. +1--j---jlf---t---J 
~ f 2.5 t-----+-·-----.. +---....... t----r·--1-----r----- ---r;--- ----
~ .i! 2.0 ---· 
--- .. L 
--"[-----~-- --
___ 
1 
...................... .. 
-~~ 
I. : I 
. 
.. ~t 15 
I 
I 
l 
I 
-
"'· a>~ 
• 
1· 
, 
. 
•
1 
_ Sandy clay-
1
smy clay 
-
''I 
/j. 
I 
I\ 
a"':e 
. 
I 
1 
1..£-+--'-
· 
,· 
! 
;S <: 1.0 
' 
I 
_l L; 
-1="'5'== 
g.g 
I 
/ 
1 
~ 1;l , 
1! 
/j "'i Hi9hly plastic clav 
(i5 Ec.' 
-
I 
: 18 o.s ----- -,--T---------11 § 
~----r--- ----- ---- -----
. a: ! 
i.' 0 L--:-'---'---'---'---'---'--..J._-'-L--'----' 
5 
4 
3 
2 . 1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Dry of optimum ~Wet 
of optimum 
Molding water content (%) 
(b) 
5 
FIGURE 12.60 Relative strengths of samples of three soils prepared by static and kneading compaction and tested 
UU at a confining stress of 100 kPa: (a) stress required to cause 5% strain; (b) stress required tocause 20% strain 
(after Seed and Chan, 1959). 
600 
Chapter 12 · ·· ·. ·An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
12.15' STRENGTH OF ROCKS AND TRANSITIONAL· MATERIALS 
· · 
·' 
'· 
~ " 
' 
' 
.When referring to rock strength and other mechanical properties (e.g., stiffness), it is important to dis-
'tinguish between intact rock and the. rock mass. In Chapters 3;A, and 11, we mentioned that rock 
defects such as fractures, joints, bedding planes, and minor faults are common in rock masses. Both the 
intact rock and,these discontinuitiesare much more difficult to characterize due to the large potential 
. variability; in conditions and subsequent properties. Section.~:14.3 described the various descriptive 
rock masscl~ssification systems, the most common of which is the Rock Quality Designation (RQD ), 
.which essentially quantifies the proportion of the rock core that is intact. 
,. . 
. }n Sec. 11.5,5,we described the various tests for determining the engineering properties of intact 
rock. Probably the most common is the uniaxialcompression test, which isfundamentallyan uncon-
fined compression test, and ASTM (2010) D 7012 gives the details of the testing procedure. In addition 
to the unconfined compressive strength qu, other. measured parameters include elastic modulus and 
,Poisson's ratio. Whilethe procedures for this test are simple in principle, Goodman (1989) points out 
that it is difficult to perform properly, with results varying by a factor of two as procedures are varied . 
. Other. methods for determining rock strength include the spliU~nsile test, point load strength test, 
direct shear. test, andso~called slake.testto determine the durability of shales and weak rocks under 
wetting and drying cycles; these were briefly described in Sec. 11.5.4. 
. 
, . •,.. 
, , , 
, . 
Table, 12.7 giyes the uniaxial compressive strength of representative rocks. The variation in qu 
:) , I among What ,WOUld Seem tO be rOCkS Of the Smne type iS extraordinary, reflecting the Wide rangeS in the 
TABLE 12.7 '·Unconfined Compressive Strength of Ripiesentati~e Intact Rocks 
Description 
Berea sandstone, Amherst, OhiO. 
Navajo sandstone, Glen Canyon Dam, Arizona 
Tensleep sandstone, Casper, Wyoming· 
Hackensack siltstone, New Jersey 
Monticello Dam siltstone/gn;ywacke, California 
Solenhofen limestone, Bavaria 
Bedford limestone, Indiana 
Tavernalle limestone, Carthage; Missouri 
· Oneota dolomite, Kasota, Minnesota 
Lockport dolomite, Niagara F~lls, New York 
. Flaming Gorge shale, Utah 
· 
Micaceous shale, Ohio ' '· ' 
,. , 
Dworshak Dam gneiss, 45° to foliation; Idaho 
Quartz mica, J.. to schistocity: 
Baraboo quartzite, Wisconsin .. , 
Taconic marble, Rutland, Vermont 
Ch~rokee marble; Tate, Georgia' · 
Nevada Test Site granite 
· 
Pikes Peak granite, Colorado Springs, Colorado 
Cedar City tonalite, Utah 
Palisades diabase, West Nyack, New York 
Nevada Test Site basalt 
· , 
John Day basalt, Arlington, Oregon 
Nevada Test Site tuff 
After Goodman (1989). 
Unconfined Compressive· 
· Strength (qu) 
MPa 
73.8 
214.0 
72.4 
122.7 
79.3 
245.0 
51.0 .. 
97.9. 
•. 
4 
86.9 
90.3 
'35.2 
75.2 
i62.o 
55.2. 
320.0 
'62.0 
66.9, 
141.1 
226.0 
10LS ' 
241.0 
'148.0 
355.0 
11.3 
psi 
10700 
31030 
10500 
17 800 
11500 
35 500 
7400 
14200 
12600 
13100 
5100 
. '10900·,: 
23 500 
. 8000 
46400 
,8990 
'9700· 
20500 
)2800 
'14700 
34 950 
/I 21500 
' 51500 
' .1650 
, , 12:16 . MultistageTesting 
601 
Weathering 
11\. ·.· ·. 
/~\ 
Natural' 
discontinuities 
·····.cavities ·· 
' 
.. ' . 
-' 
. 
~ 
. 
. 
' 
FIGURE 12.61 
General rrogression of rock weathering (after Kulhawy et al., 1991). 
.. 
. 
1
· Weathered rock 
mass 
degrees· of cementation and consolidation that are important determinants of intact rock strength. 
Also, as mentioned above, some of the variability must be due to difference in testing procedures. 
The' strength of a rock mass is much more complicated a'nd obviously more variable, since it 
includes discontinuities .. There are a number of correlations between rock mass strength and RQD, 
joint number and characteristics, stress level· and groundwater conditions, among other factors. Some 
of these correlations were described in Sec. 4.13.3 under rock mass classification. A number of empiri-
cal relationships'for computing rock mass modulus are summarized in NCHRP (2006), Table 12. 
If rock mass strength is complicated, then the strength of transitional or weathered rock mass mate-
rials is even more problematic. This stems from the fact that transitional materials are highly variable and, 
· as their name implies, are at some stage of transition from rock to soil alongthe weathering spectrum. 
Figure 12.61 shows the general progression of unweathered rock material 'as it transitions to weathered 
rock mass, beyond which it further weathers to either a mixture.of soil and rock or, in some environments, 
. to a residual soil that often has the appearance of rock but lacks rock's cohesiveness and strength (Sec. 4.2) . 
. : The fundamental test for determining the degree of weathering and strength degradation from 
rock to soil is the material's reaction to water-i.e, the degree of disaggregation of the mass in the pres-
ence of water. Welsh et al. (1991) describe two such tests, the jar slake or soak test, and the free swell 
index test. In the slake test, descriptive observations are made of the disaggregation and a qualitative 
scale used to classify the degree of slaking. In the free swell test, dilantancy in the presence of water is 
measured quantitatively, so that it may be less prone to operator error than the slake test. Another test 
for the durability of shales and similar rocks is the slake durability test, ASTM (2010) D 4644. 
· Weathered rock and its ultimate end product, either residual soil or soil with rock fragments, 
presents a significant engineering challenge and requires knowledge of the local geology and geohy-
drologic influences. 
12.16 
MULTISTAGE TESTING 
Several times in our discussions of direct shear and triaxial testing (see Sees. 11.5, 12.5, 12.9.1, and 
12.10.1) we mentioned that we usually test at least three or more identical specimens at different 
confining pressures to determine the complete Mohr failure envelope for a given soil. This is true for 
CD and CU tests on all types of soils and soft rocks. Another important consideration is that, as we 
mentioned in Sec. 11.6 on in situ testing, obtaining high quality undisturbed samples of the subsur-
face soils and rocks is expensive and often problematic, especially in highly stratified or interbedded 
geologic deposits. (Subsurface investigation and undisturbed soil sampling are usually discussed in 
courses and book~ on foundation engineering, but a brief description is given in Sec. 13.13.4.) 
Multistage testing on only one specimen is sometimes used in practice to overcome the problem of 
lack of identical test specimens, and it saves time and money. Ideally, the specimens should be.saturated, 
and both direct shear and triaxial CD tests may be performed multistage: Sometimes it is used for testing 
602 
Chapter 12 : ; ·'An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
;f. 
remolded compacted specimens of fine grained soils that are unsaturated. These tests should be UU 
triaxial tests (Sec; 12.11.1), but because the Mohr failure envelope is curved [Fig. 12.38(b )], interpreta-
tion of the results requires experience. Multistage testing should be used only for soils and soft rocks 
that are not structured, sensitive, cemented, or brittle. . . 
. 
: 
' 
· 
·How is multistage testing actually done? As with all st~ength teiting, the testing pressures, loading 
rates, and othe~ test details appropriatefor the project should be specified by an experienced geotech-
nical design engineer in collaboration with laboratory technicians. After the specimen is set up in the 
test apparatus, the first phase confining pressure is applied and the specimen allowed to cpnsolidate 
under this first stage effective confining stress. Then the axial load is applied at a controlled strain rate or 
using small increments of constant stress until the specimen starts to yield as the peak stress or first stage 
"failure" point is approached. An experienced laboratory technician (assisted by automatic data acqui-
sition and plotting) will know when to stop loading and immediately increase the second stage confining 
pressure. Some time maybe required for second stage consolidation, depending on the. type of soil and 
test. The process is repeated for the third stage of the tests. 
· Judgment based on the shape of the stress-strain curve as well as the amount of strain that has 
.. occurred is necessary to decide.where the "failure". points are. For example, some laboratories test a first 
' specimen to a strain well above the ·failure strain. This is done to get a good idea of the minimum strain 
to achieve prior to running the second stage in another specimen. This is a conservative and reasonable 
approach. When all the stress-strain curves are plotted, the second one will start where. the first one 
ended, and so on. 
A three stage test is illustrated in Fig.12.62 by the typical stress-strain curves from a CD triaxial 
test on a loose silty sand. The resulting Mohr circles and Mohr failure envelope are shown in Fig. 12.63. 
Is the resulting angle of internal friction shown in Fig. 12.63 typical for a fine to medium sand? 
. If there is any question about the use of a multistage test for a particular deposit, one could run 
tests on individual specimens at different confining pressures and compare the results with the multi-
. stage results. A geotechnical engineer familiar with the soils in his or her geographic area will know 
, when it is appropriate to run multistage tests. 
. ; . : 
Q) 
0 c 
~ 
Jg 
'6 
(/) 
(/) 
~ 
'lii 
., 
. i• 
.. -~ Gi 
a. 
Tl 
c 
(t 
'' 
FIGURE 12.62 Stress-strain curves for a multistage CD triaxial test on a fine silty sand (e = 0.75) 
(data courtesy of Shannon and Wilson, _Inc., Seattle, WA). 
FIGURE 12.63 Mohr circles 
from data in Fig. 12.62 from 
a multistage CD triaxial 
test on sand (data courtesy 
of Shannon and Wilson, Inc.;· 
Seattle, WA)., 
Example 12.12 
Given: 
Note: 100 kPa = 14.7 psi· 
12.16 Multistage Testing 
603 
150 
u;(psi) 
Data (courtesy Shannon & Wilson, Inc., S~attle) from nitiltistage CU tiiaxial tests on Lake 
Bonneville lacustrine deposits. The soil is a moist gray silty clay (CL) with trace~· of fine gravel, sand, 
and organics. Two specimens were tested. The first specimen, Test 1, was consolidated to the in situ 
effective vertical overburden stress, then axially loaded in the undrained state to failure at a strain 
·rate of about 0.006 in./min~ The test data is given in Table Ex.12.12a and plotted in Fig. Ex. 12.12a. 
TABLE EX.12.12a DatafromTest1 
Item 
Natural water cont~nt,% 
Dry unit weight, pcf 
· Liquid limit· 
Plasticity index 
In situ overconsolidation ratio 
Effective consolidation stress, psf 
Total cell pressure, psf 
Initial back pressure, psf 
Principal stress difference at failure, psf · · 
Pore water pressure at failure, psf . 
Axial strain at failure,% 
Effective major principal stress at failure, psf 
Effective minor principal stress at failure, psf. 
Effective principal stress ratio at failure 
Note: 48 kPa = 1000 psf. 
Symbol 
Wn 
"Yd 
LL 
PI 
. OCR' 
u~ 
·u3cell 
Uo 
. (ul -
u3)J 
f:.uJ 
ef 
ul.r 
u3t 
,u!tlu3t 
Test 1 
41.9 
91.6 
35 
12 
-1.5-1.7 
2506 
6819 
4313 
2523 
1592 
3.34 
3363 
852 
3.94 
604 
Chapter12 
· An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
3000r-~~~~-r~~~~--,-~~_,~-.--~ 
Q) 
0 
~ 2000 
~ 
~ 1500 
rJl 
~ 
1ii 
. 
~ 1000~r-~----t---~~-t--~----t---~~-1--_j~-
. 9-
.§ 500 ·---·-·•··-----+·-·--·-·-+----·-+--·-·--··---·--·--•··--·--·--··-·----···---··---·-· 
a. 
Note: 48 kPa = 1000 psf 
OL---~--~--~---L--~~~~--~--~--~--~ 
FIGURE Ex. 12.12a Stress-
strain data from Test 1. 
0;. 0.02 . 0.04 0.06 0.08 
0.1 . 
0.2 
0.2 
Axial strain (in./in.) · 
The second specimen was obtained from the same sample tube and tested in two stages at effec-
tive consolidation pressures of 4464 and 5904psf, respectively. Data from these two tests, Tests 2A and 
2B, are shown below. 
Required: 
a. Use the results. of Test 1 to predict the starting point for the next subsequent phases from the 
stress-strain data. Discuss the basis of your prediction. 
b. From the sample description, classification, and natural water cont~nt and dry density, are the 
triaxial test results reasonable, based on the all the infoimation that you have learned thus far? 
' 
".,-. 
,.· J• 
• 
' 
• :,· 
., 
•• •.• 
' 
• 
Solution: 
a. From Fig. Ex. 12.12a, the maximum principal stress difference is 2523 psf, and this point 
occurs at an axial stniin of 2:67%. Because the stress-strain curve is essentially flat after that 
point, we could go up to about 4% for the next phase if we wanted to. However, the test 
phase is usually stopped as soon as possible, so as to leave additional axial strain for the 
· remaining phases. 
· 
Now, using the results from the multistage CU tests, let's discuss the process that the 
Shannon & Wilson laboratory followed. The first stage, Test2A, is conducted at an effective 
confining pressure of 4464 psf, and Fig. Ex. 12.12b illustrates the stress strain curve for the sec-
ond stage, which is terminated at about a strain of 3.5%. As this strain reaches about 3.5%, the 
stress-strain curve flattens out, as would be expected from the first phase results. Then the cell 
pressure is increased so that the effective confining pressure is 5904 psf. After consolidation, 
the drainage valve is closed. The resulting stress-strain curve is shown in Fig. Ex. 12.12c. 
Why didn't we use the first specimen to provide the second stage?Well,in that test, the 
applied axial strain was carried out to 20%, and at that axial strain, starting another stage 
would be problematic because the structure of the . specimen would be so drastically 
changed. (Note that this test was carried to an axial strain greater than the maximum of 15% 
recommended by ASTM D 4767.) 
Table Ex. 12.12b summarizes all'the stress conditions at the beginning and end of the 
two stages. Now we can plot the Mohr Circles in terms of both effective and total stresses and 
evaluate the total and effective angles of internal friction. This is done in Fig. Ex. 12.12d. The 
total stress strength parameters are cp · = 18° and c = 100 psf, and the parameters in terms of 
-12.16 
Multistage Testing 
605 
~ 4ooo ------- ------ ---=--:t===+==::;;:;;t==r~4
-------
s 
~ 
fl 
/ 
c:: -,-f --------- ~-~---- --------·1 .. -------·-··-~···--·-··-·--·-1--------t-·-·---- --1 
~ 
~ 
·•> 
% 
1 000 [_____ --------- -------------··---+--·--··---·-·-+--·-------+·-----·-·--· -----·--·--·-· 
c: 
(t 
-
Note: 48 kPa = 1000 psi 
0o 
0 
0.005 
0.01 
0.015 · 0.02 
0. 25 
0.03 
0.035 
0.04 
FIGURE Ex. 12.12b Stress-
Axial strain (in./in.) 
7000.-------r-------,-------,-~~--~------, 
~ 
s 
Q) 
---...."" 
j 5000 -- -------- -------------- -----""""'~'-,' 
---···-··+r-.......·-·--··-·-·-------·- +---·-·-·-----··---- ; 
~ 
~ 
~woo 
· 
I 
"iii 
(ij 
a. 
'i3 
c: ;t 1000 t----+-----+--'---- Note: 48 kPa = 1000 psi ~ 
I 
I 
0o 
0.05 
0.1 
0.15 
0.02 
0.25. 
Axial strain (in./in.) 
TABLE EX. 12.12b Tabulation of Triaxial Compression-Test Data 
Item 
Symbol 
Natural water content,% 
Wn 
,. ' 
Dry unit weight, pcf 
'Yd 
Liquid limit . 
. :LL 
Plasticity index 
PI 
In situ overconsolidation ratio 
OCR 
Effective consolidation stress, psf 
u3 . 
Total cell pressure, psf 
lT3 cell 
.. Initial back pressure, psf 
Uo,', 
· · . Principal stress difference at failure, psf 
( ur- u3)f. 
Pore water pressure at failure, psf 
!::.uf 
Axial strain at failure, % 
, BJ 
Effective major principal stress at failure, psf 
lTJf 
.. Effective minor principal stress at failure, psf 
u3~c r . 
Effective principal stress ratio at failure 
uitlu3t 
" 
' 
Note: 1000 psf = 48 kPa. 
strain data from Test 2A. 
FIGURE Ex. 12.12c Stress-
strain data from Test 28. 
Test2A 
Test2B 
36.6 
34.5 
84 
87.8 
36 
36 
14 
14 
~1.5-1.7 
~1.5-1.7 
4464 
5904 
8784 
10224 
4331 
4336 
3939 
5959 
2915 
3749 
:3.54 
6.70 
.5488 
8113 
1549r 
2155 
3.76 
GOG 
Chapter 12 · 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
12.17 
10 000 
c' = 100 psf 
c/>' = 33° 
Effective stress circles 
-- ------ ------ -----
--,0
~e---· 
Test 1 
........ 
N-0' 
. 
. 
~ 
8000 1----:---H Test 2A • • • • 
I ::?J~e"'"' · 
1 
1 
1 
1--
Test 28 ---
e"' 
' 
~~ 
~--~--4---+-~~ev~-~--~--~--4---4 
Total stress circles 
. ]: 6000 1-----f-1 Test 1 . ---· 
Test 2A --
VI 
VI 
~ 
Ci5 
Cii 
Q) 
.s::: 
.en 
Test 28 ............ ... 
4000~~---4---+---+~~--~--4---+---~--~~ 
~~---+--~--+---1 
0 
' 
! 
0 
2000 
4000 
. 6000 
8000 
1 0 000 
12 000 
14 000 
Normal stress (psf) 
Notes: 
'· 
1. Mohr's circle plotted here are based upon effective stresses computed from consolidated-undrained triaxial testing. 
2. Mohr's circle in this plot are based upon the _maximum principal stress difference observed during loading. 
FIGURE Ex. 12.12d Total and effective stress Mohr envelopes and circles from the results of multistage tests . 
. effectiv~ stresses are ¢' ,;, 33° and~· ,;,; 100 psf. Note that theMohr failure envelopes are a 
best fit by eye, and you might get slightly different values of the strength parameters. There 
- will always be slight variations in laboratory test results of natural materials; all is not perfect 
in the ground or in the laboratory. 
b.·· Are the triaxial test results reasonable? The answer is yes, they ·seem reasonable, based on 
the sample description, classification, natural water content, and dry density, as well as the 
information in Chapters 11 and 12. · 
· 
.. 
' 
. 
. 
. 
The stress paths for this example are presented in Sec. 13.2. 
INTRODUCTIONTO PORE PRESSURE PARAMETERS 
It should now be apparent that when saturated soils are loaded, pore water pressures will develop. In the 
case of one-dimensional loadings (Chapter 8), the induced pore water pressure is initially equal to the mag-
nitude of the applied vertical stress. In three-dimensional or triaxial-type loadings, pore water pressures are 
also induced, but the actual magnitude will depend on the soil type and its stress history. Of course, the rate 
of loading as well as the soil type determines whether we-have drained or undrained loading.' 
· 
It is often necessary in engineering practice to be able to estimate just how much excess pore 
water pressure develops in undrained loading due to a given set of stress changes. Note that these 
stress changes are in terms of total stresses, and they can be either hydrostatic (equal all~around) or 
' ; , 
12.17 Introduction to Pore Pressure Parameters 
607 
nonhydrostatic (shear). Because we are interested in how the pore water pressure !:lu responds to 
these changes in total stress, !:lu1, !:lu2 , and !:lu3, it is convenient to express these changes in terms of 
pore pressure coefficients or parameters, which were first introduced in 1954 byPro f. A. W. Skempton 
of Imperial College in England. 
· · 
. . . . ·. 
· 
In general, we can visualize the soil mass as a compressible soil skeleton with air imd water in the 
· voids. If we increase the principal stresses actmg on a soil element, as in the. triaxial test, for example, then 
· . we will obtain a decrease in volume of the element and an increase in pore pressure. Refer again to 
Fig.l2.36, which represents the stress conditions in the UU test. Consider what happens when we apply the 
hydrostatic cell pressure u c and prevent any drainage from occurring. If the soil is 100% saturated, then we 
· will obtain a change in pore pressure t:.u· (= ~~c in Fig.12.36),numerically equal to the change in cell pres-
. sure !:lu c C= (}' c in Fig.12.36) we just applied. In other words, the ratio !:lui !:lu c equals 1. If the soil were less 
than 100% saturated, then the ratio of the induced !:lu due to the increase in cell pressure !!.uc would be 
less than 1. It can be shown (see Appendix B.3 for details) that this ratio for the ordinary. triaxial test is 
' • 
• ' ~ I ;, • 
• 
' 
• 
!:lu 
1 · . ·' 
·-= 
=B· 
!:lu3 
· nC 
· 
1+-v 
' · .: Csk ., 
(12;15) 
where !:lu3 = !:luc, 
. n = porosity, 
. 
. 
cv' =.compressibility of the voids, and 
· Csk = compressibility of the soil skeleton . 
. For convenience, Professor Skempton called this ratio B. The pore pressure. parameter B expresses 
th~ increase in' por~ pres~ure in undrained loadirig due to the i~c~eas(_! in hydrostaticor'<;ell pressure. 
If the soil is completely saturated with water, then Cv = Cw, and for most soils CJCsk ~ 0, since 
the compressibility. of water Cw is so small compared with· the compressibility of the soil skeleton. 
Therefore, for saturated soils, B = 1. If the soil is dry, then the ratio of CJCsk approaches infinity, since 
the compressibility of air is vastly greater than the soil structure; hence B = 0 for dry soils. Partially 
saturated soils have values of B ranging between 0 and 1. Because in general both Cv arid Csk are non-
'linear for soils, the relationship between B and the degn!e of saturation Sis also nonlinear, as shown in 
Fig. 12.64. This· relationship will-depend on the soil type'arid stress level, arid the exact relationship will 
have to be determined experimentally. 
Equation (12.15) is very useful in the triaxial testing to determine if the test specimen is satu-
rated. The pore pressure response to a small change in cell press~re is measured, and Bis calculated. 
If B = 1·or nearly so; then for soft clays the test specimen is saturated; However, if the soil skeleton is 
relatively stiff, then it is possible to have Bless than 1 and still haveS = 100% (see Table 12.8). This 
condition is possible because as C.k: gets smaller (a more rigid soil skeleton), the ratio CwiCsk becomes 
· larger; thus B decreases. Wissa (1969) arid Black and Lee (1973) 'suggest procedures to increase satu-
ration and thereby increase the reliability of pore'pressure 'measurements in undrained tests. 
Now let's apply a stress difference or a shear stress to our soil sample (see Fig.12.36 again for the 
UU test). In this case, a pore pressure !:lu is induced in the specimen due to the change in stress dif-
ference !:lu = !:lu1 -
!:lu3, or we can write, as Prof.Skempton did for triaxial compression conditions 
( !:luz = !:lu3), 
. , . , 
(12.16) 
• : . 
I 
' 
; 
' ' 
' 
; ; " • ,: 
o 
• 
.' • 
• ~ 
; 
' ' 
< 
; 
• 
\ 
; 
•' ; -; • 
• ; I 
' 
' " ; 
, • 
. \ 
' 
' :· 
'• , • ' . 1 • 
if.the soil skeleton is elastic. Since soils in general are not elastic materials, the coefficient for the 
.· 'p~incipal stress differeric:e'term is not %.S6 Skempton used instead the symbol A for this coefficient. 
' 
•. , 
• 
• 
,. 
! 
_., •• 
'·.·.• 
• 
' 
., 
-
._, 
., 
' 
' 
• 
' 
608 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear. Strength of Soils and Rock 
' .. 1.0 .----,----,---,----,,----,---..,-,.,---,--,---,----,-----,---,---.,..,.---., 
\. 
Data: 
· 
o Various soils 
Compacte'd clayey sllt(th,eoretical) · 
· o 1~ 
0 8 
_ 
• Kaolinite 
(pd)max;, 1151b/ft3, Csk = 14-28 X 10-5. in~/lb 
•.. ~~~7 
· 
TIT 
co 
!:;. 
Ottaw~, sa~d 
u0 = 8o psi 
1~1,' 1 
Qj' 
• 
• Wet} 
/II/ 
a; 
Compacted till 
. { a3 = 150 
· 
o 1 1 1 1 
~ . 0.6 _ o----o Dry 
~a3 = 15 ps1 
a = 50 
_________ ------/-r~:{/_,_ 
ca· 
. 
3 
: 
o . 
~~ /v I 
o., 
Ottawa sand (theoretical): 
10 
. { ~a3 = 15 
~~ ~~ / 
/ 
~ 
a3 = 
psi 
~ 
~ 
~ 
1 
~· 
0,=100%,a3c=20psi 
• 
' 
~a3 =60 
e,.."' :, ... ~~~~ 
1 
0 
~ 
U0 = 150, ~a3 = 100 PSI 
" 
'• ~ • 
...... : .. ..,
1 
.... .-. 
,.. ... 
({ " 
U0 = 15, ~a3 = 20 psi 
0--:::-:.-,..,--:, ............ -;_ 
.. .. 
----==--~-- ........ j........ 
0 
0.2 -------t-----:_-J::-:-.: ,:-:-; _---=-= =-=----: _-;:.r::-;;.-----"' --.:-;-~---~---------- -- ------~--- ·-
===r====-~---
- ---±---
~------
:::T:~::l::::: .. --
--~----ol 
__ ~::,o 
050 
55 
60 
65 
70 
~::,..I 
75 
80 
Degree of saturation, S (%) 
85 
90 
95 
FIGURE 12.64 The pore pressure parameter Bas a function of the degree of sat~ra.tion for several soils 
(after Black and Lee, 1973). 
· · 
· 
· 
·'·'' 
TABLE 12.8 Theoretical B-Values' for Differe~t Soils at Complete or Nearly C~mplete Saturation 
. 
,··. 
: 
' 
' 
' 
100 
Soil Type 
s,; 100% 
s = 99% 
Soft, normally consolidated clays 
Compacted silts and clays; lightly overconsolidated clays 
Overconsolidated stiff clays; sands at _most densities 
Very dense sands; very stiff clays at high confining pressures 
After Black and Lee (1973) . 
0.9998 
0.9988 
0.9877 . 
0.9130 
0.986 
0.930 
0.51 
: 
0.10 
. . -.• Now we can combine Eqs. (12.15) and (12.16) to take into account the two components of pore pressure: 
' . (1) that due to change in average or mean stress and (2) th~t due to change in shear' stress, or 
Au;, B[Aa3+ 'A(Aa1 - Aa3)] 
(12.17) 
Equation (12.17) is the .well~knownSkempton equation for relating the induced pore pressure to the 
changes in tatalstressin undrained loading. If B =,1 and S = 100%, then we normally write Eq. (12.17) as 
·Au = Aa3 + A(Aa1 - Aa3) 
(12.18) 
Sometime"s it is convenient to write Eq. (12.18) as 
Au = B Aa3 + A(Aa1 - Aa3) 
(12.19) 
where A= BA. 
Equations (12.17) through (12.19) are derived iri detail in Appendix B.3. There we show that these 
equations are true for both triaxial compression ( Aa2 = Aa3) and triaxial extension ( Aa2 = Aa1) con-
ditions, although the specific value of A is dependent on the stress path, as discussed in Sec.13.3. 
Like the parameter B, the parameter A also is not a constant; it must be determined for each soil and 
stress path. The parameter A is very dependent on the strain, the magnitude of a 2 , the overconsolidation 
12.1 T ·rntroduction to Pore Pressure Parameters 
609 
TABLE 12.9 Values of A1 for Vadous Soil Types 
Type of Clay· 
· Highly sensitive clays 
Normally consolidated clays 
Compacted sandy clays 
. Lightly overconsolidated clays. • 
Compacted clay-gravels 
· Heavily ov~rconsolidated clays 
After Skempton (i954). 
' +3/4 to+1 1/z 
+lfz to +1 
+ 1/4 to+% 
0 to +lfz 
-%to+% 
- 1/z to 0 
' 
·'·' 
ratio, anisotropy, and-for natural clays tested in the laboratory-on sample disturbance. Table 12.9 
relates the type of clay to different values of the A parameter at" failure, At in triaxial compression. Of 
course, A can be calculated for the stress conditions at any strain up to failure, as well as at failure. 
The Skemptori pore pressure coefficients are most useful in engineering· practice, since they enable 
us to predict the induced pore pressure if ,we know or can estimate the change in the total stresses. In the 
field, the Skempton equations are used, for example, when we want to estimate the pore pressure 
response during undrained loadings that might be applied by a highway embankment constructed on a 
very soft clay foundation. Typically, the embankment is constructed more rapidly than the excess pore 
water pressure can dissipate, and thus we assume that undrained conditions apply. The increase in excess 
pore pressure can result in instability if the pore pressure gets too high. Consequently, it is important to 
be able to estimate just how high the pore pressures are likely to get and thereby obtain some idea of how 
., close to failure the embankment might be. If it is too high, stage construction might be utilized; then field 
monitoring of the pore pressures would be advisable. Skempton's parameters have also been used for the 
design and construction control of compacted earthfill dams.· • 
Example 12.13 
.Given: 
The CUtest of Example 12~9. 
Required: 
At. 
Solution: Use Eq. (12.17). Since pore pressures were measured, the specimen must have been 
saturated. Thus assume B = 1. So A at failure is 
' 
' 
In an ordinary triaxial compression test, ~o-3 = 0 since the cell pressure is held constant throughout 
the test. From Example 12.9, ~o-lf = ( o-1 -
o-3)t = 100 kPa and ~ut = 88 kPa. Therefore 
. •.· 
. 88 
.· 
_At= 100 = 0.88 
From Table 12.9 you can see that the clay was probably somewhat ~ensitive ... 
610 
Chapter12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
PROBLEMS 
' 
. 
' 
' 
. 
· 12.1 A granular material is ~bserved being dumped from a conveyor belt. It f~rms a conical pile with about the 
same slope angle, 1.8 horizontal to 1 vertical. What is the angle of internal friction of this material? 
12.2 The bulb in the device shown in Fig. Ex. 12.1 is filled with a medium rounded sand in the densest state possi-
ble. Every effort is made to keep the sand saturated. A transparent tube allows observation of the water level 
in the battery filler. What will happen to the water level, if anything, as the bulb is squeezed very hard? Why? 
Would it matter if the sand were loose? Explain: 
12.3 Derive Eq. (12.3). Start by using Eq. (12.1), and then draw the Mohr circle and Mohr-Coulomb envelope at 
failure for a sand. · 
12.4 A direct shear test was conducted on a fairly dense sample of Franklin Falls sand from New Hampshire. The 
initial void ratio was 0.668. The shear box was 76 mm square, and initially the height of the specimen was 
11 mm. The following data were collected during shear. Compute the data needed and plot the usual curves 
for this type of test. 
Time Elapsed 
Vertical 
Horizontal 
Thickness 
Horizontal 
(min) 
Load (kN) 
Displacement (mm) 
: Change (mm) 
Load (N) 
0 
2.25 
0.00 
0.00 
0 
0.5 
(constant) 
O.D7 . 
-0.02 
356 
1 
0.26 
--'0.04 
721 
2 
0.45 
..:.o.os' 
1014 
3 
. : 0.97 
. -O.D3 
1428 
4 
1.71 
0.03 
1655 
5 
2.51 
O.D7 
1770 
6 
. 3.40 
0.09 
1744 
After Taylor (1948); 
12.5 A conventional triaxial compression test was co~ducted on a sample of dense sand from Ft. Peck Dam, Montana. 
The initial area of the test specimen was 10 cm2 and its initial height was 70 mm. Initial void ratio was 0.605. The 
following data were observed during shear. First, calculate the average area of the specimen, assuming it is a right 
. circular cylinder at all times during the test. Then make the calculations necessary to plot the axial stress versus 
axial strain and volumetric-strain-versus-axial-strain curves for this test. Assuming c' = 0, what is ifJ'? 
Strain Dial 
Time 
Chamber 
(giving AH) · 
Buret 
Axial Load 
Elapsed 
Pressure 
.. (giving AV) 
sec 
kPa (psi) 
mm 
(W:-3 in.) 
cc 
N 
(lbf) 
0 
206.8 
5.08 
(200) 
2.00 
0 
(0) 
(30) 
5.21 
(205) 
1.91 
182 
(41) 
5.33 
(210) 
1.86 
374 
(84) 
45 
5.69 
(224) 
1.92 
641 
(144) 
6.10 
(240) 
2.13 . 
787 
(177) 
90 
7.06 
(278) 
2.80 
921· 
(207) 
8.10 
(319) 
3.66 
970 
(218) 
9.12 
(359) 
4.56 
983 
(221) 
240 
10.21 
(402) 
5.40 
970 
(218) 
12.90 
(508) 
7.30 
898 
(202) 
460 
15.32 
(603) 
8.09 
814 
(183) 
After Taylor (1948). 
12.6 The results of two CD triaxial tests at different confining pressures on a medium dense, cohesionless sand 
are summarized in the table below. The void ratios of both specimens were approximately the same at the 
start of the test. Plot on one set of axes the principal stress difference versus axial strain and volumetric strain 
[Eq. (12.4)] versus axial strain for both tests. Estimate the iriiti.al tangent modulus of deformation, the "50%" 
secant modulus, and the strain at failure for each of these tests. 
Problems 
611 
· Test No.2 (u, = 3000 kPa) 
Axial 
(u1 '- u 3) 
Volumetric 
Strain(%) 
(kPa) 
• ... •Strain (%) 
0 
0 
0 
'0.82 
'2090 
-0.68 
2.50 
4290 
-1.80 
'4.24 
5810 
-2.71 
6.00 
6950 
-3.36 
7.76 
7760 
-3.88 
. 9.56 
8350' 
-4.27 
11.4 
8710 
-4.53 
13.2 
8980 
-4.71 
14.9 
9120 
-4.84 
16.8 
9140 
-4.92 
. 18.6 
9100 
-4.96 
'.9090 
-5.01 
12.7 .For the two tests of Problem 12.6, determine the angle of internal fri~tion'or'the sand at (a) peak compressive 
strength; (b) at ultimate compressive strength, and (c) at 5.5%axial strain. Comments? 
12.8 ·.A sand is hydr~staticallyconsolidated in a triaxial test apparatus to ~5o kPa andtlten sh~ar~d with the drainage 
valves open. At failure, ( u 1 - u 3) is 1121 kPa. Determine the major and minor principal stresses at failure and 
the angle of shearing resistance. Plot the Mohr diagram. (This problem should be followed by the next one.) 
12.9 The same sand as in Problem 12.8 is tested in a direct shear apparatusunder a normal pressure of 390 kPa. 
The specimen fails when a shear stress of 260 kPa is reached. Determine the major and minor principal 
stresses at failure and the angle of shearing resistance. Plot the Mohr diagram. Explain the differences, if any, 
of these values with those obtained in, the preceding problem: 
12.10 Indicate the orientations of the major principal stress, the minor principal stress, and the failure plane of the 
tests in Problems 12.8 and 12.9. 
· 
· 
12.11 A granular soil is tested in direct shear under. a normal stress of 350 kPa. The size of the specimen is 7.62 em 
in diameter. If the soil to be tested is a de rise sand with an angle of internal friction of38°, detennine the size 
of the force transducer,required to mea~ure the shear force with a factor of safety of 2 (that is, the capacity 
• '.of the. transducer should be twice that required to shear' the sand). '. . 
. 
12.12 The stresses induced by a surface load on aloose horizontal sand layer werefound to be uv = 5.13 kPa, 
· r v · = 1.47 kPa, ;;.h = 3.22 kPa, rh. = :...:lA7 kPa. By means of Mohr circles,' determine if such a state of stress 
'is safe. Use Eq: (11.11) for t~e definition of factor of safety." 
' · · 
12.13 ' Ifthb ~arne stress conditions'as in Problem fZ.12 act on. a very dense gravelly sand, is such a state safe against 
failure? 
' · 
· · · · · 
· 
· · · 
· ' 
' · 
· 
· · · ' 
12.14 The effective normal stresses acting on the horizodtal and vertic,al planes in a siity gravel soil are 1.77 MPa 
' and 2.95 MPa, respectively. The shear stress on these planes is ±0.59 MPa. For these conditions, what are the 
magnitude and direction of the principal stresses? Is this a state of failure?. 
12.15 A specimen of dense sand t~sted in a triaxl~l CD test failed along a well-defined failure plane at an angle of 
62° with the horizontal. Find the effective confining pressure of the test if the principal stress difference at 
failure was 115 kPa. 
12.16 . A dry loose sand is tested in a vacuum triaxial test in which the pore air pressure of the specimen is lowered 
below gage pressure to within about 95% of -;'1 atm. Estimate the principal stress difference and the major 
principal stress ratio at failure. 
12.17 For the data shown in Fig.12.5(a), what is (a) the principal stress difference and (b) the principal stress ratio 
at an axial strain of 12% for an effective confining pressure of 1.3 MPa? 
12.18 For the conditions given in Problem 12.17, plot the Mohr circle." 
12.19. Do Problems 12.17 and 12.18 for the data shown in Fig. 12.6(a). 
612 
Chapter 12 
An Introduction to Shear Strength of Soils and Rock 
12.20 A specimen of Sacramento River sand has a crlti~~l confini~g pressure of 1000 kPa. If the specimen is tested 
at an effective confining pressure of 600 kPa, describe its behavior in drained shear. Show results in the form 
of unsealed Mohr circles. 
'12.21 For the sand of Problem 12.20, describe the behavior in drained shear in a triaxial test if the effective confin-
12.22 
12.23 
12.24 
12.25 
12.26 
12.27 
ing pressure is 1300 kPa. 
, · 
· 
A drained triaxial test is performed on a sand with u3c = u3t = 450 kPa. At failure, r max = 594 kPa. Find 
u1t, (ul :... u3)t, and cf/ .. 
Assume the sand of Problem 12.22 is Sacramento River sand at a void ratio of 0.6. If the initial volume of the 
specimen was 62 cm3, what change in volume would you expect during shear? 
A silty sand is tested consolidated-drained in a triaxial cell where both principal stresses at the start of the 
test were 625 kPa. If the total axial stress at failure is 2.04 MPa while the horizontal pressure remains con-
. stant, compute the angle of shearing resistance and the theoretical orientation of the failure plane with 
respect to the horizontal. 
A specimen of sand failed when ( u 1 -
u 3) was 750 kPa. If the hydrostatic consolidation stress was 250 kPa, 
comput.e the angle of shearing resistance of the sand. What else can you say about the sand? 
A specimen of sand at the field density is known to have a ( u 1/u3)m.ax of 3.8. If such a specimen is hydrostat-
ically consolidated to 1180 kPa in a triaxial test apparatus, at what effective confining pressure u3t will the 
specimen fail if the vertical stress is held constant? (This is a lateral extension test.) 
Two .CD triaxial tests are conducted on identical specimens of the same sand .. Both specimens are initially 
consolidated hydrostatically' to 50 kPa; then each specimen is loaded as shown in Fig. P12.27. Specimen A 
failed when the ~pplied ·Au1 was 180 kPa. Make the necessary calculations to (a) plot the Mohr circles at 
·failure for both tests, and (b) determine cf>' for the sand. (After C.W. Lovell.). 
. 
' 
• 
,. 
• 
; 
., 
1 
Initial conditions:. 
At failure: 
A 
' B 
· ~ M 1 = 180 kPa 
~ Llu1 = illu3 
~ 50 kPa 
· ~ 50 kPa 
~0 
.·· 
., 
. 
-+-:+-
FIGURE P12.27 D.... 
D· ..... 
50 
50 
LJ7o i3 = ia~; D
o 
so :. -1lu3 
12.28 Plot a graph of uj/;3, ~ersu~ cf>'. (Aren't yoti ~orry you didn't do this sooner?Itwould have been helpful for 
solving some of these problems.) What range of v.alues of cf>' should be used? 
12.29 Estimate the shear strength pani~eters of a fi~e (beach) sand (SP): Estimate the 'minimum and maximum 
void ratios. 
· ' 
· 
· 
· 
· 
12.30 A subrounded to subangular s~nd has a D10 of about 0.1 mrri ~nd a i.miformity coefficient of 3. The angle of 
shearing resistance measured in the direct shear test was 47°. Is this reasonable? Why or why not? 
12.31 Estimate the cf>' values for (a) a well-gn\ded sandy gravel (GW) at a density of 1.9 Mg/~3
; (b) a poorly graded 
silty sand with a field density of 1.70 Mglm\(c) 1m SW material at 100% relative density; and (d) a poorly 
graded gravel with an in situ void ratio of 0.5. 
12.32 The results of a seri~s of CD .triaxial tests on a medium dense, cohesionless sand are s~mmarized in the 
table below. The void ;atios for all the test specimens were approximately the same at tlie start of the, test. 
Plot the strength cirCles and draw the Mohr failure envelope for this series of tests. What angle of internal 
friction should be used in solvingstability)Jroblems in which the range of normal stresses is (a) 0-500 kPa; 
(b)l000-1500kPa;(c)3-6MPa;and(d)0-6MPa? 
· 
· ., 
Test No. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Confining Pressure (kPa) , , 
120 
480 
1196 
2256 
3588 < 
3568 
After A. Casagrande. 
Compressive Strength (kPa) 
576 
2240 
'4896 
8460 
12240 
15 228' 
Problems 
613 
12.33 Estimate the values of the coefficient of earth pressure at rest, K 0 , for the four soils of Problem 12.31. 
12.34 if the sands of Problem 12.33 had been preloaded, would your estimate of K 0 be any different? If so, would 
it be higher or lower? Why? 
· 
12.35 Estimate K 0 for sands 1, 4, 5, 6, 8~ and 1~ in Table 12.1 for relative densities of 40% and 85%. 
12.36 Forfuture reference, place a scale of K 0 on the ordinate ofFig.12.14(b). You should probably also indicate a 
range of values of K 0 • 
12.37 We stated in Secs.11.5 and 12.11.1 that the unconsolidated-drained test was meaningless because it could not be 
properly interpreted. Why is this so? Discuss in terms of laboratory tests as well as possible practical applications. 
12.38 A CD axial compression triaxial test on a normally consolidated clay failed along a clearly defined failure 
plane of 54°. The cell pressure during the test was 220 kPa. Estimate rf>', the maximum uiluj, and the princi-
pal stress difference at failure.: 
12.39 An unconfined compression test is performed on a dens~ silt. Previous drained triaxial tests on similar sam-
ples of the silt gave rf>' = 32°. If the unconfined compressive strength was 420 kPa, estimate the height of 
capillary rise in this soil above the ground water table. (Hint: Find the effective confining pressure acting on 
the specimen. Draw elements similar to Fig.12.40.) 
· 
· , .. 
· 
12.40 Estimate the in situ value of K 0 of the silt of Problem 12.50. Is this value reasonable in terms of the correla-
tion shown in Fig. 11.57? 
12.41 Another specimen of the dense silt of Problem 12.39 is tested in unconfined compression. Assume the aver-
age pore size of the silt is 2 j.Lm and estimate the compressive strength of the sample. 
12.42 What would happen if the specimen of Problem 12.39 were prepared in a loose state, then sheared? What 
would be its unconfined compressive strength? 
12.43 The results of unconfined compression tests on a sample of clay in both the undisturbed and remolded states 
are summarized below. Determine the compressive strength, the initial tangent modulu's of deformation, and 
the secant modulus of deformation at 50% of the compressive strength for both the undisturbed and 
remolded specimens.·D~termhie the sensitivity of the day; For the soh.ition of a 
pr~ctical stability problem 
. involving this clay iri the undisturbed state, whatshear 'strength would you use if no change in water content 
,occurs during construction? (After A. Casagrande:). 
. 
' . 
. 
... 
1 
31· 
'1 ·" 
7'· 
,, 
2 .. 
58 
2: 
10 
,•!' 
,,.'1 ,,: ,4, 
104. 
4'' 
22 
6 
126. 
,,6 
,. 
30 
8 
l42 
.8 
38. 
12 
0 152 
12 
45 
16 
-·- 153 
16 
47 
20 
:' 153 
20 
48 
12.44 (a) Show that Eq; (i2.11)(in Example 12.10)is correct for' undrained triaxial or unconfined compression 
tests. (b) Derive a similar 'expression for· the area of the specimen iri a drained triaxial test. [Hint: 
As=f(A
0 ,H0,e,.iV)}·· 
. 
. 
. 
. , ... ' 
12.45 For the data shown in Fig: 8.5, estimate the unconfined compressive'stitmgth ~nd the sensitivity of this soil. 
'JYpicalvalues for the.clay an; LL = 88, PL·= 43, and PI·= 45. 
' 
13.1 
614 
CHAPTER 
1 3 
A<;tvanced Topics. in Shear. 
' 
' 
' 
' 
I_ 
'" 
.< 
' 
' 
Strength of Soils and Rocks 
. 
' 
-, 
·', 
-
.·. 
INTRODUCTION 
,. 
' 
.;;c 
·•,' 
>_,-: 
. ' In this chapter we build on shear strength basics introduced in Chapters i1 and 12, presenting additional 
information and advanced topics. on the stress~deformation and shear strength properties of soils and 
' rocks. We begin with a detailed discussion'of stress p~ths and their use in engineering'practice. Then we 
present a brief introduction to critical state soil mechanics and discuss other aspects of the constitutive 
(stress-strain) behavior and modulus of soils. Next we look at the fundamentals of the drained, undrained, 
and the plane strain behavior of saturated sands. As a transitioninto fine gndned soils, the dynamic behav-
ior, inducting strain rate effects, as well as the residual shear stn;rigth' of both sands and clays are summa-
rized. Next we discuss some special topics on the stress-deformation and shear strength of cohesive soils, 
including Hvorslev strength parameters, the T1 !a~0 ratio, Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, consolidation 
methods to overcome sampling disturbance, strength anisotropy, and the plane strain strength of clays. We 
conclude with an introduction to the strength of unsaturated soils arid failure theories for rocks. 
The following notation is used in this chapter. 
Symbol 
Dimension 
Unit 
Definition 
a 
-
-
.Henkel's pore pressure parameter- Eq. (13.15) 
a 
· ML-1T-2 · 
kPa 
Cohesion intercept in stress path space- Eq. (13.6) 
:. c~ ·'" ... 
ML-1r
2 
kPa, 
Hvorslev effective "cohesion" parameter 
.Ed''··· 
. ML-1T-:.Z .· 
kPa 
. ·Drained modulus'. 
E;or£1 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
Initial or initial tangent modulus 
.Eu 
ML;-1T:-:2 
.kPa 
·Undrained modulus 
Eur 
ML-1T-2 
·.:kPa. :: 
Unlmid-reload modulus- Eq. (13.27) .. 
ESP 
-
-
Effective stress path 
Gmax 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
Maximum (small-strain) shear modulus- Eq. (13.24) 
Kb 
ML-1T-2 
kPa 
Bulk modulus - Eq. (13.28) 
Kt 
-
-
Stress ratio at failure - Eq. (13.3) 
Kur 
ML-1T-:-2 
kPa 
Unload-reload modulus- Eq. (13.27) 
m 
-
-
Empirical constant- Eqs. (13.28) and (13.77) 
(Continued) 
Symbol 
n 
N 
p 
q 
Rt 
s s 
Sres 
SR0 
T 
TSP 
, Uti 
v.: s 
. :.V w 
a, 
/3 
.t:.H 
a ... 
v. 
PSRo· 
}!c.,·, 
Uoct 
>ut 
u;,. ,. 
Ups, 
'cT~ .. 
' 
( uy )hydro~tatic 
Te 
Toct 
TR 
cfJb 
cP!L 
c/Jk · 
g ..• 
"' 
' 
X 
Dimension 
MLT-2 
ML-ly:-2 
ML-l'f-2 
T-1 
MLT:"2 · 
ML-ly:-2 
. ML-1T-2 
.. ·LT~1 
. 
L 
Unit 
N 
kPa 
kPa 
% 
(%/hr) 
kPa 
m!s.: 
. kPa 
m 
·(degree) 
, .. ,(%) 
, ·:- : 
. '(degree) 
ML-:l'f-2 
ML_:1T.:.2· 
, M:J:.,-1T::.2 
ML-1T-2 
ML:-ly:-2 
ML-1T-2 . 
ML::..1r:_2 
• M{-1T::.2 ; 
ML::.l'f-2 
r 
~, 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
.. kPa 
· kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
kPa 
·.' ( d7gree) 
(degree) 
(degree) 
·· ' (degree) 
·(degree) 
·(degree) 
(degree) 
13.1 
Introduction 
615 
Definition 
Dimensionless constant- (Eq.13.27) 
Normill force- Eq. (13~30) · 
· 
(uv + uv)/2- Eq. (13.2) 
(a~:-uv)I2-.Eq~·(l3.1),. ,.. 
.. 
Model parameter failure ratio- Eq. (13.29) 
Empirical constant- Eq. (13.77) 
Undrained strength ratio, T1 1u~, for normally 
consolidated clay- Eq. (13.53) 
Residual degree of saturation 
Reference axial strain rate · 
Shear force- Eq. (13.30) or surface tension- Eq. (13.61) 
Total stress path 
. :·Air pressure·. c· · 
' : 
Shear wave velocity- Eq. (13.24) 
Specific .volume 
Strain energy dissipated during one cycle of loading 
~ Eq. (13.66) ·.· .. 
.... ' t· 
· Slope of line of con~tant stress ratio K for K < K1 
, - Eq. (13.4) , · . · . 
.. 
·. 
; Vertical expansion 
. 
Angle between direction of deposition and major 
principal stressloading , · 
, Major, intermediate; and minor principal strains 
Deviatoric component 
Damping ratio 
Dilation angle 
Change in undrained strength per log cycle change in 
strain rate- Eq. (13.60) 
Uniaxial compressive strength of rock- Eq. (13.77) 
Octahedral normal stress - Eq. (13.16). 
Tensile strength- Eq. (13.76) 
' 
Mean principal effective stress- Eq. (13.72) 
Perfect sampling effective stress - Eq. (13.23) 
Residual effective stress 
· 
· 
· 
Yielp stress for hydrostatically consolidated specimens 
Expansion shear stress 
Octahedral shear stress- Eq. (13.17) 
Angle representing increase' in shear strength due to 
suction- Eq. (13.63) 
·. 
' 
Hvorslev effective friction parameter 
Instantaneous friction angle ~ Eq. (13.80) 
·Angle of internal friction from plane strain tests and 
triaxial tests, respectively- Eq. (13.37) 
• · Friction angle between mineral surfaces (Table 13.5) 
•;Hydrostatic component · 
· Slope of Kt line - Eq. (13.6) 
·: 
Matric suction parameter- Eq. (13.62) 
616 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
13.2 
STRESS PATHS 
As you know from Chapter 11, states of stress at a point in equilibrium can be represented by a Mohr 
circle in a '-r-o- coordinate system. Sometimes it is convenient to represent that state of stress by a stress 
point; which has the'coordinates (o-1 -
o-3)/2 and (o-1 + o-3)/2, as shown in Fig.13.1. For many situa-
tions in geotechnical engineering, we (lSSume o-1 and o-3 act on vertical and horizontal planes, so the 
coordinates of the stress point become ( o-v - o-h)/2 and ( o-v + o-h)/2, or simply q and p, respectively;. or 
O"v- O"h 
(13.1) 
q= 
2 
O"v + o-h 
(13.2) 
p= 
2 
Both q and p could, of course, be defined in terms of the principal stresses. By convention, q is 
considered positive when o-v > o-h; otherwise it is negative. 
We often want to show successive states of stress that a test specimen or a typical element in the 
field undergoes during loading or unloading. A diagram showing the successive states with a series of 
Mohr circles could be used [Fig; 13.2(a)], but it might be confusing, especially if the stress path were 
complicated. It is simpler to show only the locus of the stress points. This locus, called the stress path, is 
plotted on what we call ap-q diagram [Fig.13.2(b)]. Note that bothp and q could be defined in terms 
of either total stresses or effective stresses. As before, a prime mark is used to indicate· effective 
stresses. So from Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2) and the effective stress equation [Eq. (6.8)] we know that q' = q 
while p' = p - u, where u is the excess hydrostatic or pore water pressure . 
. Although the concept of a stress path has been around for a long time, Prof. T. W. Lambe of M.I.T. 
demonstrated its usefulness as a teaching device (Lm,nbe and Whitman, 1969) and developed the method 
into a practical engineering tool for the solution of stability and deformation problems (Lambe, 1964 and 
1967; Lambe and Marr, 1979). Very often in geotechnical engineering practice, if you understand the com-
T 
·u1- u3 
-2-
u3 
., 
: 
plete stress path of your problem, you are 
u1 + u3 
-2-
u1 
well along the way toward the solution. 
A simple case to illustrate stress paths is 
the common triaxial test in which o-3 remains 
fixed as we increase o-1• Some Mohr circles for 
this test are shown in Fig. 13.2(a) along with 
· their stress points. The corresponding stress 
u 
' path shown in Fig. 13.2(b) is a straight line at 
an angle of 45° from the horizontal, because 
the stress point represents the state of stress 
FIGURE 13.1 
A Mohr circle of stress and corresponding 
· on the plane oriented 45° from the principal 
pl~nes. (Note that this is the plane' of maxi-
, mum shear stress.) 
stress point. 
T 
u 1 increasing 
q 
' 
Some examples of stress paths are 
shown in Figs. 13.3 and 13.4. In Fig. 13.3 the 
initial conditions are o-v = o-h, an equal-all-
around or hydrostatic state of stress. Those 
in Fig. 13.4, where the initial vertical stress is 
not the same as the initial horizontal stress, 
u3 
u 
p . represent a nonhydrostatic' st<ite of stress. 
,· (a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.2 (a) Successive Mohr circles; (b) stress path 
for constant u 3 and increasing u 1 (after Lambe and 
Whitman, 1969). 
You should verify that each stress path in 
Figs.13.3 and 13.4 has in fact the direction as. 
indicated· in the figures. We will show you 
how to do this in Example 13.1. 
1. Initial conditions: 
uv = uh (hydrostatic compression) 
2. During loading (or unloading) 
3. Stress paths · 
_q 
-q 
Path A: iluh = ilu v 
8: tluh = illuv 
C: tluh = 0, iluv increases 
D:iluh= -tluv 
F 
£: iluh decreases, ilu v =:o 0 · 
" 
' 
·" 
' 
' 
·' 
F: iluh increases, ilu v decreases 
FIGURE 13.3 Different stress paths for initially hydrostatic stres~c?nditions (after Lambe and Whitman, 1969). 
1. Initial conditions: 
uv * uh * 0 (nonhydrostatic compression) 
;,,·, 
2. During loading (or unloading) 
3. Stress paths 
q 
c 
-q 
~. 
·.Path A: ilu.; increases, iluh ,;, 0 
8: ilu v increases, ilu h decreases 
,C: ilu v. d~creases; ilu h = 0 
D: ilu v decreases, iluh increases 
FIGURE 13.4 Different stress paths for initially non hydrostatic stress conditions (after Lambe and Whitman, 
1969). 
617 
618 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Example 13.1 
Given: 
· Figures 13.3 and 13.4. 
Required: 
Ve~ify that stress paths A, B, and C of Fig. 13.3 and A and D of Fig. 13.4:are correct as shown. 
" 
Solution: The initial conditions for all stress paths in Fig. 13.3 are Po = (a v + ah)/2 = a v = ah and 
q0 = 0. Final conditions are [Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2)]. 
(av + .:lav)- (ah + .:lah) 
. qf ~ 
2 
(a~+ .:lav) + (dh + .:lah) 
Pt= 
2 
For stress path A, .:la v ~ .:la v; so 
a v + .:la v -
a v -
.:la v 
qf = 
2 
= 0 
av + •.:lav + av + .:lav = av + .:lav 
Pt = 
2 
Thus the stress path A moves out on the p-axis by an amount .:lav = .:lah. 
For stress path B, ~ah = 1/z .:la v; so 
· av + .:lav- av- 1/z.:lav 
1 
qf = 
,.., 
= 4.:lav 
a v + .:lei v + a v + 1/z .:la v 
3. •·· · 
Pt = 
2 
= av + 4.:lav 
These values are the (p, q) coordinates of the end of stress path B. Thus the q and p both increase by an 
amount .:lq = 3f4 .:la v and .:l p = % .:la v, which means that the stress path has a slope of 1/3 or is 
inclined at 18.4°, as shown in Fig.13.3. 
· · 
For stress path C, .:lah. = 0 and .:la v increases by some amount. 
av + .:lav- av = .!.:lav 
qf = 
2 . 
. 2 
1 
-
av + .:lav + av = av +_Z.:lav 
Pt-
.2 . 
13.2 Stress Paths 
619 
So ll.q = 1/z ll.cr v and !:,. p = 1/z ll.cr v ~Therefore the slope of the stress path must be 1 or inclined at 45°. 
This solution holds also for stress path A in Fig.13.4. Here initial conditions.are nonhydrostatic, so 
The final coordinates for path A are 
So !J.q ~ 1/2 ll.cr v and !J.p = 1/2 ll.crv, which is the same as for stress path C in Fig.13.3. 
For stress path Din Fig.13.4, ll.crv decreases while ll.crhincreases. Initial (p0 , q0 ) are the same as 
. path .A i~ this figure, while the final values of (Pt• qf) are 
.. 
. 
. (crv- ll.crv) -
(crh + ll.crj,) 
qf = 
2 
So· 
and 
The actual slope of the stress path depends on the relative magnitudes of ll.cr v and ll.ah, but in general 
it trends down and out, as shown in Fig. 13.4. 
It is often convenient to consider stress ratios. In Chapter 6 we defined a lateral stress ratio K, 
which is the ratio of horizontal to vertical stress, 
· 
· 
(6.18) 
In terms of effective stresses, this ratio is 
. (6.19) 
where Ko is called the coefficient of lateral earth pressure at re~t for conditions of no lateral strain. 
Finally, we can define a ratio K 1 for the stress ratio at failure: 
620 
Chapter 13 · 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
. where ui.r = the horizontal effective stress at failure, and .. 
· u~j' = the vertical effective stress at failure: 
Usually K 1 is defined in terms of effective stresses, but it could also be expressed in terms of total 
stresses. Constant stress ratios appear as straight lines on a p-q diagram (Fig. 13.5). These lines could also 
be stress paths for initial conditions of u v = uh = 0 with loadings of K equal to a constant (that is, con-
stant uh!u v)· Other initial conditions are, of course, possible, such as those shown in Figs. 13.3 and 13.4. 
Note that 
or in terms of K 
1- K 
'!I=tanf3=1+K 
p 
1-tan/3 
K= 1 +tanf3 
(13.4) 
(13.5) 
where f3 is the slope of the line of constant K when K < · K 1. At failure, the slope of the K 1 line is indi-
cated by the symbol 1/J. Note also that for any point where you know p and q (for example, point A in 
Fig. 13.5), uh and u v can readily be found graphically; that is, lines· at 45a from the stress point intersect 
the u-axis at uh and u v. Finally, there is no reason why u v must always be greater than uh. It usually is, 
but in many important situations in geotechnical engineering uh > uv. In these cases, by convention q 
is negative and K > 1, as shown in Fig. 13.5. 
Now we describe some stress paths that are important in geotechnical engineering. When soils are 
deposited in a sedimentary environment like a lake or the sea, there is a gradual buildup of overburden 
stress as additional material is deposited from above. As this stress increases, the sediments consolidate 
and decrease in volume (Chapters 8 and 9). If the area of deposition is relatively large compared with the 
thickness of the deposit, then it seems reasonable that the compression is essentially one-dimensional. In 
this case the stress ratio would be constant and equal to K 0 , and the stress path during sedimentation and 
q 
-q 
K,(compression) . 
K = 0.5 = K0 for 
normally consolidated 
clays 
------- K<1 
1 
CTv>CTh 
p,p' 
.05"~ 
/ K- 1(uv 
uh} 
. 
t • 
CTv<CTh 
j 
FIGURE 13.5 Different constant stress ratios and examples of stress paths, starting 
from CTv = uh = 0 (after Lambe and Whitman, 1969). 
· 13.2 Stress Paths 
621 
q 
Sedime. ntation and """ · 
consolidation 
~ 
_.....-r 
. 
~ 
/. 
_.....-r 
_.....-r 
Specimen in lab before testing 
FIGURE 13.6 Stress paths during sedimentation and sampling of.normally consoli-
dated clay, where K0 < 1. 
p' 
consolidation would be similar to path AB in Fig. 13.6. Typical values of K 0 for granular materials 
range from about 0.4 to 0.6, whereas for normally consolidated clays K 0 can be a little less than 0.5 to 
perhaps as high as 0.8.A good average value is about 0.5. (See Secs.12.7 and 12.13.) When a sample of 
the soil is taken, stress decrease occurs,· because the overburden stress u vo has to be removed to get at 
the sample. The stresspath follows approximately lirie BCin Fig. 13.6, and the soil specimen ends up 
someplace on the hydrostatic (uh :: uv) or K ::.1 axis. This stress path and its relation to the strength 
of clays is discussed in Sec. 13.6 and more extensively in Ladd and DeGroot (2003). 
. If, instead of by sampling, the overburden stress were decreased by erosion or some other geo-
logic process, an unloading stress path similar to BC in Fig. 13.6 would be follo\ved; If the vertical stress 
continued to be removed, the path could extend to a point well below the p-axis. The soil would then be 
overconsolidated, and Ko would be greater than 1.0. 
Sometimes in engineering practice a test specimen is reconsolidated in the laboratory under Ko 
conditions so as to reinstate the estimated in situ stresses. Such conditions are shown in Fig; 13.4 and at 
point A in Fig. 13.7. After consolidation, the loading (or unloading) path followed to failure depends on 
the field loading conditions one wishes to model. Four common field conditions and the laboratory 
stress paths that model them are shown in Fig.13.7. Note that these stress paths are for drained loading 
(discussed in the previous chapter), in which there is no excess pore water pressur~; therefore total 
stresses equal effective stresses and the total stress path (TSP) for a given loading is identical to the 
effective stress path (ESP). 
· · 
' '· 
As suggested by Eq. (13.3), we are often interested in conditions at failure, and it is useful to 
know the relationship between the· K f line and the Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope. Consider the 
two Mohr circles shown in Fig. 13.8. The cirde on the left, drawn for illustrative purposes only, rep-
resents failure in terms of the p-q diagram. The identical circle on the right is the same failure circle 
on the Mohr r-u diagram. To establish the slopes of the two lines and their intercepts, several Mohr 
circles and stress paths, determined over a range of stresses, were used. The equation of the K f line is 
,,q1 =a+ p1 tan!fi 
(13.6) 
where. a ::,the intercept on the q-axis, in stress units, and ... 
. ·. 1/J. = · th~ angle ~f the K f line with ~~spectto the. ho~izontal, in degrees. 
The equation ofthe Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope is 
· r11 = u11 tan ¢ + c 
(11.9) 
622 
Chapter 13 
. Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
q 
K1 (compression) 
Ko 
0~--~~~.-----~------------------------~ 
-q 
Symbol 
AC: Axial compression 
LE: , Lateral extension 
AE: Axial extension 
LC: Lateral compression 
p' 
. Geotechnical engineering example 
Foundation loading- increase u "' uh constant 
Active earth pressure- decrease uh, u,; constant 
Unloading (excavation)..:. decrease u "' uh constant 
Passive e'arth pressure...:, increase uh, u 
v constant 
FIGURE 13.7 Stress paths during drained loadings on normally consolidated 
clays and sand (after Lambe, 1967). 
· 
, 
q ._ 
......, K, 
', p 
u 
FIGURE 13.8 Relationship between the K1 line and the Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope .. 
From the geometries of the two circles, it can be shown that 
'and 
sin¢= tan 1/J 
a 
c=--
'cos ¢ 
So, from a p-q diagram the shear-strengtliJ)arameters 1/1 and c may readily be computed. 
(13.7) 
(13.8) 
Another useful aspect of the p-q diagram is that it may be used to show both·total and effective 
stress paths on the same diagram. We said earlier that for. drained loading, the total stress path (TSP) 
and the effective stress path (ESP) are identical (excluding any back. pressure used to saturate the soil 
· · specimen; see Sec.12.10). This is because the pore water pressure induced by loading was approximately 
equal to zero at all times during shear. However, in general, during undrained loading the TSP is not 
13.2 Stress Paths 
623 
equal to the ESP, because excess pore water pressure develops. For axial compression (AC) loading of a 
normally consolidated clay ( K 0 < 1 ), a positive excess pore water pressure D.u develops. Therefore the 
ESP lies to the left of the TSP because u' = u -
D.u. At any point during the loading, the pore water 
pressure D.u may be scaled off any horizontal line between the TSP and ESP, as shown in Fig.13.9. 
the stress paths for the multi-stage consolidated undrained triaxial tests results presented in 
Example 12.12 are shown in Fig. 13.10. As in Fig. 13.9, the shapes of the effective stress paths indicate 
that these specimens were normally or only lightly overconsolidated. 
q 
FIGURE 13.9 Stress paths 
during undrained axial 
0 '--------------------------~ compression loading of a 
' p, p' 
normally consolidated clay. 
4000r--,,-,,-.~------
.. --r---,--~-~--~~---. 
3000~----~----~r-----~----~------4------4 
1[ 2000r---~-----~-----~------+-----~r------i 
o- ' . • . 
ESP< · 
' 
· 
1 000 ___ :_: __ ~_z 0.,.. ---" .. ----~-'-... + 
..... ·.---------.... -----+-----.... _:_ .... _____ , __ + .............. --.......... , .. +--------.. ·----.... -.. --1 
-
: \;ht-: TSP 
'0 
. ' 
J• 
0 
2000 
4000 
6000 
p(psf) 
8000 
10 000 ' 12 000 
4000~----~----~~----~----~------~----~ 
·I 
3000r-~~-+------+-----_, ______ -r--~--+----.-.-i_ 
~ 
~p 
. 
-9:: 2000 
...... 1 -,-----+------+------1 
0' 
' 
' 
4-- TSPI 
' ' 
1 000 _____ ,.,_,_, __ _,,.,,.,,.,, .,,_,_, ___ , _________ ,., ,_,, __ .. , .. ,-;,~~ .. ____ ,,_,_,-....... ,.,_,,_,_,_,, __ _,_,, ___ , ...... , .... .,,.,,_,,.,,.,_,.,,_,.,,, .... 
0 
.,~ 
·-
I 
! 
0 
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
1 0 000 
12 000 
p (psf) 
4000r------r------~----~-------r~----~-----. 
I 
3000r------+------4--~~~\4-------~1 --,,----+,-------4 
~ 
ESP---.y-
i.A-TSP 
-9:: 
20001-------r~---/~F~~~-\,~--~-.,~~·~----4-----_, 
0' 
., 
-,1 
.,-, 
I 
1 000 ------------- ------------ ------------- :--:" ______ [ _____________ ------------
0 
. 
0 
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10 000 ,. 
12 000 
p (psf) 
FIGURE 13.10 Stress 
paths from the multi-stage 
test results presented 
in Example 12.12 (courtesy 
Shannon & Wilson, Inc., 
Seattle). 
624 
Chapter 13 
, Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
,. 
Example 13.2, 
Given: 
, The results in Fig.13:10: , 
1'' 
Required: 
i'.; 
Using the stress paths in Fig. 13.10, verify that the total and effective strength parameters shown 
in Fig. Ex. 12.12( d). 
Solution: From the slope and intercept of the best-fit-by-eye Krlines for the effective and total stress 
paths, determine the parameters tfr', a', ljJ and a using Eqs. (13,7) and (13.8). The results are given in 
Table Ex. 13.1 along with the corresponding Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters. 
TABLE Ex. 13.1 
Effective and Total Stress Strength Parameters 
Stress Paths 
Mohr-Coulomb 
l{l'(deg) 
a'(psf) 
l{l(deg) 
a(psf) 
q/(deg) 
c',(psf) 
'q,(deg) 
c(psf) 
29 
88 
17 
100 
18 
100 
If a clay is overconsolidated (K 0 > 1), then negative pore water pressur~ (-llu) develops 
because the clay tends to expand during shear, but it can't. (Remember: we are talking about undrained 
loading in which no volume change is allowed.) For AC loading on an overconsolidated clay, stress 
paths like those shown in Fig. 13.11 will develop. Similarly, we canplot total and effective stress paths 
for other types of loadings and unloadings, for both normally and overconsolidated soils, and we shall 
show some of these in Sec. 13.6. ' : 
' :- , , 
-
, 
, 
, 
In most practical situations in geotechnical engineering, there exists a static groundwater table; 
thus an initial pore water pressure U 0 , is acting on the element in question. So there are really three 
stress paths we should consider: the ESP, the TSP, and the (T - u0 )SP. These three paths are shown in 
Fig.13.12 for a normally consolidated clay with an initial pore water pressure u0 undergoing AC loading. 
Note that as long as the groundwater table remains at the same elevation, U 0 does not affect either the 
ESP or the conditions at failure. 
-
, 
-, FIGURE 13.11 • Stress paths during 
axial compression of a heavily over- ' 
consolidated clay. 
K, 
p,p' 
q 
13.2 Stress Paths 
625 
FIGURE 13.12 
ESP, TSP, and 
(T- U0)SP for a normally 
o ~..::::=--------L------'----"---...L_-----"-----~ 
consolidated clay (after Lambe, 
ui,o; 
U~o 
Uho 
Uvo 
p, p' 
1967). 
p, 
(a) 
q 
K11ine 
q, 
FIGURE 13.13 Stress paths for 
the hydrostatically consolidated 
0 f----4r---------<------t.-.-----,~-------~ axial compression tests on 
P~ 
Pf 
Pi 
p, p' 
(a) normally consolidated clays; 
(b) 
(b) overconsolidated clays. 
In the CD triaxial test the stress paths are straight lines, since we usually keep one of the stresses 
constant and simply vary the other. Typical drained stress paths are shown in Fig.13.7 for four common 
engineering situations that can be modeled in the triaxial test. The stress path for the axial compression 
test illustrated in Fig.l2.20 is the straight line AC in Fig.l3.7. 
Stress paths for the two CU tests of Fig. 12.32 are shown in Fig.13.13. The tests are quite con-
ventional, hydrostatically consolidated, axial compression tests. Let's look first at Fig. 13.13(a), the 
stress paths for the test on normally consolidated clay. Three 'stress paths are shown: the effective stress 
path (ESP), the total stress path (TSP), and the total-u0 stress path, (T ·- u~)SP. Because the test is 
626 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
hydrostatically consolidated, the paths begin on the hydrostatic axis at values of p equal to the total 
and effective consolidation pressures, respectively. Note that p = p' + u0 • The total stress path for 
axial compression and constant cell pressure is the straight line inclined at 45° as shown. Since positive 
pore pressures develop in the normally consolidated clay, the ESP lies to the left of the TSP, because 
u' = u - Au. The situation is directly analogous to that shown in Fig.13.9. Note that q1 is the same for 
all three stress paths, because we define the failure at the maximum (u1 -
u:i). Figure 13.13(a) is sim-
ilar to Fig.13.9, except the initial consolidation in thafcase was nonhydrostatic (K0 < 1). · 
Since the overconsolidated clay was tested in axial compression with a constant hydrostatic cell 
pressure, the two total stress paths of Fig. 13.13(b) are exactly like those of Fig. 13.13(a) -straight lines 
inclined at 45° to the hydrostatic axis. But the shape of the ESP is significantly different. Look back at 
the development of pore pressure with axial strain. for this test in Fig: 12.28. See how it starts out 
slightly positive, then goes waynegative (actually, less than u0 , as explained previously). The same 
thing happens to the ESP in Fig. 13.13(b ).It goes slightly to the left (+Au) of the (T ..:.. u 0 )SP at first; 
then, as the pore pressure becomes increasingly negative, the ESP crosses the (T - u0 )SP until maxi-
mum q or q1 is reached. Again, because of the way we define failure, q1 is the same for all three stress 
paths. You may recall that the ESP in Fig.13.13(b) for the overconsolidated clay has a shape similar to 
that shown in Fig.13.11, except that the latter sample was consolidated with K 0 < 1. 
Stress paths for the UU tests ofFig.12.39 are shown in Fig.13.14. Behavior is for a normally con-
solidated clay, and the values of p and q for all three tests are listed in the table below the figure. Refer 
q 
rf/ = arctan (sin l/J') 
.K1total: r/Jr = 0 (l/Jr = 0) 
T. 
TSP·2 
a=c=r,l ~~----~~~~----~--~~---------;,; 
Lo~ 
p,p' 
Initial conditions 
At failure 
Test 
Po , 
qo -
Pt 
... 
'q, 
0 
0 
0 
l::.ur 
l::.ur 
2' 
2 
Total 
1 
0 
l::.ur+ 2uc1 
t::.u, 
stresses 
Uct 
2 
2 
·• 
l::.ur+ 2u~ 
:.··t::.u, 
2 
.. Uc2 
0 
'., 
;) 
,, 2' '•' 
2 
-· 
p~· 
. qo 
Pr 
q, 
Effective 
' 
.iu1 + 2u,- 2t::.u1 
l::.ur 
stresses 
u 
.. , 
0 
: 
'All 
r 
2 
2 
i 
·:FIGURE 13.14 Stress paths for UU tests on a norm~llyconsolidated clay. Same tests as in Fig. 12.39. 
q 
13.3 Pore Pressure Parameters for Different Stress Paths 
627 
·,,: 
FIGURE 13.15 Cambridge stress 
paths for (1) a conventional CU 
triaxial test with the cell pressure u 3 
0 1£.-------''-----------''-----,--J~ constant and (2) LE CD test with u 1 
p, p' 
constant. 
to Fig. 12.39 if necessary to verify these values. If the clay were o~erconsolidated, then from your knowl-
edge of CU behavior you would expect the ESP to have a shape similar to those of Fig. 13.12(b ). 
At the beginning of this section we mentioned that there are several ways of representing stress 
paths in geotechnical engineering. Vector curves were developed at Harvard by Prof. Casagrande and 
his associates (e.g., Hirschfeld, 1963). They defined the vector curve as the state of stress on the poten-
tial failure plane, but this was not very practical unless you already knew the friction angle of the soil 
(see Sec. 11.4.2). Later, for convenience they plotted vector.curves assuming the angle ofthe failure 
plane a1 was 60°, which automatically assu~ed a friction angle of 30° [Eq. (11.10)].Although Lambe's 
stress point and stress paths are a simplification of the vector curve concept, MIT stress paths with 
p' = 
1h(u~ + ul.) are very useful in practice, as we will see in the next few sections. 
· Another stress path common in critical-state soil mechanics (Sec. 13.7)'is the ·cambridge stress 
path. The differences are that: q is the principal stress difference,. or q = ( u 1 -
u 3), instead of 
1h ( u 1.- u3) as in the MIT system; and the Cambridge stress path has a 3-D definition of the mean 
effective stress, or p' = (ul. + 2u3)/3. The Cambridge stress paths will have a different shape than the 
MIT paths, as shown in Fig.13.15. For example, the total stress path (TSP) fora conventional CU tri-
axial test with the cell pressure u 3 constant has a slope of 3V:1H instead of 1:1 as in the conventional 
MIT case. The ESP is typical for a NC clay, although it is not as curved as a MIT stress path plot. Also 
shown in Fig. 13.15 is the stress path for an LE CD test with u 1 constant. Instead of a 1:1 slope, it has a 
negative inclination of 3V:1H. 
13.3 
PORE PRESSURE PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT STRESS PATHS 
in Sec.12.17,we introduced the Skempton pore pressure parameters A and Band described how they 
are used in laboratory testing and in geotechnical pnictice. We also mentioned that the common 
· · Skempton equation 
(12.18) 
. 
. 
was derived for conventional triaxial compr~ssion condition~. But, as in shown in. Appendix B.3, it is 
also true for triaxial extension. You recall that in triaxiaJ extension the principal stresses have rotated 
90°, because now u 1 = u 2 • The following discussion explains the reason that, although the definition is 
the same for both triaxial compression and extension conditions, the specific value of A is different and 
dependent on the stress path. The common triaxial stress paths are shown in Fig. 13.7 and discussed in 
detail in Sees. 13.4 and 13.5. 
628 
Chapte.r 13 _;,. -~dyanced Topics in Shear Strength of SoHs and Rocks 
,,:·! 
As shown by Law and Holtz (1978) and in Appendix B.3, where rotation of principal stresses 
occurs, it is better to define the pore pressure parameter A in terms of principal stress increments 
which are independent of the initial stress system. If this is done, then the equations for A for each of 
the common triaxial stress paths are 
, It is also shown in Appendix B.3 that 
• and' 
~u 
Aac = ~O"v 
' . 
~u 
Ale= 1 -
~O"h 
au 
1-'-
Aae. = 
~O"v 
. 
~u 
Ale.= '~O"h. 
Aac =:'~I!'' 
-Aae= AI~ 
(13.9) 
(13.10) 
(13.11) 
(13.12) 
(13.13) 
(13.14) 
· You will find these equations useful in understanding stress paths during undrained loading (Secs.l3.4 
and 13.5) and forthe problems at the end of this chapter. 
_,_; 
, A more general pore pressure equation was proposed by Henkel (1960) to take into account the 
effect of the intermediate principal stress: It is 
'i 
~u = B(~Uoct'+ a~'Toct) 
~ 
; ( 
(13.15) 
where 
O"oct = %(o-1 + Uz + o-3) 
(13.16) 
'Toci, = 1 /; Y(o-1- o-z)2 -: (uz --~3f+ (o-3-:- o-1)2 
(13.17) 
.· and a is the Henkel pore pressure parameter. Sometilp(!s the Henkel parameter is denoted by the symbol 
. a, ~ndson1etimes a = 3 a. Equation (13.15) is derived in Appendix B.3. As pointed out by Perloff and 
Baron (1976), because T oct is not linearly related to stress, you cannot in general calculate ~T oct directly 
from the principal stress increments. Instead, you have to determine the initial and final stresses, substi-
tute them into Eq. (13:17) to get theinitial and final values ohoct• and then calculate ~'Toct· 
· · ' The equations for getting the· equivalent Skempton A from Henkel's a parameter for triaxial 
compression and extension conditions are developed in Appendix B.3. These relationships are for tri-
axial compression (AC and LE)conditions, ' 
; • 
' 
' ' 
. ' ., 
' 
,, . ' 
··, 
A 
.1 ._. ' :. ~2-
·=·- + ... VL. 
3 
a~ 
>' 
·• 
3 
(13.18) 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading...:....Normally arid Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
G29 
For triaxial extension (AE 'and LC) conditions 
':.' 2 
V2 
A=-+a-
3 
3 
(13.19) 
These equations mean, of course, that a = 0 for elastic materials (since A= 1/3 in triaxial compression 
and 213 in triaxial extension). 
If you have some idea of what the intermediate principal stress is in the field, then you probably 
should use Eqs. (13.15) through (13.17) to estimate the in situ pore pressures. It is noteasy to predict 
the field pore pressures from hi bora tory test results, primarily because the {)ore: -pressure parameters 
are very sensitive to sample disturbance. Hoeg et al. (1969), D'Appolonia et al. (1971), and Leroueil 
et al. (1978a and b) provide methods for estimating pore pressures U';lder embankments on SOft clays .. 
13.4 
STRESS PATHS DURING UNDRAINED LOADING-NORMALLY 
AND LIGHTLY OVERCONSOLIDATED CLAYS 
·'' 
' 
. 
' 
' 
' 
. . 
. 
We show examples of stress paths for undrained loading of normally consolidated clays in Figs. 13.9, 
13.12, 13.13(a), and 13.14. These stress paths also apply to clay soils that are lightly overconsolidated, 
probably with an OCR < 2 or so. When the OCR in a natural deposit is greater than 3 or 4, it starts to 
behave more like an overconsolidated clay. Natural clay deposits, unless they are very recent, are rarely 
truly normally consolidated, and in this chapter, when we discuss normally consolidated properties and 
behavior, we include lightly overconsolidated deposits in that category. 
Undrained stress paths for overconsolidated clays are shown in Figs.13.11 and 13.13(b). From 
our comments concerning those figures you should now understand why these stress paths have the 
shapes they do. The stress paths' we showed for' undrained shear ~ere for the most common type of tri-
axial test used in engineering practice, the axial compression (AC) test. Most of the time, the initial 
consolidation stresses are hydrostatic ( K 0 = 1) because laboratory procedures are simpler. However, a 
better model for in situ stress conditions would be nonhydrostatic consolidation; that is, the axial stress 
would be different than the cell pressure (Ko #-l).As we mentioned in Sec.13.2, there are stress paths 
other than axial compression that model real engineering design situations. Some of these are shown in 
Fig. 13.16, along with their laboratory model. Axial compression (AC) models foundation loading such 
as from an embankment or footing. Lateral extension (LE) models the active earth pressure conditions 
behind retaining walls. Axial extension (AE) models unloading situations like excavations, and lateral 
compression (LC) models passive earth pressure conditions such as might occur around an earth 
anchor or in pipe-jacking applications. 
If you think about it, the ordinary triaxial test is- not the best model for the design conditions 
illustrated in Fig.13.16. It would be all right for cases (a) and (c) if the foundation or ~xcavation were 
circular (for example, an oil tank, underground shaft, or nuclear reactor pit). The more usual case is 
where one dimension (perpendicular to the page in Fig.13.16) is very long compared to the others. This 
is the case forplane strain. Examples are long embankments, strip footings, and long retaining walls. In 
these cases, strictly speaking, the shear strengths should be _determined by using plane strain tests 
[Fig.13.16(b)]. The laboratory models on the right side ofFig.13.16 can also apply to stress conditions 
in this test just as well as in the triaxial test. Since the plane strain test is more complicated in several 
respects than the triaxial test, it is rarely used in engineering practice. Triaxial strengths are still com-
monly obtained for design problems that are obviously plane strain: 
. . 
. . . 
It is important that you know how to make the computations necessary to plot undrained stress 
paths; the procedures for doing so are illustrated by the following examples. 
630 
Chapte.r;B, . ,-t\dvancedJopics in ShearStrengthofSoils andRocks 
'~ t 
\cl' 
'· 
), 
Field situation 
(a) Foundation loading 
/\~:· 
~~ 
~ 
. 
~ 
o" 
r-
: 
• 
•• 
,.;,") 
0 ', • 
; 
• 
• ~<·.::\< '; . 
,; 
. ' ; .. · .· 
;, 
. Laboratory model .. · 
I Au 
Axial · . 
· t 
compression ~' 
· ... 
(AC} 
Uvo 
,• 
. 
' .. ' , .. 
·. 
Uho 
. ,, 
Later_ru 
.. i·!'f· ·. 
extension 
.· 
. 
. . 
':• 
(b)Active earth pressure 
, 
' 
. 
i 
. .i.\,,, .•:,\, .-1. 
'"f 
,. 
' ' 
~ _; 
(LE)' 
·, 
.. · · ·: ·~ 
, 
Au 
Uho 
(c) Foundation unloading (excavation) 
Axial 
· tAu 
'G-~0; .. 
. 
. ' 
' 
, 
·_.Uho 
. : :·; ' 
' ,. ~ . ' 
• ~ t 
extension. 
(AE} 
. 
-,,; 
rF
:.~ 
,,,. 
·,.' 
;~ 
Lateral 
. 
. 
. 
. 
oomp"'"'oo ' I. j f· .. · 
, (LC} '· 
: , 
·.,, : , : 
... .', -
.. 
, ·.·Au 
: · 
•.· 
uho 
~ ; 
\; ;; 
. 
~' . 
" 
"·!. 
: FIGURE 13.16:: Some common field stability situations along with their . 
daboratory model. 
: · r · · · ·: · 
· :. , '· 
11' 
Given: 
.. ·i 
. •,•" 
•" 
~ . 
·::-r 
• ~ j 
., 
tt. 
,. : 
The a-8 and u-.e data of Fig. Ex.'l3.3a were recorded whe~ the normally 'consolidated cl~y of 
•\ 
Example 12.9 was tested in axial compression .. 
"' 
'',· 
.Required: 
ul 
Draw the· iota! and dfective ·stress paths for this test. Determine the Mohr--:Coulomb strength 
r.arameters. 
.. ,·· ·::,' 
. · · · .. · " . 
. 
' 
... • : . 
. . 
· · 
Solution: Using Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2), we have to'determinep;'p':anci q for several strains in order to 
plot the stress paths. Usually five or six points are sufficient. Sometimes, to keep things in order, a 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading---:Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
631 
0 
t:.u 
(kPa) 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
FIGURE Ex. 13.3a 
2 
3 e(%) 
uc = 150 kPa 
··: ,.-
e(%) 
table is helpful. Then just fill in the. appropriate 
columns: It may alsobe helpful to know that 
(13.20) 
and 
(13.21) 
Also, since a' = a - u, p' = p - u. And finally, 
aJ. + a3 
2 
because (al. - a3) = (a1 - a3). 
(13.22) 
Now just choose the values of (a1 - a 3) 
and ~u at several convenient strains, and fill in 
the table (Table. Ex. 13.3) by using the above 
equations. Note that a 3 in Example 12.9 was 
150kPa. 
· Total and 'effective stress paths are 
shown in Fig. Ex: l3.3b. The failure· lines are 
·also drawn, assuming a' = a·::; 0. 
Fro,m Eq. (13.7). 
1/J' = 24.1°, thencV'= 26.6° 
and 
Note that the problem could be solved graphically by plotting the TSP first, then scaling off the 
corresponding ~u values horizontally to the left of the TSP; one point done this way is shown in 
Fig. Ex. 13.3b. 
TABLE Ex. 13.3 
UJ- U3 
UJ + U3 
a!+ uj 
e 
u 1 -·u3 
tJ.u 
uj 
q=---
p=---
p' =---
2 
2 
2 
(%) 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
(kPa) 
0.25 
49 
35 
115 
25 
175: 
140 
0.50 
73 
57 
93 
37 
187 
130 
0.75 
.. 86 
.. 72 : 
78 
43 
193 
121 
1 
94 
80 
68 
47 
197 
115 
Failure 
1% 
100 
88 
62 
50 
200 
112 
11/2 
96 
92 
58 
48 
198 
106 
2 
.· 89 
99 
51 
45. 
195 
96 
632 
Chapter-13 · · Advanced Topics in sh'ear Strength of Soils and Rocks • · 
',•_.' 
...... ., .......... 1/Jr ~ 14.1° 
FIGURE Ex. 13.3b 
' Example 13.4 
Given: ' 
A long embankmentshown i~ Fig. Ex.13.4a is to be constructed rapidly on a deposit of soft organic 
silty clay hi northern Sweden. The,soil profile and properties are also shown in Fig. Ex. 13.4a. Assume 
· K 0 ;,: 0.6. Also assume A befon!f~ilure is about 0.35; at failure, A1 = 0.5 (after Holtz and Holm, 1979). 
Required: 
Determine the TSP, (T -
U0 )SP, and ESP for a typical element 5 m below the centerline of the 
embankment. 
;• 
Sol~tion: First, calculate the initial stress conditions for the ~lement. Use Eqs. (6.13),(6.14), and (6.15). 
•' 
. . 
. 
' 
. 
' 
P = 1.24 Mg/m3 
Uvo = 1.24(9.81)(1) + 1.30(9.81)(4) = 63 kPa 
u~ ~··1:0(9.81)(4), 
' 
= 39 kPa 
·I 
I 
1-----11 m ----~ 
' 
I . p = 2.1 Mg/m3 
.I 
~--------17,m -------~ 
1~··· 
i -::::=- = 1.3 Mg/m3 
4 m Psat 
I 
I 
Wn- 140% 
LL- 160 
.PI-105 
1 
··I 
Typical element~ 
. 
I 
.I 
FIGURE Ex. 13.4a 
Organic 
,;"T~' 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
633 
U~o = Uvo -
Uo 
= 24kPa 
u/20 = 0.6u~0(K = 0.6) = 14 kPa 
Uho =·l!'ho + U0 
=53 kPa 
Second, calculate the .lu due to the embankment. 
.lu at the surface = 2.1(9.81)(2.75) = 57 kPa 
uz at -5 m; use Fig.10.6, 
I = 0.45 X 2 = 0.9 
uz = 0.9 X 57 = 51 kPa 
This is .lu v on the typical element. 
To determine the increase in horizontal stress .luh, eqmitions and some charts are available for 
a limited number of geometries (see, for example, Poulos and Davis, 1974). For this example, let's 
assume the increase, in horizontal stress is one-third of the increase in vertical stress. 
· .luh = 0.33(51) = 17kPa 
Next, use Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2) to determine q, p, and p' for both initial and final conditions. 
Don't forget the conditions for the (T -
U0 )SP. To get the final effective stresses, we need to estimate 
·the induced pore pressures. Use the pore pressure parameter information given. Assume initially that 
the soil is not stressed to failure, so A = 0.35. B = 1 below.the water table. Use Eq. (12.19) . 
.lu = .lu3 + A(.lu1 - .lu3) = 17 + 0.35(51 - 17) = 29 kPa 
If the embankment were overstressing the underlying soil, then the induced .lu would be 34 kPa 
(because A1 = 0.5). 
It is sometimes helpful when calculating stress paths to draw elements with the appropriate total, 
total - u0 , pore pressure, and effective stresses indicated (similar to Fig.l2.27). This technique is shown 
in Fig. Ex.13.4b both for initial conditions and after loading. Note that stresses on the elements for initial 
Initial conditions: 
u 
u 
u- U0 
u' 
63-53 
•, ~63 
·l24 
~24 . 
q0 = --2-
= 5 kPa 
63 +53 
Gsa 
[~l 
.. 
ffi 
'llii-
Po=-. - 2-
=58 kPa 
Po -
U0 = P~ = 19 kPa 
Final conditions: 
u 
u 
,U--: U0 
u' 
114- 70 
~51} . 
.q,~ 
2 
= 22 kPa 
114 + 70 
~ 
144 
p,= 
= 92 kPa 
63 
~75 
~46 
2 
Pt -
U0 = 53 kPa 
Chrr ~ [h 
[h 
Pi= 24 kPa 
~ 
39 + 29 
70 
FIGURE Ex. 13.4b 
634 
Chapter:13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
q (kPa) 
30 
r-· u,,; 29 --* 
Uo=39~ 
ESPt ~-~p2 
~=:~~ 
ouo• 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
-50 · 60 , 70 
80 
90 
100 
p, p' (kPa) 
FIGURE Ex. 13.4c 
conditions are those we calculated at the beginning of this. example. For final stresses, the vertical total 
stress increased by 51 kPa and the horizontal totai ~tress increased by 17 kPa, as we determined previously 
. 'from elastic theory. The-induced pore pr'essur~s shown aie those we found from the' pore pressure equa-
tion. The calculations for p,p', and q forb~th initial and final conditions are shown below the elements. 
· 
Finally, plot the stress paths on the p~q diagram, as shown in Fig. Ex. 13.4c. Sketch the ESP so it 
has a shape similar to those shown previously [for example, Figs.l3.13 and 13.14(a)] for normally con-
solidated clays. . • 
Example 13.5 
Given: 
The initial stress conditions and stress changes from Example 13.4. 
Required: 
. 
. 
. 
-Estimate the induced pore water pressure using the Henkel pore pressure parameters. , 
' 
( 
. 
' 
' 
. 
'' 
Solution: Recall from Sec. 13.3 that the Henkel pore pressure equation is 
t.u = B(t.croct + a8.Toct) 
(13.15) 
where CToct and Toct were defined in Eqs. (13.16) and (13.17). To obtain 8.croct and 8.roct• we need the 
three initial and three final stresses so we can determine the initial and final values of cr oct and T oct. One 
way to do this is to use Fig. Ex. 13.4b and simply assume that crh := cr2 = cr3. Determining t.cr oct is easy, 
because 8.croct = (crocdinitial -
(croct)final = 1f3 (8.cr1 + t.cr~ + 8.cr3), but as we mentioned in Sec.l3.3, 
you cannot do the same thing with t.r oct. To get 8. r oct you have to use the initial and final stresses, substi-
tute them into Eq. (13.17) to get the initial and final values of r oct; and then calculate 8.7-oct. 
From Fig. Ex.13.4b, 8.CToct = (croct)final- (croct)initial = % (114 + 70 + 70) _:_· %(63 +53 +53) = 
28 kPa. • 
For 8. T oct = ( T oct)fi~al -
( T oct)initial 
. 
1 
-
(~oct)final ~ 3Y(114- 70)2 + (70- 70f+ (70- 114)2 = 21 
(roct)initial = jY(63- 53?+ (53- 53?+ (53- 63)2 ~ 5 
So t.r oct = 16 kPa. 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
635 
Next we need to find the Henkel parameter a. From Eq. (13.18), 
. . 
1, V2 
··· A=-+a-
. 
3 
. 3 
Since A= 0.35 before failure, Henkel's a= 0.035. So b.u = [(28 kPa + 0.035(16 kPa)] = 29 kPa. 
It is interesting that in this example, if you substitute the individual stress increments into 
Eq. (13.17), you also get the same numerical value of flToct = 16 kPa. This is because in this example 
we assumed uiz. = u 2 = u 3• In general, u 2 'f. u 3 , and you must calculate the final and initial values sep-
arately and then subtract to obtain a correct value of flToct· 
The next example is a little more complicated. First, we shall construct the stress paths and deter-
mine the strength parameters for an axial compression test; thel} we use the AC test and our knowledge 
of stress paths to determine the pore pressure response of a lateral extension test. We will see that the 
effective stress paths for both tests are identical, even though the total stress paths are very different. 
Example 13.6 
Given: 
1\vo identical specimens (same w, e, etc.) of a normally consolidated saturated clay were hydrosta-
tically consolidated (Ko = 1) and then sheared undrained. In testA, the axial compression (AC) test, the 
cell pressure was held constant while the axial stress was increased until failure. Specimen B was failed by 
lateral extension (LE) in which the vertical stress was held constant while the cell pressure was decreased 
until failure occurred. Stress-strain and pore pressure data for test A are shown in Table Ex. 13.6a. 
Required: 
a. Compute and plot the stress-strain and pore pressure-strain curves for test A. 
b. Plot the TSP and ESP for both tests. 
c. Determine cf/ and r/Jr for both tests. 
d. Show that the stress-strain curve for test A (AC) is identical to that for test B (LE). 
e. Evaluate the pore pressure-strain data for test B from the LE stress paths. 
f. 
Compute the pore pressure parameter A for both tests. 
TABLE Ex. 13.6a TestA (ACTest Data) 
8 (%) 
I:J.ulu~ 
!:J.ulu~ 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0.35 
0.19 ·. 
2 
0.45 
0.29 
4 
0.52 
0.41 
6 
0.54 
0.47 
8 
0.56 
O.S1: 
10 
0.57 
0.53 
12 
0.58 
0.55 
After Ladd (1964). 
636 
Chapter 13 . : Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Hocks 
Solution: 
a. Plot a-e and !::.u-e curves for test A (AC), as shown in Fig. Ex. 13.6a. Note that the data in 
Table Ex. 13.6a is normalized with respect to the effective consolidation stress a~ in the test. 
We could assume a a~ (in whatever units the test was conducted), or we can work everything 
·out in terms of the normalized stresses. 
. 
. 
. 
b. As for the previous example, it is helpful to sketch elements showing the total, pore pressure, 
.• and effective stresses for the initial consolidation conditions, during shear, and at failure, as is 
· ·'done in Fig. Ex.13.6b. Use these stresses to compute the TSP for both tests and the ESP for the 
AC test. Since at this time we don't know anything about the pore pressures developed in the 
· LE test, we cannot plot its ESP. 
Calculations for p, p', and q for test A (A C): 
Initial conditions: 
. 
.. 
At failure: 
. 
1 + l' 
Po =c' P~ = - 2-
'= 1 
1-1 =0 
and 'qo=, 2· 
1.58 + 1 
Pt = 
,., 
= 1.29 and 
Pt = Pt -
!::.u = 0.74 
(Check: p[ = l.03 ; 0.45 =0.74) 
. . 
1.58 :__ i 
... . 
qf = · .. 
2 
= 0.29 
(Check: l.03 ; 0.45 = 0.29) 
For Test B (LE): 
FIGURE Ex. 13.6a Stress-strain 
and pore pressure-strain curves 
for the AC test. 
flu 
a;. 
0.2 
• 
1 
1+1 '• 
1-1 .. 
Po= Po= - 2-
= 1· and· q0 = - 2-
= O· 
·- 1 + 0.42·.:.:. on · d 
:....: 1.- 0.42 -··o 29 
Pt -
2 
-
. 
an 
qf -
2, 
. -;--
. 
flu 
a; 
e(%) 
e (%) 
13.4 Stress Paths During· Undrained Lciading..:.;_Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
637 
Initial. 
conditions: 
During 
shear: 
At 
failure: 
Axial compression (AC) : 
'· ', 
· Lateral extension (LE) · 
·U 
p.o 
~LO 
D_.rJ D-
,1.0 [J 
1.0 
(Or U0 ) 
' · 
1 + ~u- ~u 
~ 
~ 
~1 
D-: ·Q--0 
1 -
~u 
· 1 -
~u [J 
~0.58 
~ 1 
. 
~1.03 . 
) 
F I 
oT GJ o~ o~o; w 
0.55. 
' ';:--y---l :-0.03 
0.42 
~1.03' 
··o··· 
... 
. -
: 
' 0.45 
FIGURE Ex. 13.6b. Total, pore pressure, and effective stress conditions for the AC and LE tests. 
' 
. 
. 
• ' 
' 
~ ' ! 
-.. , 
Now plot the TSP's f~r both test A(AC) and test B (LE). w6 know that the TSP's will be straight 
lines inClined at 45° from the stress' conditions in both tests, since one of the principal stresses remains 
constant during the test. Therefore we need only calculate and plot the end points q
0 ,"p
0
, and q1 on 
Fig. Ex. 13:6c, and connect these points with straight lines. 
. . 
·. 
' 
. 
· · . 
Intermedi<ite points for both the TSP and ESP may becakulated from the stress-strain and 
pore pressure-strain inforim1tion of Table Ex. 13.6a and Fig. Ex .. ~?·6a .. ~is process is exactly like 
_g_ 
u' c 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
~u, 
.. 
-, = -0.03.\ 
Uc 
rf 
--41· 
~-.J,r(LE) 
. . 
. ~-
........ ·· ·. 
1{1' (ACandLE) 
~u 
. 
. .. 
-'= +0.55 
u~· .... ··/~) 
1.0 
2.o 
.J!...:.,L 
a~ 
u~ 
FIGURE Ex. 13.6c Stress paths for the AC and LE tests. 
638 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks,, 
>· 
that shown in Example 13.3. Usually it is easier to do the problem graphically by simply plotting the 
intermediate q values on the TSP (q = tl.a/2) at several conveniently spaced strains. This determines 
the intermediate p values. Thim, scale off the tl.u values horizontally to determine the intermediate 
p' values at these.same strains. This process, shown il1 Fig. Ex . .13.3b and Fig. Ex. 13.6c, determines 
the corresponding ESP. · · 
· 
· 
· 
. 
. 
. · 
. 
· 
Note that only one ESP is shown for both tests. This is because the effective stress conditions in 
both tests are the same. Why? Note that during shear the stress difference tl.a, which is equal to 
(a1 -
a 3 ), is the same for both tests. Looking at it another way:, 
· 
For the AC test, 
· 
fl. a AC = 1! + fl. a - 1 = fl. a 
For tlie LE test, 
~ 
' 
! 
·-tl.aLE = 1,-1 +·tl.a =.tl.a· .. 
Therefore at every· strain (including at failure)· fl. a AC = ~~~E. Thus the stress-strain curves for both 
tests must be the same. So, if we plotted the LE stress-strain curve, it would look exactly like the AC 
curve shown in Fig. Ex.13.6a. (By the way, this is the answer to part d.) 
If the two specimens have exactly the same. stress-strain curve and identical strengths, then the 
effective stress conditions in the specimens must be identical, both at failure and during loading. This 
means that the ESP's must also be the same. · . . 
. . , . : • 
' 
> 
: 
.. 
' 
; 
. 
. 
: 
. 
Another way of looking at this is that in the LE test, the change in stress difference fl. a is produced 
by a change, a decrease, in cell or hyc1rostatic pressure. When the hydrostatic pressure changes in an 
undrained test, only a change in pore pressure results, not a change in effective stresses. If there is no 
change in effective stresses, then the stress-strain and strength behavior must be the same (Hirschfeld, 
1963). The only difference at failure between the tests must be in the amount of pore pressure tl.u that 
develops. If this is true at failure, then it is also true throughout the test. Therefore we can construct the 
. pore pressure-strain curve [part e of this example] for the test B (LE) from the stress path plots. 
· · 
As .with test A (A C) the ~mount of pore pressu're de~eloped in test :B (LE) is simply the horizon-
tal dist~nce. bet~een the ~SP. and the. ESP for,~hat test. N~te. th~ii for the_.LEtestall values of tl.u are 
negative. The constructed pore pressurecstrain curve for the LE test is shown in Fig. Ex .. 13.6d along with 
the stress-_strain ~urve.f()r both tests ~md.!!Ie'pore pressun;-str~in curvdor,the_AC test. For easy com-
. parison,numerical values of the pore pressure are listed in Table. Ex.J3.5b. Figure Ex. 13.6d and Table 
Ex. l3.6b are solutio~s to plut e. 
· · · · 
· · · · · · · · · · · · 
· 
· · .· · 
TABLE Ex. 13.6b Test B (LE Test Data) 
e (%) 
D.a/a~ 
D.ula~ 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0.35 
' . .:..0.16 
2 
0.45 
•-0.16 
4 
0.52 
-0.1L 
6 
.0.54 
,. -0.o7 
8 
O.S6. 
-0.05 
10 
0.57 
-0.04 
12 
0.58 
-0,03 
13.4 Stress Paths During UnCJrained Loading~Normally'and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
639 
!:J.u:' 
Failure 
,!:J.u 
u~ 
u~ 
0.6 
" 
0.6 
0.4 
0.4 
0.2 
o:2 
0 
0 
B (%) 
·'-· 
-0.2 
-0.4 
· FIGURE Ex. 13.6d · Stre~s~strain and pore pressure-strain data for both tests;· 
Now you·can see where the effective:stress valuesfor,the LE testin·Fig . .Ex.J3.6b came from. 
Another curious fact about theAC and LE test is that.the numerical difference between the two pore 
., 
pressure curves at a given strain is exactly equal to the principal stress difference at that strain. You can 
check this statement by using the values of Tables Ex. 13.6a and b or scaling off liu values between the 
two: llu curves of Fig. Ex.' 13.6d,. Also the horizontal· distance between the two TSP's in Fig. Ex. 13.6c is 
equal to liu at a given strain. 
, 
. , 
, , .· 
, ,, 
, 
Now that we know the TSP's and ESP's for both tests, we can'com{mte.c<f>, and rf>Tfor the two 
tests [part c). From Fig. Ex.13.6c we can measure the angles 1/J'; "'; {Ac),'and 1/JT (U:i) ":~th a protractor, 
or we can use Eq. (13.4). Since the clay is normally consolidated, we can assume that c' "" 0, and this 
is why we drew the intercepts a and a' on the p-q diagram to be essentially zerci: From Eqs. (13.7) and 
(13.8) we may readily compute 4>', rPT (AC), and rPT (LE}. These values are shown in Table Ex. 13.6c. 
TABLE Ex. 13.6c Strength Parameters from Fig. Ex.13.6c 
(in degrees) · 
Angle 
TestA (AC) 
TestE (LE) 
. . t/Jr 
22 
4Jr 
12.8 
:23.8 
·t/1' 
21:, 
21 
4J' 
. jl•. 
· f.Letus n~w co~pute the pore pr~ssure parameter A fo~ both tests. By Eq. (12.19), 
• . 
' 
' 
. 
•"l' '. c,. 
. 
' 
' 
. 
: 
'' . 
' 
• 
. 
; 
., 
• 
_ · '· ·llu :_ llu3 · 
, Ar = 
.. 
· · , 
llu1 - llu3 · 
. To obtain. the stress: changes during , the test; it is usually easier to refer to the, elements of 
Fig. Ex. 13.6b and select the changes in total stress from the initial conditions to the conditions at failure. 
640 
C~apter 13 :c Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
,,: 
; •· 
For the test A (AC), Au3 = 0 and Au1 = · u 1j - u 10 = .1.58.- 1.0 = 0.58; ilu1 = · 0.55. So, 
Forthe test B (LE), Au1 = 0 and Au3· = u 31 - u 30 = 0.42 - 1.0 = -0.58; flu1 =: -0.03. So, 
-
-0,03 - ( -0.58) = 0.55 = 0.95 
Ar =.. 
0 _ ( -0.58) 
0.58 
If this is confusing, it might be easier to u.se,E_q. (13.10) for the LE test: 
-
. 
· A.u 
flu 
-0,03 
Ate = 1 - -
= 1 - -
= 1 - -- = 0.95 
iluh 
ilu3 
-0.58 
(Of course we knew from Eq. (13.13) that Ate should equal Aac·) The term iluh is negative 
because it is decreased during the LE test (refer again to Fig. Ex. 13.6b ). 
· What conclusions can we draw from Example 13.6? First, both the axial compression and lateral 
extension tests have identical stress-strain curves and their compressive strengths Au 1 are the same. If 
the stress-strain curves are the same, then they have the same E modulus. They also have the same ESP. 
However ~ey have markedly different TSPs and markedly different pore pressure responses, but A1 
(and thus Ar) is the same for both tests. We can summarize these observations as follows:· 
Same Au, and Au 1 . 
. , 
· Sameu.:...e curves and E modulus 
Same ESP 
Same¢' 
Same A1 (and A1) · 
Different TSP 
Different ¢r 
Different Au 
., 
In Example 13.6 we showed the stress conditions and plotted the stress paths for the AC and LE 
tests, where you will note that the principal stresses at failure had the same orientation as they did at the 
beginning of the test. For the axial extension (AE) and lateral compression (LC) tests (see Figs.13.7 and 
13.16 for a review of these tests), the principal stresses rotate during shear, and the stress paths go 
below the horizontal axis. In this case, q becomes negative. If we went through on exercise similar to 
what we did in Example 13.6, we would reach the same conclusions as for the AC and LE tests: they 
have the same strength, ESP, A1, and¢', but differentTSP and Au. The stress conditions fortheAE and 
LC tests are shown in Fig. 13.17; you might compare these stresses with those shown in Fig. Ex.13.6b and 
see wliatis meant by the rotation of prinCipal stresses. Figure 13.18 then shows typical test results from 
AE and LC tests. The stress paths for both tests are shown in Fig. 13.19. 
The difference between the AC-LE and the AE-LC tests really depends on the intermediate 
principal stress u 2 • Note that for the first two types of tests we assume that u 2 = u 3 , and there is no 
rotation of principal stresses from the beginning of the test until failure. On the other hand, for the 
AE-LC tests u 2 = u1; and a rotation of principal stresses occurs. This rotation would be even more 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
641 
Initial 
conditions: 
At failure: 
u 
Axial extension (AE) 
u 
+ 
u' 
U0 ± t:.u, 
U~f = CTc- flCTt- Uo:;: flUt = UJf 
u;,, = Uc- U0 :;: llu, = u;, 
u 
Lateral compression (LC) 
U 
+ 
u' 
u~t = u c -
U0 - t:.u, = uf3r 
u!,, = CTc + llrr,- U0 - t:.u, = u;, 
FIGURE 13.17 Stress conditions for the axial extension (AE) and lateral compres-
sion (LC) tests. Note that the major principal stress is now horizontal for both 
these tests at failure. 
· 
------ AE and LC 
t:.u 
+ 
FIGURE 13.18: Stress~strain and pore pressure~strain curves for AE and LC tests on a normally 
consolidated clay (after Hirschfeld, 1963). · 
· · 
· 
' · 
· 
· · · 
' 
' 
. 
. 
' 
' . . . . 
-
. 
';"• 
q 
e (%) 
-q 
· FIGURE ,13.19 , Stress paths for the AE 
and LC tests-normally consolidated clay. 
642 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks , 
35 
K1 line (compression) 
30 
25 
20.---.-~,--,,--,~~~~---.---.--~ 
20 
15 
15 
' 10 
~ 10 
~ 
.c: 
<? 
~ 5 
b 5 
I 
~ 
b 
fiC\1 0 r------~~~~---~~-------_j 
b 
~ 
~~ 
~~ 
~?c 
0 
-5 
-5 
o<:' 
•\.:o~ 
c; 
'!Y"-... 
• 
'~'.1 
........ 6 wfo~ 
Effe.ctive 
~:_,1' 
-10 
.... ~ stresses 
~. LC 
AE 
, 
.. 
.. 
............ K1 line (extension) · 
· 
-10 
-15 
-20 
-15L---L-~L-~-~~~-~--J--J--~ 
0 
5 
1 0 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
u v + uh and u~ + u;, (kPa) 
2 
2 . 
. 
(a) 
-25L-~-~--L-~--~~L--L~ 
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Strain(%) 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.20 
(a) Total and effective stress paths and (b) stress-strain curves for K,-consolidated undrained triaxial 
tests on a normally consolidated clay (after Bishop and Wesley, 1975). 
dramatic if, for initial conditions, we had different vertical stresses than horizontal stresses: that is, if 
u vo =F uho = u cell· For this initial condition, u vo ;o= u10 and Uho = U30 = Ucell· For both the AE and LC 
tests, the horizontal stress at failure becomes the major principal stress, as shown in Fig.13.17. 
Some actual test data on natural clays is shown in Figs. 13.20 and 13.21. These results verify the 
assertions made above that the ESP, u-e: and At responses of AC and LE, andAE'and LC, tests are 
essentially the same for satur"at~d soils. The effective stress and u~·e behavior is determined only by the 
sign and magnitude of the principal stress difference, Au = u v -
uh, and is independent of the partic-
ular shape of the total stress path (Bishop and Wesley, 1975). 
Note that the ESP for the AE and LC tests in Figs. 13.20 and 13.21 did not cross the AE-TSP as 
it did in Fig.13.19. This means that the induced pore pressure in these tests did not go slightly negative, 
in contrast to the behavior shown in Fig; 13.19. The specific ESP characteristics for any given soil must 
be determined by laboratory tests. 
· 
The angle of inclination of the failure planes determined according to the Mohr failure hypothesis 
(discussed in Sec. 11.4) is different for the AE and LC tests because of the rotation of principal stresses. 
We may determine this angle by using the pole method. This procedure is shown in Fig. 13.22 for the AC 
and AE tests; similar results would be found for the LE and LC tests. In summary, then: 
For AC and LE, no rotation of u 1 and u 3: at = 45° + ¢'/2 
For AE and LS, with rotation of u 1 and u 3: at ~ 45° - ¢' /2 
13.4 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-:-Normally and Lightly Overconsolidated Clays 
643 
<? 
a. 
~ 
"' 
b 
I C\1 
.f 
t:r 
Effective stress 
path of AC test · .-----.._ 
0 
Test type: 
q 
flu 
(a) 
Total stress path 
~ 
ofACtest 
"'-Total stress path 
of LC test · 
-
-...-::;...- ,Axial compression (AC) 
-
--&-
Axial extension (AE) 
---o-
Axial. strain (('o) 
(b) 
.. 
.. 
( , v' . . · 
.. · . 
Specimen 
Ka 
Test type 
Wn 
Wt 
u1 :-:u3 . 
. , c, 
(%) 
(%) 
'· •. ~ 
~ax. (kPa). ·. ' .. 
Kars clay: 
·" 
195-22-5 
0.75 
AC 
71.5 
70.4 . 
, 
51.2 
195-22-7 
0.75'' 
LC 
73.5. 
72.0. 
34.9 
195-22-3 
0.75 
AE 
71.5 
'70.3 
.. 
34.5 
: ~ ' ' ; ' 
·At 
" 
';,, 
0.32 
0.73. 
0.73 
" 
At is the pore pressure parameter at failure based on expression in· Table 8.3.2.: 
; · · · 
. • 
FIGURE 13.21 
(a) Total and effective stress paths and (b) stress~strain and pore pressure-
strain response of K0-consolidated undrained triaxial tests on undisturbed samples of 
·,,,Led a clay from Kars, Ontario (after Law and Holtz, 1978), ; 
' 
' 
' 
' , 
. 
. 
., 
644 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength 'of Soils and Rocks 
Element at failure 
T 
~u~ 
U1f 
Mohr circles at failure 
I 
I ~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Axial 
compression: 
I. 
~~u,} , 
r-l~ ' 
I 
> 
~=u3t oV 
df \ , 
Axial 
extension: 
a1 = 45° + <f>'/2 
~~u,} 
, ~u~ 
u!Jr 
o;=·•· 
a,= 45°- <f>'/2 
T 
/Pole 
, 
U31 
, 
U1f 
FIGURE 13.22 Angle of inclination of th~ failure plane for AC and AE tests. 
13.5 
STRESS PATHS DURING UNDRAINED LOADING-HEAVILY 
OVERCONSOLIDATED CLAYS. 
, u' 
u 
All of the previous section on undrained stress paths concerned the behavior of normally consolidated 
clays. For overconsolidated clays, the principles are the same, but the shapes of the stress paths are differ-
ent because the developed pore pressures are different. Examples of stress paths for axial compression 
tests on overconsolidated clays are shown in 
Figs. 13.11 and 13.13(b). Knowing how the 
excess pore ·water pressures· develop along 
with the shapes of the total stress paths for · 
the various types of tests, you can readily con-
struct the ESP's; for overconsolidated clays. 
As discussed in Sec. ·12.13, overcori~ 
solidated clays may have a K 0 greater than 
one. Therefore the stress paths for over-
consolidated clays in situ (or for samples 
reconsolidated to in situ stresses in the labo-· 
ratory) may start from below thehydrostatic 
q 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
.... 
...................... 
'-..· ........ ~X, line 
(extension) 
(K0 = 1) axis; as shown in Fig .. 13.11. 
Figure 13.23 shows how the stress pathsfor 
-q 
AE and LC tests on an overconsolidated 
FIGURE 13.23 AE and LC stress paths for an overconsoli-
dated clay. 
clay might appear. 
13.5 Stress Paths During Undrained Loading-He,avilyOverconsolidated.Ciays 
645 
'",'"' 
Example 13.7 
(After C. W. Lovell.) 
Given: 
Consolidated undrained triaxial compression tests are conducted on an overconsolidated clay 
with preconsolidation stress u~ of 800 kPa, which is equivalent to an OCR of 10. The results are 
shown in Fig. Ex. 13.7a. Another CUtest is conducted on the same clay at the same OCR and thus 
the same u~. In the latter test, the lateral stress is not held con~tant but is increased at the same time 
as the axial stress is increased, so that ilu3 = 0.2 llu1• (See Fig. Ex. 13.7b.) Assume that the test 
results on this clay shown in Fig. Ex.13.7a are valid for all waysofchanging the boundary stresses in 
compression-that is, both u 1 and u 3 increasing during the test. 
· 
Required: 
. 
' 
Predict the behavior of the second CU test. 
a. Calculate the quantities and fill in the columns of Table Ex.13.7 for0%,0.5%,2.5%,5%, and 
· 7.5% strain. 
· 
· 
b. Draw the TSP and the ESP for this test. 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
. FIGURE Ex. 13.7a · 
~~u1 
~u~ 
---· 
[h ~u3 = 0.2~u1 
\: 
FIGURE Ex. 13.7b 
... 
TABLE Ex. 13.7° 
• e (%) 
'·~UJ 
0 
0 
0.5 
16 
2.5 
58 
·5.0 
80 
7.5 
" .94' 
• All stresses in kPa. 
A 
UJ 
0 
80 
3 
96 
12 
138 
16 
.160 .· 
19 
174 
UJ 
A 
~u 
80 
+0.1 
0 
83 
+0.05 
4 
92 
-0.11 
7 
'96 
-0.23 
1 
99 
-:-0.32 
-5 
646 
Chapter 13 >; 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
,\'' 
Solution: 
a. Table Ex. 13.7, filled in. 
b. Fig. Ex.13.7c. Note that cr~ = cr~/(OCR) from Eq. (8.2). Thus 
q (kPa) 
40 
,; 
FIGURE Ex. 13.7c 
0 
Also 
But cr~ = 80 kPa, so 
:>i' 
800,;, 80kPa 
(T~ =; 1o 
., 
. ' ~ 
40 
80 
(Tl = (T~ + ACTt 
120 
cr3 = cr~ + Acr3 = cr~ + 0.2 Acr1 
,' 
( cr1 - cr3) = A crt - 0.2 A?"t = 0.8 Acr1 
(crt - cr3) = 0.8 Acr1 
u~ 
a~ 
Acr1 = 100( cr1 ~~ cr3) 
160 
p, p' (kPa) 
The quantity in parentheses is what is plotted in Fig. Ex. 13.7a. Now the values for 
Acr1 and Acr3 ( = 0.2 Acr1) can be determined from the figure and inserted appropriately 
in Table Ex. 13.7. Once the initial values are known, cr1 and cr3 at each strain are also 
readily obtained. 
For calculation of Au, use Eq. (12.19) (assumes S = 100% for a triaxial test with pore 
pressures measured) or 
Au = Acr3 + A( A crt -
Acr3) 
= 0.2 Acr1 + A(Acr1 - 0.2 Acrt) 
= (0.2 + 0.8A) ACTt 
Thus values of Au in Table Ex. 13.6 are readily determined. 
Stress paths are either calculated from Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2) or constructed graphi-
cally (Fig. Ex.13.7c). 
13.6 ·Applications of Stress. Paths to Engineeri~g Practice 
647 
· ExampldD illustrates two:inip6rt1mt points.' First, the ESP ha~ the iypical'shape'of an over-
wns~lidatedclay [compare with Hgs.13.11 and 13.13(b)]. Second, you can use th~ principles devel-
oped previously for simple' ordinary triaxial tests (constant cell pressure) 'to plot the results of more 
··complex st~~ss path tests. 
· 
· 
· 
· · · 
· · · 
· · 
13.6 
·APPLICATIONS OF:STRESS PATHSTO ENGINEERING PRACTICE 
In this section ~e ciff~r some ~~ampies of ho~ a knowledge of the ·~tress path; h~lps to explain what is 
happening to the stresses inthe ground during a given engineering loading or unloading situation. If 
you can' draw the complete stress path for· some critical elemelits in your engineering problem, then 
you will have a' much better 1niderstanding of the entire problem. This knowledge ~ill enable you to 
, , . design an appropriate laboratory test program, to estimate the in situ load-deformation response of 
the soil and structure, and finally to plan a suitable observation and instrumentation program for mon-
itoring the construction operations and final performance of th~ structure. 
. 
...• .Let's look' first at whathappetis when we take a sample of normally,consolidated clay from a 
deposit of soft clay. We showed the stress path during 'sedimentation and consolidation, from A to B, 
in Fig. H6, ·arid point B co~responds to pointl inFig.13.24. Figure l3.24 is a more complete picture of 
. all the operations 'necessary before a tube 'specimen is ready for laboratory testing. As we shall see, it is 
not surprising thatif the samples are disturbed~and they always a:re to some extent-, the measured 
undrained shear strengths are often much less than in situ strengths. 
. .·. :·.··. 
. . : . 
Ladd and DeGroot (2003) explain the various paths and events in Hg. 13.24, and they give detailed 
recommendations for minimizing the effects of sample disturbance that ~ften' occurs during each of the six 
events. These recommendations are not espeCially co~tlyor complicated~ but when implemented, they can 
. result iri inuch more reliable estimates of the in situ shear strength on esp~cially soft and sensitive soils. 
. 
When the in situ soils atpoiritl are loaded by a:fo~ndation, the stress'path. in situ follows the 
dashed curve up to the failureline7liis also would ,be the' undrilinedstress path followed iri' an ideal lab-
oratory test on an ideal test spe~imen. However, even perfect sampling results in a loss ofshear strength 
. of up to lO% (Skempton and Sowa, 1963; Ladd and Lambe, 1963; and Noorariy arid Seed, 1965), and we 
• 
·. 
' 
'' . 
! 
• • 
' 
• • 
' 
' 
• ' ' 
' 
. • 
• 
•· 
. : 
< 
~ 
' 
• i 
• 
' 
! 
.·• 
.! ·' 
C\J 
··~ 
·b 
I 
Path 
Event 
1-2 
Drilling 
· · p' = (cr~ + uf,)/2 
FIGURE 13:24 
Hypothetic~ I stress path during tub~ sa~pling and spe~imen preparation of a soft, 
nearly normally consolidated clay (from Ladd and DeGroot, 2003). · 
· 
· · 
· · ·· · 
· 
648 
Chapter 13 
. Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
'~ .. ' 
can see why in Fig. 13.24. Perfect sampling is sampling with no additional mechanical disturbance, and 
. with the specimen in the test apparatus ready to be sh~~red. If you go back and look at Fig.12.34, you 
'' ' wili s~e the conditions in the test specimen immediately after sampling but befon; application of cell 
. pressure and axial load. In this case, we called the. pore' pressure "residual (capillary) pressure, after 
sampling," -u, (Sec. 12.11.1), and the corresponding effective stress is a~. For perfect sampling, the 
effective stress conditions would be a~s· and this is the a~s shown in Fig.13.24. Now if you were to load 
the perfect sample atthat point, its ESP would. be similar.in shape to the stress paths for NC soils in 
Figs. 13.9 andJ3.12 and as shown with the dotted curve in Fig. 13.24. Thus the loss in shear strength 
even with perfect sampling is significant. ; . . , ·. , .. · . · 
,. 
_ .· . ~~· · . . . · 
, 
· . 
Using the stress conditions in Fig. 12.34, the definitions· of the stress increments described in 
Sec. 13.3 and Appendix B, it is pos~ibl,e to d~rive the e~uatio~ for a~s· or fo~ K 0 < 1 
' 
a~s,; a~o[K0 + Au (1 -
K~)] 
I 
(13.23) 
, . 
. Because even with the best equipment and techniques we cannot obtain perfect sampl<!s, in real-
ity the loss in strength due to all the additional steps shown in Fig. 13.24 is much greater than 10%. 
Look at the unconfined compression test stress path from point 9 up to the failure. line. You can see 
that the measured shear strength is much less than the in situ strength. Calculations of the stability of a 
foundation based on the measured shear strengthfrom disturbed samples will result in excessively 
. ' expensive foundations and overly con~ervative designs. Procedures for evaluating sample disturbance' 
and correcting the measured shear strengths are suggested byLadd and Lambe (1963), Ladd et al. 
(1977), and Ladd mid DeGroot (2003). 
· 
Next, let's take ·a close look at what happens to the in situ stress. path for foundation loading, 
from point 1 in Fig.13.24 up to the failure line. Consider the case of, for example, a highway embank-
ment constructed on a soft clay foundation in which the clay is 100% saturated and essentially nor-
mally consolidated. This case, shown in Fig. 13.25(a), may be modeled by axial compression stress 
conditions. Strictly speaking, as mentioned previously, the loading should be plane strain ( e2 = 0) for a 
long embankment, but we shall use the common triaxial test, with which you are familiar, for illustra-
' tiveputposes. The stress paths for this case are shown in Fig.13.25(a) (comparewithFig.13.12). 
Let's look a little more closely at these stress paths and their engineering implications. For this 
normally consolidated clay, the Ko is less than 1 (about 0.6), so that the initial stress conditions in the 
ground are plotted as point A on the figure. In foundation loading, the horizontal stresses probably 
increase slightly, as was done in Example 13.6, but for this case we will assume that they are essentially 
constant. Then the (T - u0 )SP is the straight line AC. The total stresses represented by point C are 
applied at the end of construction. The induced pore pressures are positive, of course, for a normally 
consolidated clay, and so we 'will have the typically shaped ESP hooking off to the left, as is illustrated 
by curve AB in Fig. 13.25(a). The distance BC, then, is numerically equal to the excess pore pressure 
induced by the embankment loading. Note· that the shear stress on a typical element under the 
embankment increases from its initial value. of q0 to q1• Had loading continued to the l~vel of q1, the 
ESP would have intersected the K 1 line and failure would have occurred. 
· 
For this example, let's assume that we are good designers, that we correctly estimated the in situ 
shear strength of the soil, and that no failure occurred. Then we are at point B on the ESP at the end of 
construction, the most critical design condition for foundation loadings on normally cons~lidated clays. 
Why is this the "most critical"? Well, look at what happens after we reach point B. The applied loading 
is constant thereafter (assuming no additional construction loading occurs), the clay starts to consoli-
date, and the excess pore water pressure caused by the load dissipates. This excess pore pressure is rep-
resented by the distance BC. Thus the ESP proceeds along line BC. Ultimately at U = 100%, all the 
excess pore pressure will be dissipated and our element will be. at point C in equilibrium under the 
embankment load. It will still have a shear stress q1 acting on it, and p = p' = p1• Since there is no 
; 
,_: 
13.6 Applications of Stress Paths to Engineering Practice 
649 
. Pr Pi Po 
P1 
_, 
·, 
p,p 
.• 
, (a) 
q 
p,p' 
D'-. .... ~ ...... 
............ : ................ 
) 
........ _ ................ :' 
·'. 
K1hne :. .... 
· ·· 
(extension)'~.(!/'~ · 
:·.··;_ .. 
.. I .. 
(b). 
FIGURE 13.25. Stress paths for(~) fou~d~tion loading and (b)f~uncf~tion 
excav~tion of normally consolidated clay.' . 
. . ' 
' 
. 
. 
. 
. 
', . 
·excess pore water pressure remaining in the element, the total stresses will equalthe effective stresses 
at point C.Now you can see why point B at the end of construction is the most critical for this case . 
. • Point B is'the closest point to the failure line K1.'After.that, becauseof consolidation, the foundation 
' ··soil becomes stronger with time (safer) until at point C we are at the farthest point from the K 1 line for 
this particular loading situation. Thatis why the end of construction is the most critical for foundation 
• loading of normally consolidated clays. The enginee'ring lesson here is that if you make it through the 
·end "of the construction period for this type of loading, then conditions become safer with time. 
· For th~ foundation loading of an overconsolidated clay, the TSP and ESP would look something 
like the. paths shown in Figs. 13.11 and 13.13(b). As the negative excess pore pressure dissipates, the 
·· • ; stresses on the element move closer to the K 1 line, which means that the' long~ term conditions are actu-
ally the least safeafter dissipation of the pore pressure has occurred. But in most cases for foundation 
loading on overcmisolidated clays, we are so far froni t~e K 1 line anywaY that long-term conditions are 
usuallynotcriticaL 
' 
''·t ·;·.· 
' 
. :··,.( !· 
650 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Example 13.8 
Given: 
The embankment of Example 13.4. Triaxial compression tests indicate cf>' = 23° and c' = 7 kPa. 
Required: 
Cmistruct the K 1 line and determine whether the embankment will be stable. 
' 
' 
Solution: From Eqs:- (13.7) and (13.8), 1/J'. = 21.3° and a' = 6.4 kPa. Draw the K 1 line on the p-q 
diagram (Fig. Ex. 13.8). Since the ESP would intersect the K 1 line before the final design loads could be 
applied, failure would occur. At that time, q w<;mld be approximately 15 kPa. 
q (kPa) 
K11ine 
.--::::L: "'' = 21.3° 
30 
20 
FIGURE Ex. 13.8 
0o 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 p, p'(kPa) 
In Sec. 12.11.5 on the use of UU strength in practice, we mentioned the case of foundation load-
ing of lightly overconsolidated clays that exhibit dilatant behavior when sheared. This behavior has been 
observed both in laboratory tests and in the field under offshore structures in the Canadian Beaufort 
Sea. Crooks and Becker (1988) estimated total stress changes from elastic theory at the location of a 
piezometer under an offshore island and constructed the field (T - Uo)SP caused by the island's con-
struction [Fig.13.26(b)]. Then the measured excess pore pressures at various stages during construction 
were subtracted from the computed total stresses to construct the ESP at the piezometer location, also 
shown in Fig. 13.26(b ). The shape of this ESP. indicated dilatant behavior [compare with Figs~l3.11 and 
13.13(b)], which was also observed in lab shear tests on the sanie material iri Fig.13.26(a) .. 
The stress paths also indicated that when the shear stresses reached point A on the (T - u0 )SP, 
corresponding to the ~hear stre'ngth of the material at point N on the ESP, no further increase in shear 
stress was possible. In order to maintain the imposed shear stress at a constant value, the horizontal stress 
in the foundation clay had to increase. Because at points A and A' the. foundation clay was' in a state of 
failure, significant plastic deformations developed under the island. However, because of the island's large 
. diameter and flat side slopes, the overstress zone was confined, It also helped that the soft layer was thin 
compared with the diameter of the island. This example shows how valuable stress paths can be in practice. 
Another important engineering situation concerns an excavation for a foundation in normally con-
solidated clay. This situation is illustrated in Fig.13.16 as an example 9f axial extension. We already know 
from Fig. 13.19 what the TSP and ESP look like for this case; they are also in Fig. 13.25(b ). Since the ver-
. tical stress decreases during an excavation, the total stress path goes from the initial conditions at point A 
to point C. As with the case of foundation loading, the horizontal stresses may also decrease slightly, but 
for illustration purposes we shall assume that they remain essentially unchanged. Since negative pore 
pressures occur due to unloading,' the ESP must lie to the right of the (T - Uo)SP. For the case shown 
with unloading from q0 down to q1, the ESP then follows curve AB, and point B represents conditions 
" 
13.6 · Applications of Stress Paths to Engineering Practice 
651 
50 
40 
40 
30 
40 
<? 
a. 
6 30 
"' 
b 
20 <? 
<? 
a. 
a. 
6 
6 
I 
::;, 
o-
b 
10 
20 
10 
0 
0 0 
12 
Axial strain(%) 
(a) 
. p, p: (kPa) 
; .. 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.26. (a) Stress-strain and pore pressure~strain resp~nse ~~d effective stress p~th of a CU triaxial test 
onTarslut Clay; (b) stress paths in clay tmder Tarslui: Island, Beaufort Sea (afi:erCrooks and Becker, 1988). 
' 
• 
! 
• 
' 
• • 
• '' 
, 
• 
'' 
~· • 
• 
' 
•• 
· at the end of construction. For this case, failure did not occur, and we are safe at the end ~f construction. 
'Now,the excess pore pressure ~tarts to dissipate-it is negativein this case, and riow itstarts to become 
more imd more p~sitive, following line BDC. At point C, of course, all the excess negative pore pressure 
.. would be dissipated and the total stresses would equal the effective: stresses. This would never occur, 
however, because when the ESP reached point D, it would intersect the K 1 line in 'extension and failure 
would occur. Therefore the long-term conditions are the more critical for the case of an excavation in 
'normally consolidateddays. Iri contrast to the case of foundation loading, just because you get through 
construction without a failure doesn't mean that you are free of a possible failure. No, the excavation 
. (unloading) will become less and less safe with time. Field measurements (for example, Lambe and 
Whitman, 1969) have shown that the 'rate of dissipation of this negative pore pressure occurs relatively 
· · · fast, much faster than in the case of foi.nidation loading. Therefore· the engineering implication for this 
·· · case is to'get that excavation filled and the clay reloaded as· fast as possible. Otherwise you risk a failure 
occurring at some time, perhaps only a few weeks after completion of the excavation. This is another 
example of the long-term conditions tieing more critical than the end of construction conditions. 
· 
The above examples illustrate the value of the stress path method. You can construct similar TSP 
and ESP diagrams for the other cases shown in Fig. 13.16, for both normally. (and lightly overc6nsolidated 
652 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
TABLE 13.1 
Critical Conditions for the Stability of Saturated Clays 
Foundation Loading 
Soft (NC and Slightly OC) Clay 
Stiff (Heavily OC) Clay 
Critical condition 
UU (no drainage). 
Probably UU but check CD (drainage 
with equilibrium pore pressures)'. 
Remarks 
Use cfJ = 0, c = T1with appropriate corrections for 
sample disturbance, strain rate, anisotropy, age, etc. 
Stability usually not a major problem. 
Excavation or 
Natural Slope 
Soft (NC) Clay 
Stiff (Highly OC) Clay 
Critical condition 
Remarks 
After Ladd ( 1971 b). 
Could be either UU or CD. 
If soil is very sensitive, it may change from drained to 
undrained conditions. 
CD (complete drainage). 
' Use effective stress analysis with 
equilibrium pore pressures. If clay 
is fissured, c' (and perhaps c/J') will 
likely decrease with time. 
clays) and heavily overconsolidated clays, and see what the critical design situations are. Some of the 
critical conditions for stability are summarized in Table 13.1 (Ladd, 1971b). 
13.7 
CRITICAL STATE SOIL MECHANICS 
We have already seen that, simplified, conceptual frameworks of soil behavior, like the Peacock diagram 
for sand shear behavior (Sec. 12.4, Fig. 12.11), can provide a means for understanding how soil under a 
certain preshear state will behave when sheared to failure. One of the most important conceptual and 
theoretical frameworks in all of soil mechanics is known as critical state soil mechanics ( CSSM). Devel-
oped at Cambridge University, this framework was originally presented by Schofield and Wroth (1968). 
It brought together previous well-known concepts such as the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion and 
Hvorslev parameters (Sec. 13.13.2): However, it also provided new levels of sophistication in terms of 
our ability to model soil behavior byincludirig prefailure behavior [albeit using a simple ehistic-plastic 
model, Fig. 11.4(d)], the effect of stress history on generalized soil yielding, and drained versus 
undrained behavior in clays. The development of this framework served as the foundation for today's 
more sophisticated soil constitutive models, which in turn are used in numerical analyses for simulating 
highly complex geotechnical p;oblems. These constitutive models include Modified Cain clay (Roscoe 
and Burland; 1968), cap models (e.g., Drucker et al., 1957), nested models (e.g., Prevost, 1977), and 
bounding surface models ( e.g.,Dafalias, 1986; Whittle, 1987; and Pestana, 1994), among others. Consti-
tutivemodels are .reviewed in Sec. 13.8. 
, .. , · 
. 
. 
. 
· 
. 
. It is important to mention that the CSSM framework was originally developed for saturated, 
reconstituted clay-tliat is, clays completely remolded and then reconsolidated to a normally consol-
: ida ted. state. This reconsolidation can be followed by mechanical overconsolid~tion to some over-
consolidation ratio (OCR). Stated in its most fundamental form, the CSSM framework links a pair of 
well-known, two-dimensional (2-D) soil mechanical "spaces," void ratio-effective stress and shear 
stress:_effective stress spaces. It combines these 2-D spaces into a three-dimensional (3-D) space that 
describes how a clay with a particular stress history .~ill behave when sheared to failure, including 
volume change if it is a drained test, and sheaHnduced pore pressure if it is an undrained test. 
· Let's first reintroduce the 2-D spaces ~ith which yo~ are ~lready familiar. Figure i3:27(a) shows 
a typical plot of void ratio (e) versus the logarithm (base 10) of vertical effective stress (u~) such as that 
~ 
<Ji 
en 
,:~ 
.Cii 
~ 
(]) 
.s::: 
(/) 
Q) 
o· 
·~ 
"'C ' ' 
'i5 > 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
(a) 
a~(kPa) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8,.·9 10 
Displacement, 8 (mni) 
(c) .. 
c' = 0 
: 13.7: ;Critical State Soil Mechanics 
653 
Effective stress, a~ 
(d) 
FIGURE 13.27 Simplified criticai state framework for direct sh~ar tests that are cme-dimensio~a-lly consolidated, 
then sheared to failure: (a) e-;log a~ relationships for consolidation and critical states; (b) e-a~ relationships for 
consolidation and critical states; (c) shear stress versus displacement for direct shear tests at three a~ values; and 
(d) shear stress versus a~ for the three direct shear tests (after Mayne, 2006)., 
presented in Cha~ter. 8.1 ~~·ihis case, the slope in the ~ormallyconsolid~ted range is the compression 
index, Cc [Eq. (8.7)]. Figure 13.27(b) shows this same plot, except that u~ is plotted on a linear scale, 
resulting in the curved shape of the consolidation relationship. 
Next, as shown in Fig.13.27(c), we perform CD direct shear tests on three clay specimens con-
solidated to three ·different u~ values. While CSSM can depict test results from other, more complex 
tests such as the triaxial test (discussed later); use of direct shear results provides a simple way to 
understand CSSM principles. The preshear e-1og u~ states are shown on the compression curves of 
Fig. 13.27(a) and (b), and the peaks are plo£ted in shear stress T Versus normal stress CT~ space in 
Fig.l3.27(c). These failure r-u~ states form the f~miliar Mohr-Coulomb failure envelop~ defined by 
1Schofield and Wroth (1968) originally used specific volume ( v) instead of void ratio, where v =' l + e, i.e., v is the 
volume of soil for which there is auriit volunie of solids. They also usedthe natural logarithm (base e) instead of log 
baselO, and they used the 3-D definition of the mean effective stress, or p' ·= (ai + 2a3)/3, we mentioned earlier. 
To illustrate CSSM principles in familiar terms, we will use e and log a~ and then later use our familiar definition of 
p' = 1/z (a~ + aj,) to illustrate the usefulness of the critical state concept. ' 
' 
'. ' ; 
654 
Chapter 13 ,. • Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
the effective friction angle ¢', in Fig. 13.27(d). In the CSSM framework, this envelope, which always 
has ari intercept c' = 0, is known as the critical state line (CSL). The CSL represents the state of stress 
at failure for all soils, regardless of their stress history. 
· · 
In order to link the e-log IT~ and T-IT~ spaces together, we return to Fig. 13.27(a) and plot the 
e-log IT~ states at failure for the three direct shear tests that were performed. Since these were drained 
tests on normally consolidated specimens under constant IT~, we know· from Sec. 12.9 that the speci-
mens contract during shear, imd that the preshear IT~ = IT~ at failure. This leads to failure states that lie 
.directly under the preshear states, and the formation of a new line in Fig.13.27(a) that is the CSL, only 
now it is in e-log IT~ space (perhaps you c~m now start to visualize the 3-D CSL, which for these tests 
would be the combination of e-T-IT~). 
' 
·For each of the drained, direct shear. tests at different IT~ values, the paths followed during shear 
to failure on the CSL can be drawn first on thee-log IT~ plot [Fig.13.27(b)]; these are the paths labeled 
AB, CD, and EF. The same tests can be depicted on the T-IT~ plot in Fig.13.27(d)-they are also verti-
cal for the same reason, that IT~ is constant during these tests. If the paths AB, CD, and EF were plotted 
in 3-D space (e-T-IT~), we would refer to them as their state paths, since they track both the stresses 
and physical states (as represented by the void ratio) of the specimen during shear. 
· 
··You can begin to see that, like other soil behavior models that we've discussed, once the com-
pression curve and CSL are established for a particular set of tests, they can be used for simple predic-
. tions of failure stresses and void ratio changes for given values of preshear IT~. To expand the CSSM 
framework.toundrained shear, Fig. 13.28 shows the same compression.relationships, e-logiT~ and 
e-IT~, and the r-d~ space shown in Fig. 13.27. This time, the direct shear test is performed undrained 
after consolidation to IT~o at point A, so that the void ratio is unchanged as it moves to the CSL. The 
'* 
\ 
' 
\ 
' 
\ 
' 
\ 
Q) 
0 e 
'',,, 
i 
·',,, 
~ 
' 
' 
Cll 
' 
B ' 
' 
·I ' 
I 
-----
' 
: ',·1 
--B~ 
I 
'1.,. 
I 
' 
I 
;g eo 
0 > 
I 
I' 
I 
,, 
I 
I 
I CSL 
I 
....... 
1 
I 
I 
'!" .. 
I 
I, .... CSL 
, 
U'vf 
(a) 
, 
U'vp 
log u~ 
FIGURE 13.28 Simplified critical state 
framework for a direct shear test'that is 
one-dimensionally consolidated; then · 
sheared to failure, normally consolidated 
state: (a) e-log u~ relationships for con-
solidation and critical states; (b) e-u~ 
relationships for consolidation and critical 
··states; and (c) shear stress versus u~ for 
the undrained test (after Mayne 2006):, 
.,.. 
CJ) 
(/) 
~ 
Ui-
(ij 
(J) 
.t= 
U) 
I 
I. 
I 
Effective stress, u~ 
(b) . 
: 
I 
I 
. 
I. • 
CSL 
k?"Jtancf>' 
I 
I 
I 
4-
--
I 
-1J! 
-
I 
A 
1 
Uvo 
Effective stress, u~ 
(c) 
13.7 ·.Critical State Soil Mechanics 
655 
result is that the u~ at failure (point B) is lower than the preshear u~, the result of positive excess pore 
pressure, Au, being generated during shear. In fact, Au == u~ (pn;shear):- u~ (failur~ )· 
We mentioned that CSSM can also be used to model behavior of mechanically overconsolidated 
. 
~ soils-Le., those that were loaded to. some maximum stress ( u~m), then unloaded to a final stress ( u~1 ), 
which produces an OCR == u~mhi~f· In Fig. 13.29, a swelling line with slope Cs has been added to the 
compression curves, e-log u~· and e-u~, and the CSL remains the same in all three spaces as it was for 
the normally consolidated specimens. The slope of this unloading or swelling part of the e-log u~ path 
is C., which is defined by the same equation as the compression index, Cc [Eq. (8.7)]. The framework can 
once again be used for predicting both drained and undrained test results, as indicated by paths AB and 
AC, respectively. The undrained path AC indicates that since u~ (~reshear) is less than u~ (failure)• the speci-
men experienced excess pore pressure during shear, Au.<· 0, resulting in a T-'<T~ path that curls up and 
to the right to land on the CSL in Fig. 13.29( c): One question to ask is this: in an undrained test, is there 
a preshear i:T~ value that would lead to a vertical T-u~ path during shear (in other words, Au == 0 during 
shear)? This would be the case when <T~(preshear)'is where the.swelling line crosses.the CSL in 
·Fig. 13.29( a) and (b), point D. Thus, the CSL in these two figures can be treated as a dividing line of sorts: 
· .. when u~ (preshear) is to the right of this crossing point, the clay is'normally or lightly overconsolidated and 
. ' will contract during drained shear, or develop Au > 0 during undrained shear. When u~ (preshear) is to 
the• left of this crossing point, the clay is heavily overconsolidated and will dilate or produce Au < 0. 
Our use of direct shear tests in the above discussion allowed us to learn some basics of the critical 
• state framework, namely the relationship between preshear states on the compression curve and failure 
states on the CSL. However; this byitself would not have made it that much more. advantageous than 
the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion. The other significant piece of.the critical state framework is the 
Q) 
0 e eo 
"0 
'5 
> 
(a) 
FIGURE 13.29 • Simplified critical state 
framework for a direct shear test that is 
one-dimensionally consolidated, then . 
sheared to failure, heavily overconsoli-
dated state: (a)e-log u~ relationships for 
consolidation and critical states; (b) e-u~ · 
relationships for consolidation and critical 
states; and (c) shear stress versus u~ for 
the undrained test (after Mayne 2006}. 
Effective stress, u~ 
(b). 
Effective stress, u~ 
(c) 
656 
Chapter .13 : 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
" 
,,. 
concept of the yield surface. To understand what this surface represents, we will now look at the q versus 
p' stress space of a triaxial soilspecimen that is hydrostatically consolidated. As Fig.13.30 shows, there 
is still a compression curve for this situation, except that we now plot it as e-log p'. and e-p', instead of 
· using u~, which was for one-dimensional conditions used in the direct shear test. There is still a CSL 
plotted in these two spaces as well as in q-p' space [Fig.l3.30( c)]. The yield surface in q.;.. p' space is the 
· :.dividing line betwe~n elastic behavior and plastic or inelastic behavior,' and its size is determined by the 
maximum value of p' to which the soil is consolidated. Figures13.30(a)and (b) show three normally 
consolidated p' levels for the soil, A, Band C. Asp' increases, the size of the yield surface in Fig.13.30(c) 
also increases, defined by the intersections of the surfaces with the p' -axis at points A; B and C. 
· Avery simple case using the yield surface is during hydrostatic consolidation.· In Figs. 13.30(a) 
'and (b), the soil is mechanically overconsolidated to point D; this is also shown on the p' -axis in 
· . :Fig: 13.30( c). When the soil is reconsolidated to point B, the recompression portion D~B is elastic, since 
it lies inside the yield surface, and the portion beyond this (path B-C) is plastic, which also increases the 
size of the yield surface due to consolidation. 
· . · ·:i: , .Let's consider.a hydrostatically consolidated, drained triaxial.test cin a lightly overconsolidated 
,. soil. As shown in Figs. 13.31(a) and (b);the soil has been consolidated from point A:to point Band 
. unloaded to point C. These consolidation points are also shown in the stress path space ofFig.13.31(c). 
During the drained shear portion of the test; as shown by path CD inFig. 13.31(c); the initial part of 
"this loading, inside the existing yield surface, will be elastic. The soil then yields and begins deforming 
plastically, expanding the yield surface until it fails on the CSL at poirit D. You can see the subsequent 
decrease in void ratio on the compression curve. For a: hydrostatically consolidated, drained triaxial 
··· test on a normally consolidated soil, the. stress path would start where the yield surface crosses the p' 
axis, and the yield surface would progressively expand to failure. 
Cll 
.Q 
"§ eo 
~ 
• logp' 
(a) 
FIGURE 13.30 Simplified critical state • 
framework fora triaxial test showing 
the relationship between hydrostatic ' 
yield surfaces and compression curve', 
Cll 
0 .e 
'-o g 
normally consolidated and overconsoli~ 
o-
dated states: (a) e-log p' relationships.\.': 
for consolidation and critical states; 
(b) e-p' relationships for consolidation' 
and critical states; and(c) q versus p' . 
for different yield surfac~s (after 
Mayne, 2006). 
Effective stress, p' 
(b) 
;;; 
;;;;.CSL 
;; 
·(c) 
CSL 
p• ... 
Q) 
0 ·e eo 
"0 
·a 
> 
p~ 
I 
Pi 
logp' 
(a) 
FIGURE 13.31 
Simplified critical state 
framework for a hydrostatically consoli-
dated, drained triaxial test showing the 
relationship between hydrostatic yield 
o-
surfaces and compression curve, lightly 
overconsolidated soil: (a) e-log p' rela-
tionships for consolidation and critical 
states; (b) e-p' relationships for consoli-
dation and critical states; and (c) q versus 
p' fordifferent yield surfaces (after 
Mayne 2006). 
13.7 Critical State Soil Mechanics 
657 
p' 
(c) 
Undrained tests will obviously behave very differently, since their yield surfaces are fixed by 
their preshear p'. Consider two hydrostatically consolidated, undrained triaxial.tests, one normally 
consolidated and one heavily overconsolidated, shown in Fig. 13.32. The normally consolidated soil 
starts at a preshear state, point A. Since all of its deformation will be plastic, it will follow the yield sur-
face up and to the left to point B on the CSL; this is consistent with the idea that normally consolidated 
soils contract or produce t:.u > 0 during shear, and this is also seen in the e-log p' and e-p' spaces. In 
addition, a normally consolidated clay tends to strain harden; monotonically rising to failure as it 
climbs up the yield surface. For the heavily overconsolidated clay starting at point C in Fig. 13.32, the 
soil would climb up through the yield surface with resulting elastic strains and then fall to the CSL, 
where it would fail at point D. This is consistent with expected t:.u < Oduring shear, and strain soften-
ing behavior after peak shear stress is reached. . 
· 
. . 
· 
. 
So, how do we determine the yield surfaces (or yield curves in 2-D) for a particular soil? We can 
run tests following different stress paths, as shown in Fig.13.33(a) or, asshown in Fig.l3.33(b), we c1m 
use different stress ratios. Both approaches will result in the same yield cur¥e-i.e., the yield curve is 
independent of the stress path used to establish it (Leroueil et al., 1990). 
An example of the second approach [Fig.l3.33(b)] is illustrated by so~e data obtained byTavenas, 
Leroueil, and their coworkers at Universite Laval using triaxial tests on samples of Laurentian clays 
from Saint-Alban, Quebec. Stress-strain and pore pressure-strain data at three different consolidation 
pressures on overconsolidated specimens from 3 m depth is shown in Fig. 13.34. Note that the strain at 
failure (at the maxhnum principal stress difference) is only about 1%, suggesting that this soil is highly 
structured, which is typical for Laurentian clays from Quebec. 
658 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
q 
- ii; 
Cll I C 
~ 
:!2 g 
u;, 
log u~ 
(a) 
FIGURE 13.32 Simplified critical state 
framework for a hydrostatically 
consolidated, undrained triaxial test 
showing the relationship between hydro-
static yield surfaces and compression 
curve, normally consolidated and heavily 
overconsolidated soil: (a) e-log p' rela-
tionships for consolidation and critical 
states; (b) e-p' relationshipsfor consoli-
dation and critical states; and (c) q versus 
p' for different yield surfaces (after 
Mayne 2006). 
K0a~0 
U~o 
··."; 
(a) 
q 
1-
u) 
•(/) 
~ 
'li5 
[ij 
CD 
.t:: 
rJ) 
I 
Normal stress, u~ 
(b) : 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
CSL 
: 
;'CSL 
. I 
,;.· 
~e 
. 
1 ' 
~?>-v 
• e e cf_,. 
c;,v 
• • ,' • 
·e'o I 
• 
, 
B. 
• 
-{~ 
I. 
";' 
'. 
.I 
,' 
• 
e 
I ;; 
~Q' . 
,,lo 
•t,/ : . 
~'lc 
: 
-lA 
Normal stress, u~ 
(c) 
(b) 
Differ.ent K values during .consolidation. 
---- ,.._. Different stress paths during drained tests compression tests. 
FIGURE 13.33 • · Deter.mining the yield curves by (a) different str~ss paths, or (b) different stress ratios (Leroueil 
etal.,1990). 
· 
' 
·., 
cp' 
. 
~' 
Stress paths for the three triaxial tests in 
Fig. 13.34 are shown in Fig. 13.35. The data are 
plotted with the MIT definition of p' (Sec. 13.2). 
Tests 1,.2, and 3 were conventional CU triaxial 
tests consolidated hydrostatically-that is, with 
the confining pressure held constant. From the 
shapes of the stress paths, you know that the clay 
was overconsolidated. 
The yield curve. in Fig. 13.35 was deter-
mined from peaks of the three stress-strain 
curves in Fig.13.34 and from the yield points of 
four nonhydrostatic .consolidation tests-that 
is, with the ratio K ~ u)luJ. held constant dur-
co 
a. 
:::. 
•C'J 
b 
I 
'b' 
ing consolidation, as shown in Fig. 13.36. The 
yield surface appears to be centered about the 
Ka-nc·line, with K 0 ~ 1 - sin cf/ [Eq. (11.8)), 
rather than about the CSL line as would be 
predicted by the Cam clay model shown in . 
Fig.13.32. Note that at point A, the major prin-
~ 
cipal effective stress uJ. ~ u~, as determined· :; 
froml-D consolidation tests. This suggests that 
<1 
a good estimate of the yield curve can be made 
from ordinary 1-D consolidation tests performed 
on high-quality samples. 
13.7 Critical State Soil Mechanics 
659 
40 
r 
I I 
Saint-Aiban, 3m 
" 
ITl -- u~ = 4 kPa 
IP~f 
[g)--- u~ = 12 kPa 
I, . 
@]--· u~ = 20 kPa 
\ 
~ 
K®··, 
I 
,.... 
. 
30 
20 
·~ ..... 
r:::.: .. J 
--
-.... 
1-..... •• 
r---:.:r -... .:":j :.· --•• 
10 
0 
0 ....... 
0 
. 
2 
4 
6 
81 (%) 
l ---
I 
r--
I 
8 
10 
12 
Yield curves obtained from specimens. 
from three different depths of the Saint-Alban 
clay shown in Fig. 13.37 have a similar shape, so it 
may be possible to normalize the test results from 
FIGURE 13.34 Stress-strain and pore pressure-strain 
curves (after Tavenas and Leroueil, 1977). 
the same deposit with respect to the preconsolidation pressure u~. In fact, as shown by Leroueil et al. 
(1990), samples taken from different depths and consolidated under a cell pressure u~, such that the ratio 
u~u~ is constant, will have essentially the same ( u]. -
u))!u~ and !lulu~ versus axial strain relationships. 
co 
a. 
:::. 
•C'J 
b 
I C\1 
'b' 
II 
o-
~ : ' 
301r=~~r=====~--~~-----r----~ 
, -p CU after hydrostatic 
• 
consolidation 
o · u3fu1 = constant 
20 
p'= 
Yield curve 
20 
.30 
~; + ci3 . (kPa) 
2 
50 
FIGURE 13.35 Yield curve 
for Saint Alban clay at 3 m; 
see text for description of 
the types of tests (after 
Tavenas and Leroueil, 1977). 
660 
Chapter 13 : Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
FIGURE 13.36 Volumetric strains 
from nonhydrostatic cu triaxial 
tests on St. Alban clay (after 
· 
TiiVenas and Leroueil, 1977). 
FIGURE 13.37 Yield curves for 
specimens of Saint-Aiban clay 
obtained at different depths 
(after Tavenas and Leroueil, 1979). 
~ 
c 
~ 
:s 
<l 
co 
0.. :::. 
-<'ll 
b ' 
,I C\J 
-b 
II 
o-
p' = u 1 ;:- u 3 (kPa) 
0 0 
1 0 . 
. 20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
I 
1. <&:;::,...-.........__ 
I 
oL.... 
I 
I 
2 I. 
I 
I 
'\ '\. 
I n....\ 
'\. ~ 
I 
I 
4 1·--·--·-·-·-·---·-·-·--··t··-·----··-·-:-··--·-+·--···----·---·-··-· 
:· 
A0.65 
.{. 0.50 
K = u3fu1. o 0.85. 
01.00 
Up3.0 
· . ·- p' = u; + u3 (kPa) 
2 
Up4.5 
Up5.7 
Diaz-Rodriguez et al. (1992) presented normalized yield curves from tests on 17 natural soft 
clays of very different geologic origins, all normalized .with respect to u~, as shown in Fig: 13.38. The 
sources and geotechnical characteristics of these clays are given in Table 13.2. All yield curves had the 
same general shape as the yield surfaces of the Saint-Alban clay from Canada in Fig. 13.37, and they 
appeared to be centered ~bout the Ka-ne-line, rather than about the CSL line as predicted by Cam clay. 
When the specimens were hydrostatically consolidated, their yield stress ( uy )hydrostatic depended on 
the preoconsolidation pressure. The ratio ( u¥ )hydrostatic/u~ varied between 0.44 and 0.73 with an average 
·~ 13.7 , Critical State Soil Mechanics 
661 
-<>. 
b 
~ 0.4 
'"' 
b 
I 
~ 0.2 
</>' = 25-27° 
• .Otaniemi 
A Riihimaki 
(a) 
• 
Saint-LouiiSI---+---+----o~il--'.]~---1 
-b"- o Ottawa 
~ +Osaka 
'"' 
b 0.2 1--'-r-t.Z:.--=-t----+--.;"-1 !:J"'----1 
I 
~ 
0 
-<>. 
b 
~ 0.4 
'"' 
b I. 
~0.2 
(c) 
(u1 + uj)/2u;, 
(e) 
0 
</>' = 23° 
~ Atchafalaya 
- A Perno 
</>' = 28-30° 
@lt. Champiain sea 
• Backebol 
A Drammen 
• Pornic 
0.2 
0.4 
(b) 
(d) 
0.6 
(u1 + uj}/2u;, 
(f) 
0.8 
1.0 
0!----=-'::---~,_•'•'~---=~-~ 
FIGURE 13.38 Normalized yield curves 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 : ·of 17 natural soft clays with friction 
(u1 + uj)/2u;, · 
angles varying from 17S and 43° 
(g) 
(Diaz-Rodrfguez et al., 1992). 
662 
Chapter :13 ·< Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soi_ls and Rocks 
TABLE 13.2 Geotechnical chanicteristicsfor the natural clays in Fig. 13.38 (Diaz-Roddgue~ et"al., 1992) 
Site 
Depth (m) 
w(%) 
PI 
u~ (kPa) 
cf>Nc CO) • Refer~nce • 
Atchafalaya, Louisiana-
21.3 
58 
44 
150 
23 
Tavenas and Leroueil (1985) 
Backebol, Sweden 
3.4 
87 
42 
.57 
30 . 
Brousseau (1983), Tavenas and 
Leroueil (1985) 
Bogota, Colombia 
7-12 
90-160 
100-170 
150-255 
35 
Maya and Rodriguez (1987) 
Champlain Sea clays, Quebec 
-
58-90 
17-45 
50-290 
27-30 
Brousseau (1983) 
Cubzac-les-Porits, France 
4.5-5.5 
. 60..::So 
40 
46-75 
32 
Magnan et al. (1982) 
Drammen, Norway 
-
52 
29 
-
30 
Berre (1972), after Larsson (1977) 
Favren, Sweden · 
-
60 . 
-
70 
32 
Larsson (1977) : 
Mexico City, Mexico 
1.7 
460 
493 
71 
43 
Diaz~Rodriguezet al. (1992) 
Osaka, Japan · 
30.0 
63 
-
330 
25 
Oka et· al. (1988) 
Otaniemi, Finland 
2.0 ' 
130 
63 
20 
25 
Lojander (1988) 
Ottawa, Ontario 
-
65 
36 
.150 .· 
27 
Wong and Mitchell (1975) 
Perno, Finland 
4.2 
100 
39 
' 22 
23 
· Korhonen and Lojander (1987) 
Pomic, France. 
1.2-2.0 
75-88 
40 
35-:45 
29 
Moulin (1988, 1989) 
Riihimaki, Finland 
4 
'· 55 
25 
90 
27 
Lojand~r (1988) 
St. Jean-Vianriey, Quebec 
3.7 
4(' 
9 
1150 
' 
32 
Brousseau (1983) 
St. Louis, Quebec 
-
67· 
'23 
190 
25 
La Rochelle et al. (1981) 
· Winnepeg, Manitoba 
8-12 
54:-63 
35-;60 
190-380 
17.5 
Graham et al. (1983) 
value of about 0.6. The ratio also tended to decrease as cf/ increased. The position of the yield curve above 
the ¢~c-line changes with the value oftlie fricti~n angle and with the structure of the clay.'The further the 
upper part of the yield curve tends to be' above that line, the more highly structured it is. Also the height of 
this "hump" above the ¢~c-line decreases with increasing sample disturbance. You will recall a similar 
"hump" in the Mohr failure envelopes for OC clays in both drained and undrained shear (see, e.g., 
Figs. 12.26 and 12.34). An extreme example of disturbance is complete remolding or destructuring of the 
clay. The effect o_n the shapes of the stress~strain curves is dramati~, as shown i~ Fig. 13.39, and of course 
the change is equally dramatic in the shap~s of the yield curves, as shown b~Tavenas'and Leroueil (1985). 
0.8 .------,.-------, 
0. 6 1------·-····-··--·L ........... ~--1 
-c. 
b 
l :::r:=L-
" . 
/. 
I 
Saint-Aiban 
l (Leroueil et al., 1979) 
0o 
2.5 
5 
--Intact 
--- Destructured 
···········-----l_:........ . 
. ............ .. 
~.,...---......; 
/' 
// 
"'~/···"'"'"""'""""0"-•·---·"""'"''"' 
Atchafalaya 
(Pare;1983) 
0 
2.5 
-'~ (%) 
5 
/ ... ~---.... 
---1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/''''''"' 
I 
I 
o_ 
Backebol 
· (Brousseau, 1983) 
2.5 
5 
FIGURE 13.39 · Stress-strai~ c~rve~ fro'm hydrostatically consolidated CU tests on intact 
and destructured soft clays (Tavenas andleroueil, 1985). 
13.8 Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
663 
From this brief introduction, you can see that critical state soil mechanics is a powerful frame-
work for describing soil behavior and predicting soil response under a variety of preshear and failure 
states. However, a number of textbooks, mostly by British authors: have appeared in recent years that 
p~ovide additional information and applications of critical state soil mechanics to geotechnical prob-
lems. Recommended are Atkinson arid Brans by (1978), Bolton (1979), Muir Wood (1990), Aziz (2000), 
Powrie (2004),Atkirison (2007), and Budhu (2007). 
13.8 
MODULUS AND CONSTITUTIVE MODELS FOR SOILS 
, 
·, 
' 
Several times in Chapters 8, 10, 11, and 12 we mentioned that soils and rocks were often simply assumed 
to be elastic, and that this assumption was important for settlement analyses (stress distributions and 
immediate settlement in Chapter 10) and in our discussion of the stress~deforrriation 'characteristics of 
geo-materials (Chapters 11 and 12). W~ also occasionally mentioned the modulus of a soil, either a com-
pression modulus or a Young's modulus. You may recall from your courses in strength of materials that 
. the modulus is the slope of the stress-strain curve. Sometimes the modulus of a material is called its stiff-
ness. We showed several different types of stress-strain curves in Fig. 11.4. If the stress-strain curve is linear, 
obtaining the modulus or stiffness is easy, but how is the modulus determined on a nonlinear curve? 
We begin with a detailed discussion of soil modulus, its definitions, and how it is measured or esti-
mated. Soil modulus is part of what are known as constitutive relations in solid mechanics. Constitutive 
modeling of soils and rocks has become increasingly important in recent years, because many geotechni-
cal projects require deformation predictions' in addition to conventional analyses of potential failure and 
factors of safety. Well-calibrated soil constitutive models are required to ·make reliable predictions of 
· deformations. We end this section with a brief description of the hyperbolic (Durican..:.chang) nonlinear 
soil model, because it is commonly used in 'geotechnical practice:.. 
. 
. . 
13.8.1 Modulus of Soils 
Although there are a number of ways to describe the modulus of a material, all are basically the ratio 
of stress increment to strain increment (or the slope) over a particular range of the stress-strain rela-
... tionship for that n'taterial. Figure 13.40 shows some definitions of modulus that include: 
\ 
·' 
' 
! 
' 
' 
I 
' 
• Tangent modulus: slope of the tangent to the stress-strain curve at any point; an impoitant mod-
ulus shown in Fig.13.40(a) is the initial tangent modulus (E; or E 1). 
• ., 
• 
. · 
• Secantmodulus: slope of a straight lin~ drawn from the origin to some predetermined stress 
level, such as 50% of the maximum stress; a chord modulus is the slope of a'straight line between 
'any two points on the curve. Figure 13.40(a) shows examples of both tangent and secant moduli. 
• Cyciic loadbig.-related moduli: when ther~ is ail Jnload~reload ~ycle: tlie modulJs ~1ay be defined 
. by drawing a tangent from the lower bouitd stress .on either the unload 'or n:load pmtion, or by 
' connecting the end points of the hystere~'is' ioop, as shown i~ Fig. 13.40(b ): The hysteresis loop 
. modulus is sometime called the unload-reload modulus Eur· . . 
. ' ... 
·• 
', 
' 
• 
' 
,, 
· 
• 
• 
• 
' 
r 
1 
' 
Besides the loading condition, other factors. that influence modulus include·(1)for granular 
. materials, particle packing (as measured by the dry density, void ratio, and/or relative density, and may 
include the influence of compaction), and (2) for cohesive soils: water content, plasticity index, stress 
., . history, and cementation (Briaud, 2001 ). It is sometimes difficult to generalize about the effect each of 
these factors has on modulus. For example, while dry density tells us something about the packing of 
the particles, it cannot be assumed that soils with the same dry density will have the same modulus. The 
two soils may ha~e verydifferent structures or fahrics (e.g., flocculated versus dispersed-Chapter4) 
. and thus they will have very different modulus values. Another example is the effect of water content. 
.: While higher water content tends to indicate alower modulus, this assumption would be invalid for 
some compacted soils as well as high water content clays that are cemented or highly structured. 
664 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
a 
Tangent modulus· • 
. 
-_. 
a 
. ...;---
. ._..... 
·. ·. 
.. 
.. 
. 
· 
. At some stress-strain level .. 
L---,.,.--,-,--.,.,.---':-------,--;,._e 
Y 
(a) 
' ·: ' 
~ 
I ; 
' 
Reload ta~gent modulus . 
Hysteresis 
loop 
modulus 
:.-"" 
"' 
,.,."" 
Unload 
,. tangent 
,.,."" modulus 
.. ' .~ 
L-----------~--':---~----------~e 
FIGURE 13:40 Definitions of soil modulus. for vario'us loading and unloading conditions: (a) ta~gent, 
secant, arid chord modulus; (b) cyclic loading moduli (after Briaud, 2001). ·· 
· 
· · · 
. i ; ' ~ . . 
. j • ' :, •. 
: 
.:;' 
.. ··Note also that all of the moduli shown in Fig. 13.40 can be either drained or undrained, depend-
ing on the drainage aconditions in the field or in the laboratory. When specifying or reporting modulus 
. values in practice, it is important Jo. clearly state what drainage conditions apply. For example, when 
using elastic theory to estimate the immediate settlement (Sec.-10.4)of fine-grained soils,· because the 
immediate settlement takes place before any consolidation can occur, the appropriate modulus is the 
undrained modulus Eu· For granular soils, the appropriate modulus for settlement analyses is of course 
a drained modulusEd. 
· 
· 
. 
Measurement of Modulus 'You ~ight think that a particular modulus can be 'easily determined from 
the stress-strain curve obtained by a triaxial or other type of shear .test. However, as mentioned in 
. , : Sec.11.6, obtaining undisturbed samples of granular soils is not easy or inexpensive; Consequently, gran-
ular soil moduli are most commonly determined from empirical correlations with in situ test results. 
... 
As for cohesive soils, many. researchers have shown that the undrained modulus is significantly 
:affected by sample disturbance. Mostly .th~ disturbance t~nds to reduce the undrained modulus Eu, and 
. tlius:you would tend to ov~rpredict the immediate ~ettleinents in the field. Because other factors also 
• affect the undrained moduius in laboratory tests (D'App~ionia et al., 1971b; Simons, 1974), field loading 
' 
:' 
~ 
• ' ' 
• + 
• 
• ' 
• • 
• ' 
,' 0 ~ ' 
' ' ' . • • ' - • i . ' 
. ' ' ' 
• 
-" . 
~ ' 
; 
' 
,1 
• 
•• 1 • • 
' 
. ' 
'. • . ·~ \ • -. 
; • 
' 
• 
tests aresometm1es used for Important proJect~. From settlement measurements, the _modulus Is back 
calculat~d using elastic theory (Chapter.10); Load tests haye sh~wn that stress lt!vel is a very important 
. factor that strongly affects E~. For example, large.:scale loading tests caiTied oui in Nonvay, Canada, and 
Sweden (Hoeg et al., 1969;Tavem!s etal., 1974; and Holtz and Holm~ 1979)' showed veiy little settlement, 
because the load was applied rapidly. However;'when about one~half.the failure load was reached, the 
' settlements started to rapidly accelerate as the load was increased. Thus the back-calculated Eu values 
were very dependent on the level of the shear stress applied by the surface load.' .• 
. 
·:Because of the difficulties mentioned above,' other techniques and procedures have been devel-
·. oped for estimating the modulus of soils. i' 
. 
':' 
<: . 
~ 
·. 
.. ;: ;\!'' 
• Small Strain Stiffness •. Burland (1989) showed that under service'loadingconditions, the strains expe-
rienced by the foundation material can be verY: small. Measurementson'full~scale foundations have 
indicated that strains are less than 0.01 %; and the stress-strain behavior is 'remarkably linear and 
.. ~ 
~ .. 
C? 
c.. ::. 
~ 
40 
1 20 
I. 
g. 
/ 
/ 
./ 
'/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
· 13.8 .. • Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
665 
;;...--·· . 
....... 
_.,.,.. 
' . 
'"\ 
., . 
. 
' 
/. . 
.. 
'. . 
. ' 
//" 
Strarns determrnedfrom external 
1j(. 
displacements corrected for load 
~ \ 
cell compliance 
: ' 
· 
/ 
Apparent linear modulus from external 
/ 
• measurements 
.·• 
FIGURE 13.41 
Initial stress-strain 
, behavior from unconsolidated 
'undrained triaxial test on London 
Axial strain (%) 
·' 'Clay-internal versus external strain 
measurements(Jardine et al., 1985). 
recoverable (i.e., elastic) with only a small amount of hysteresis. Unfortunately, measurement of small 
strains and therefore 'soil stiffness in laboratory specimens is impossible in conventional triaxial tests 
with axial strain measurements (dial indicators or linear variable differential transducers-LVDTs) 
· ·that determine the overall deformation of the specimen. Figure 13:41 shows the dramatic differences in 
Stress-strain behavior between strain measurements from instrUII~ents mounted intertlally on the SOil 
speCimen and those from external displacement sensors in the same triaxial test. The strains have to be 
measured locally, and ignoring the errors caused by external strain measurement can lead to significant 
under~estimation of modulus and soil stiffness. 
Local strain measurement techniques on triaxial and hollow cylinder tests include the use of 
miniature LVDTs, noncontact proximity transducers, Hall-effect sensors, and flexible beams with 
strain gages (Scholey et al., 1995). Santagata et al. (2005) attached miniature displacement transducers 
to the specimen, while O'Kelly and Naughton (2008) used rioncontaCt proximity sensors that sense the 
. position of targets on the specimen. Hall-effect transducers that measure magnetic field changes were 
. ·used by Clayton and Khatrush (1986), and Rechelunacher and Finno (2004) successfully used image 
analysis techniques for local strain measurements . 
. Regardless of the method used, the local strain sensing device has to be mounted directly on the 
soil specimen inside the triaxial cell, but submerged electrical devices and risk of leakage pose major 
· , technical challenges: However, with special techniques and precision testing equipment, it is possible to 
make extremely small and precise strain measurements. For example, Fig. 13.42 shows the time history of 
the stress, strain, and excess pore pressure variation from a strain-controlled cyclic triaxial test on Ottawa 
sand with a strain amplitude of less than 0.001%. The tests were performed in a device developed by 
Huang et al. (1994) that has an extremely high resolution stepper motor and preloaded ball screw to pro-
vide the driving force, and uses noncontact proximity transducers for local strain measurements. 
· Because of .the strong international interest in small strain stiffness, five international confer-
.. enceson prefailure deformation of geomaterials haye taken place since 1994 (for example, Burns et al., 
2008). Their emphasis has been on small-strain laboratory and field modulus measurements, and their 
use in analytical methods.·· 
One method for making small-strain laboratory modulus measurements that has gained popular-
. ' ity in recent years is the use of bender elements. Bender elements are polarized, piezoceramic elements 
! that are essentially cantilevers used in pairs. One element is used for. transmitting a mechanical she51r 
wave through the soil by electrical charge excitation; and the other one-receives the resulting wave at 
666 
Chapter 13 .: Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
;·· 
~· t :.I-. 
0.001 f--
;;g 
~ 0.0005 f--
., 
" 
-~ 
0 f--J 
1ii 
"iii -0.0005 f-
~ -0.001 f-
-0.0015 
co 
21-
a.. 
6 
~ 
0~ 
"' 
b· 
·I 
.§:. 
· 
··~ ·11 II 
-;-2 . 
<? 
-4 
·a.. 
6 
'U 
:J 
<I 
~ 
0.: .· 
':J 
(/) 
(/) 
~ 
a. 
a; 
1ii 
r-
some distance from the transmitting element 
and converts it into' an output" electrical sig-
nal. This allows theshear'wave velocity VstO 
be computed, which can be used to compute 
the small strain shear modulus Gmax• or 
Gmax = PtVi 
(13.24) 
where p1 = the total density of the soil 
through which the shear wave is transmitted. 
In the field, the most common tool for 
determining shear ·modulus· is the seismic 
cone penetration test (Lunne et al., 1997). 
r-
After the cone is penetrated to the desired 
testing depth, thearrival time of a surface-
generated shear ·wave is detected at that 
~ 
. depth. This information can be used to com-
pute the Vs and Gmax· Shear wave velocity 
and shear modulus are discussed in more 
detail in Sec. 13.15. 
Estimates of Modulus Based . on Other 
Properties Because of all the, problems 
with laboratory and in situ modulus mea-
surements, correlations of the modulus with 
-0.5 r 
::: 
, J II 
I 
I ' 
~ 
-1 
, 
· a classification or other property that is 
I 
• I 
II 
• 
· I 
I 
I 
I • . 
more easily measured have been developed 
0 
0 
50 
100 
.150 
a.. 
200 
250 
for coliesi~e as ;well as granular soils. 
... Time (sec) 
1. Cohesive soils: It. is quite common 
in pnictiCe to assume that Eu is somehow 
FIGURE 13.42 A time history of stress, strain and 
excess pore pressure from a cyclic triaxial test ori 
Ottawa sand (A. B. Huang, personal communication, 
2008). 
. . 
· related to the undrained shear strength. For 
example, Bjerrum (1972) said that the ratio 
Eufrr ranges from 500 to 1500, with Tf deter-
. mined by the field vane shear test. The lowest 
value is for highly plastic clays, while the highest is for clays of lower plasticity. D'Appolonia et al. 
(1971b) reported an average Eufr1 of 1200for load tests at 10 sites, but for the clays of higher plasticity 
·the range was 80 to 400. Simons (1974) found published values ranged from 40 to as high as 3000! 
::These cases plus a few others we have taken from the literature are plotted versus PI in Fig: 13.43 for 
:softer clays-stiff fissured soils and glacial tills are not included. There is much scatter for PI < 50 and 
not much data for PI > 50. It seems 'reasonable to simply use · Bjerrimi's recommendation 
(Eulrf = · 500 to 1500) especially for preliminary estimates of Eu. See also Sec. 10.4.1f you need a good 
estimate of the undrained, modulus, seeD' Appolonia et al. (197lb) and Holtz (1991). 
Ladd et al. (1977) also showed how Eufrr vades with OCR, but the relationship is not so simple 
because, as we mentioned earlier, Eufrr dep(mds so strongly on the level of shear stress. In general, 
however, it decreases with increasing OCR for a given stress level (Fig,13.44). : · 
Kulhawy and· Mayne· (1990) recommended a· hyperbolic stress-strain model· (Sec. 13.8.5) for 
foundation design and for estimating tangent modulus values for cohesive soils. They provided a range 
of undrained modulus vahies for clay, as shown in Table 13.3, normalized by atmospheric pressure (i.e., 
·multiply these dimensionless values by 14.7 psi or 101.3 kPa). 
4000 
3000 
Eu 
Tt 2000 
1000 
• 
CJ 
• 
CJ 
• 
Field vane tests 
o Triaxial tests 
X ·Direct simple shear tests 
CJ Field loading tests 
Sources: 
Bozozuk (1963) 
Bozozuk and Leonards (1972) 
• D' Appolonia, Poulos, and Ladd (1971 b) 
DiBiagio and Stenhamar (1975) 
Hansbo (1960) 
Holtz and Holm (1979) 
Ladd and Edgers (1972) 
LaRochelle and Lefebvre (1971) 
·13.8 ·Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
667 
800 
• 
Raymond, Townsend, and Lojkacek (1971) 
ex. • 
Simons (1974) 
Tavenas, Chapeau, ~aRochelle, and Roy (1974) 
.:>0 
eo . o 
•x 
X 
CJ 
0 
~0 
rf 
CJ 
X 
CJ 
o~------~----~--~~~~~~ 
.. 
8 
• 
1 
10 
OCR 
FIGURE 13.43 The ratio Ejr,versus plasticity index, as 
reported by several authors. 
· 
FIGURE 13.44 Effect of OCR on Euht from direct 
simple shear tests on Bangkok clay (after Ladd and 
Edgers, 1972, and Ladd et al., 1977). 
TABLE 13.3 T}'pical Ranges of Undrained Modulus for Clay 
Consistency 
Soft 
Medium 
Stiff. 
Normalized Undrained Modulus, 
E~IPa 
15 to 40 
40 to 80 
.SO to 200 
After Kulhawy and Mayne (1990). 
Ladd et al. (1977) showed Eu values from direct simple shear tests for cohesive soils with varying 
plasticity indices (PI) at different shear stress levels ( rh) relative to undrained shear strength, r 1 
[Fig.13.45(a)], and relative to overconsolidation ratio (OCR) as given in Fig.13.45(b) and (c).Duncan and 
Buchignani (1976) suggested the plot shown in Fig.13.46 to unify Eulrj; PI, and OCR in a generalized plot. 
2. Granularmaterials: Since undrained conditions e~ist orJ.ly for very short pe~iods in granular 
deposits, the drainedmodulus (Ed) is appropriate. Table 13.4 shows the relationship between density 
classification and range of Ed, again normalized by atmospheric pressure. 
As noted in Secs.11.6 and 12.11.4, in situ tests are probably best for sandy deposits, although they 
provide ·only an indirect measurement of modulus. Probably the most common methods to determine 
Ed in the field are the SPT and CPT, although, as concluded by Kulhawy and Mayne (1990), correlations 
between the blowcount Nand Ed show "considerable scatter." 
668 
Chapter .13 
, .Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
~ 
-t 
UJ" 
1000 ~-~.-,--,--,-rr,.,--, 
500r--.--~-r~~ 
~ 
-t 
UJ" 
,· 
0.2. 0.4' 
0.6 
0.8 
· Shear stress ratio, Thlrt 
(a) 
2 
i 
5 
OCR 
(b) 
10 
2 
5 
OCR. 
(c) 
10 
FIGURE 13.45 Relationships among normalized modulus (EufTr), PI and OCR from direct simple shear tests 
' (from Ladd et al., ,1977): (a) EufTtVersus applied shear stress level (ThiTr) for soils of various Pis; (b) EufTjVersus 
OCR at ThiTr = 1/3, various Pis; (c) EufTrversus OCR at Thlrt = 213, various Pis (after Kulhawyand Mayne, 1990). 
400 
'2 
6 
8 10 
'·' 
Overconsolidation ratio,09R 
' 
' 
I 
>. 
TABLE 13.4 · .'I)rpical _Ranges of Drained Modulus for Sand 
Density Classification . 
Normalized Drained 
. Modulus, EdiPa 
FIGURE 13A6 Generalized relationship among . 
normaiized modulus (EjT,), PI, and OCR (after 
Loose 
Medium 
Dense 
100 to 200 
200to500 
, • 500 to 1000 
buncan and Buchignimi, 1976). . 
. . . 
. . 
:< 
·.:; 
t 
After Kulha\vy and Mayne (1990). 
. ; .. 
13.8.2 Constitutive Relations 
Although the process is n~t usually me~tioned in undergraduate mechanics courses, basically all prob~ 
lems in solid or continuum mechanics are solved by starting with the body forces (usually gravity) and 
surface forces and tractions acting on the body, which are connected by the equations of equilibrium. 
Next we consider the displacements and strains in the body. They are connected by geometric or 
·13.8 · Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
669 
compatibility relationships that insure that the body remains contimious. All of this is valid .for all 
materials, whether elastic or plastic including soils, as long as they behave as a continuum. In Sec. 6.9 
on effective stress, we mentioned that even though they are particulate media, finer grained soils 
especially are often assumed to be a continuum and thus can be treated as a solid body ... 
·in order to predict strains (and thus deformations) from the applied stresses (and forces), we 
need some sort of connection or association between them that represents the mechanical behavior of 
'the material. Because the constituents of the material affect its behavior, the mathematical equations 
expressing the connection between stress and strain are called constitutive relations. 
·How do we determine the constitutive relations for real materials? As you can guess, the real 
behavior is very.coniplex, and it:is almost impossible to consider all factors that might influence 
their; mechanical behavior. We can imagine that the response of a: material to applied stresses 
depends on their magnitude, time over which they act, temperature of the:body, stress and strain 
history, and maybe even the material's response to different electrical fields or chemical environ-
<ments. Attempts to· determine the constitutive relationships of a material based on the statistical 
mechanics of its elementary particles or the micromechanics of the constituent components have 
not yet been successfuL 
· , · 
So, we are left with determining these relations experimentally, and then developing simple but 
reasonable mathematical models of mechaniCal behavior that can be used to solve engineering prob-
·lems. This type of constitutive model is a called a phenomenological model. Phenomenological models 
are consistent with fundamentals of solid mechaniCs and soil behavior, but they lie somewhere 
between the theoretical and empirical. They are the most common type of constitutive model, although 
.. they must be calibrated and adjusted by curve~ fitting experimentally observed behavior. Constitutive 
modeling refers to the mathematical expression of the assumed or calibrated stress-strain relationship 
used to describe the behavior of soils. 
. ' 
· 
13.8.3 Soil Constitutive Modeling · · 
The complexity of real material behavior means that we must use approximations or idealizations in 
order to formulate the mathematical expressions for constitutive relations. We mentioned several 
times in Chapters 8, 10, 11, and 12that soils and rocks are oft'en simply assumed to be linearly elastic, 
even though we know they tr~ly are neither linear ncird~stic. Other examplesof ideal material 
behavior include nonlinear·. elasticity, ·linear visco-elasticity, elasto-plasticity, . arid. other composite 
material models. 
· 
' 
· ' 
. 
' 
· ·o 
. 
• 
• 
·As noted by Muir Wood (2004), the key to successful constitutive modeling is to identify the 
important characteristics of soil behavior for a particular application'.' If the model is too simple, it will 
:miss the important behavior characteristics, but if it is too complex\vith many parameters, then it 
requires too many laboratory or in sit~ tests 'to define thos~ material parameters. For virtually all use- . 
ful soil constitutive models, closed-form solutions for strains and deformations are impossible except 
for very simple loading and boundary conditions. Therefore for the vast majority of geotechnical 
problems, numerical analysis such as the finite element method is required to obtain approximately 
correct solutions. 
The critical state soil mechanics (CSSM) framework presented in Sec.13.7 was a very important 
development in soil modeling, since it described the relationship between void ratio (e), shear stress 
(q), and effective normal stress (p') for a number of loading paths, including drained (varying e) and 
undrained (constant e) conditions. We can trace.CSSM's ideas to common conceptual roots with the 
more simplistic, but practical Peacock diagram described in Sec.12.4 (Fig.l2.11) and Sec.13.10. CSSM 
initiated some 30 years of constitutive model development for soils, including the Cam clay model and 
its offspring, modified Cam clay (in which the bullet-shaped yield surface of Cam clay was replaced by 
an elliptical yield surface; Roscoe and Burland, 1968), which moved soil modeling beyond relatively 
simple failure criteria and linearly elastic stress-strain behavior. However, since CSSM models are 
670 
Chapter 13: 
, Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
elasto-plastic; they still lack many of the crucial shear stress-strain-strength characteristics of real soils, 
·.as we showed with the real soil data at the end of Sec . .l3.7. 
,: 
: · .. ·. Since the early 1970s; soil constitutive models have: been developed that have become increas-
ingly more sophisticated and complex. Along with the concurrent dramatic increases in readily available 
· ·computing power; they were increasingly incorporated in·numerical analyses of large-scale geotech-
· .. : nical problems. Perhaps the most important development in some of the newer models is their ability 
·" 
to integrate more subtle transitions from elastic to plastic soil behavior, as.well as viscous (i.e., time-
dependent) components of that behavior. Some models also included common· soil behavior charac-
teristics such as anisotropy and loading direction, which in turn allowed their. use in modeling behavior 
, , · , measured in more advanced testing devices and more complex field situations. However; considering 
more complex behavioral characteristics requires more materials properties to be determined by labo-
·ratory or.in situ tests, and these.are quite costly. Thus in practice, when more advanced soil modeling 
techniques are employed, parametric analyses'are commonly performed using a wide range of mater-
\ ·.·• :,:: ial properties determined from correlations with.classification and in situ test data rather than from 
. expensive sampling and laboratory;tests., 
· 
. ,; ·: 
For further information on constitutive modeling, see Perl off and Baron (1976) for a simple 
: , . introduction to linear elasticity and linear visco-elasticity models, while.Muir.Wood (2004) presents 
, ; , 
an introduction to constitutive modeling with a description of elastic; elastic-perfectly. plastic, and 
elastic-hardening plasticity models that include extended Mohr-Coulomb and Cam clay. See Aziz 
, , ··· ... (2000) for details about Cam clay and modified Cam clay; he also provides a brief but useful analysis 
:, , 
of the shortcomings of these popular soil models. 
: ' 
· •. ·, 
Other useful references include Fung (1965); Yong andKo (1980), Chen and Saleeb (1982), Chen 
.and Baladi (1985), and Chen (1994). 
i; 
This section will first explore the different failure criteria for soils, one of which you are already 
very familiar with, the Mohr-Coulomb criterion. After this, different classes of models will be described 
to give an idea of how this area has evolved since CSSM arrived on the scene .. 
. 
,;\ __ ,_. 
. 
,_, 
13.8.4 Failure Criteria for Soils ' 
·,_,. 
., 
' 
.c 
;. 
·:;:; 
••· •• 
-
.( 
' 
-
• 
-' 
-
-
, , . A common requirement for. all soil models is the existence. of a failure criterion. Such criteria are 
, ' , , generally divided into one~ and iwo-paninieter types, dep~nding on the number ofpa~ameters used in 
, L their definition. For the simplest assumption of an isotropic soil with only principal stresses acting on 
the soil element, these criteria are typically defined for a three-dimensional state of stress consisting of 
. ·:., the major, intermediate, and minor principal stresses on the soil (u1, u 2 , and u 3 , respectively)~ Failure 
, ,· occurs when, for a given normal stress, the deviator or shear stress on a soil element increases to some 
, state, defined as failure fot that' element. It turns out that failure criteria for soils, including the 
Mohr-Coulomb (Sefs. 11.4 andl3.14), canbe defined in terms of their octahedral normal stress (the 
, :average or mean hydrostatic stress) 
:·; 
'uoct ~Ha-t+ uz+'u3) 
··,, 
.·•r' 
-:t 
:and the octahedral shear stress (an average of the possible shear stresses on the element) 
'· Toct =·H(ul- uz)2 + (uz- u3)2·+ (u3- Ut)2]
112 
I 
~· 
,' 
(13.16) 
(13.17) 
. As Fig. 13.47 shows, the stress state P( u 1, u 2 , u 3) for a s~il element with only principal stresses acting 
on it (as is the case for, say, the triaxial test); can ·be depicted using a vector representation that brings 
this stress state into a two-dimensional representation with a position vector OP that has a hydrostatic 
· ·,component g = V3 CT oct and a deviatoric component normal to the hydrostatic axis, 7] '= \13 T oct 
(McCarron and Chen, 1994). 
· 
,:!( 
13;8 . Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
671 
Deviatoric axis 
\ 
' P(u1, u2, u3)' 
Hydrostatic axis 
The one-parameter. failure criteria 
.. ;include. maximum. shear stress models, the 
Tresca criterion and . von Mises criterion, 
which are independent of hydrostatic stress 
.and therefore are symmetric about the 
hydrostatic axis. The Tn~sca failure envelope 
is a six-sided prism, while the von Mises 
envelope is. a cylinder. You know that soil 
shear :strength is strongly dependent on 
applied normal stress, so these failure criteria 
are not particularly useful for soils, but they 
introduce us to the idea of three-dimensional 
failure criteria. The other one-parameter fail-
u2 
· ure: criterion is the Lade-Duncan model 
FIGURE 13.47 Three-dimensional representation ofthe 
(Lade and Duncan, 1975), which has been 
stress state in principal stress space (after McCarron and 
used to describe the strength of cohesionless 
Chen, 1994); 
· · · 
· 
· · 
· 
· ·· . soils ( c = 0 ). Because the strength is defined 
Space diagonal 
using a linear dependence on TJ (McCarron 
and Chen, 1994), it is useful for depicting 
sand behavior that is dependent on friction 
angle,¢' .. · · 
. 
; · 
Two~paraineter faihire .criteria are 
more corrinion for a general representation 
·of shear strength in geologic materials, and 
the; mo~t 'common among these is the 
Mohr-'-Coulohib criterion. We have shown 
a~~:::_ __ .:__.:__ ____ .:__ __ u 3 
this thUS far Only in two-dimensional, T-U 
FIGURE 13.48 Mohr-Coulomb criterion in three-
dimensional principal stress space (McCarron and Chen, 
1994). 
. 
space. A ·more . generic; three~dimensional 
view is given in Fig. 13.48,\vhiCh shows that 
the actualMohr.:.coulomb surface is a six-
sided conical ' prism.:. tha:t' expands with 
increasing· hydrostatiC ·stress. The prism 
. reaches an apex'eitheniithe 6figin (in the 
case of cohesionlt!ss materials) or at some 
point along the hydrostatic axis where 
(crt = u 2 = u 3 < 0) for cohesive soils. The 
Drucker-Prager criterion, also known as the 
extended von Mises criterion, has a true conical shape; i.e., if you slice this surface normal to the hydro-
static axis at a given TJ value [refer to Fig.13.49(a) for the 3-D representation, and Fig.l3.49(b) for the 
2-D representation], a circular shapeis obtained. 
. .. 
·A third, common, two-parameter criterion used for geologic materials is the Lade two~ parameter 
criterion (Lade, 1977). This was fundamentally an extension of the Lade-Duncan one-parameter crite-
rion, used primarily for sands, but introduced a curvature to the failure surface as hydrostatic stress 
. increases, accounting for the nonlinear relationship between normal and shear stress at higher stress 
levels in cohesionless soils. 
. 
. . .. 
.. . . . .. .. 
. 
.... One other failure criterion is the Matsuoka-Nakai criterion (Matsuoka and Nakai, 1977). This is 
' .. ; a p~~fectly plastic model, so that the fixed yield surface is the same as the failure surface. It corresponds 
to the Mohr:-Coulomb model for axisymmetric stresses, and in 3-D problems has a smooth surface, 
which is advantageous from a computational point of view. · 
· 
· 
672 
Chapter 13 , Advanced Topics in Shear. Strength of Soils and Rocks 
(71 
J3i2 Toct 
. Space' diagonal 
~~~~-----,-----· 
)oJo- 173 
.,:,· 
3 Uoct 
a2 .. 
,,~ 
(b) 
(a) 
FIGURE 13.49 (a) Three-dimensional representation of Drucker~Pragerfaiiure criterion (Chen and Saleeb, 1994); 
(b)Two-dimensional depiction of Drucker-Prager ca'p model (McCarron and Chen, 1994). 
13.8.5 ·Classes of Constitutive Models for Soils 
There, are three general classes of constitutive models for soils: cap models, nested models, and bounding 
. surface models. We have already seen the classic cap model for soils in Sec. 13.8.2, when we described the 
· principles of criticalstate soil mechanics and the modified Cam clay model. As defined by McCarron and 
Chen (1994), the capmodelsconsist of a fixed failure criterion (e.g., Mohr-Coulomb) that describes the 
point where the soil becomes perfectly plastic [shear stress remains constant with additional shear 
i, 'strain-see Figs. 11.4(c) and (d)], and a subf~ilure surface that allows the soil to "work harden" or 
' undergo an increase in plastic yield stress due to changes in volume. 
' 
' 
· 
A simple example of the cap model behavior is the one-dimensional (Ka) case,in which the con-
. solidation stress shifts the pl~stic yield stress outward in the form of an increasing preconsolidation 
str~ss, u~. Figure 13.50 shows, ir:t. q-p' space [Eqs. (13.1) and (13.2), respectively] how this loading 
expands the cap while the perfectly plastic failure surface remains the same. The computational method 
or rule by which the cap expands is clearly important, and you are referred to Aziz (2000) for further 
information on such flow rules. 
· 
'M 
b 
I 
i: 
, ,...IN 
II 
.,, 
··Perfectly plastic 
surface 
~-
Expansion of cap due to 
plastic, strain . 
' 
1 
.' 
' 
P' = 2(u1 + u3) 
FIGURE 13.50 Simple example 
of work-hardening cap model 
during one-dimensional (K0 ) 
·consolidation (after McCarron 
and Chen, 1994). 
" 
13.8 .Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
673 
The second major class of constitutive models for soils is the nested model (Mroz, 1967; Iwan, 
1967; Prevost 1977; Lacy and Prevost, 1987; Prevost and Popescu, 1996), which became very useful both 
for characterizing soil anisotropy and for modeling cyclic loading. Jbese models are based on either 
cylindrical or conical yield surfaces in our three-dimensional stress space of Fig. 13.47, and they can both 
shift and expand/contract with loading and unloading. While they were innovative in their approach to 
modeling more complex aspects of soil behavior under nonmonotonic loadings, as· McCarron and 
Chen (1994) suggest, the potenti~lly large number of input parameters is a significant obstacle to their 
implementation. 
. 
·. 
. 
. 
: 
Because they are defined by surfaces that explicitly separate elastic and plastic behavior, both 
cap and nested models have an inherent and important disadvantage in the modeling of geologic mate-
rials. As we shall see in Sec. 13.16, the stress range over which soils and rock behave in a purely elastic 
mode is extremely small, and plastic strains begin to emerge at very low stress/strain levels. The third 
major class of constitutive models are the bounding surface models (e.g., Dafalias and Popov, 1975, 
Dafalias and Herrmann 1982, Kaliakin and Dafalias 1990a) th\lt allow plastic strains to occur inside a 
new yield surface known as the bounding surface, with the plastic strain magnitude determined by the 
proximity of the stress state to the surface (McCarron· and Chen, 1994 ); This is arguably a more sophis-
ticated method for achieving the nested model goal, but without having the many parameters required 
in the nested model to maintain multiple surface shapes and locations. This class of models has been 
especially useful for cohesive soils under cyclic' loading (e.g.; Whittle, i9S7), and has been extended to 
use in modeling cohesionless soils as well(e.g.; Bardet, 1986; Pestana, 1994). A final aspect ofthese 
models is their ability to incorporate viscous (or rate-dependent) effects based on the original work 
by Perzyna (1963) and later implementation and verification by Kaliakin and Dafalias [1990(a, b)]. 
Sheahan and Kaliakin (1996) provide a number of additional papers on the. topic of modeling rate-
depi:mdent soil beha~i()r. 
. . 
· · : 
.. · 
' 
· 
. 
' 
.. . . . · . 
. · 
· 
.. 
· · 
· 
. In order for constitutive mociels to accuratelypredict.stresses a.nd deformations; they must be 
properly calibrated. The material properties should be defermined on high-quality soil samples using 
. the best testirig equipment and techniques, and the characterizationshould also consider the effect of 
loading and unloading, dilatancy, and fabric anisotropy. Model limitations, simplifications, ·and capabil-
ities should be well understood. Experience has shown that accurate predictions are possible with well-
calibrated constitutive models and valid input parameters. 
13.8.6 The Hyperbolic (Duncan-Chang) Model 
We mentioned in Sec.l3.8.2 that most geotechnical problems involvirigconstitutive modeling require 
numerical analysis such as the finite element method to obtain a solution: One ofthe most common 
soil models used for finite element analyses in practice is a simple incremental nonlinear elastic stress-
strain model popularly known as the Duncan-Chang hyperbolic model (Duncan and Chang, 1970). It 
is based on the transformation of a hyperbol~·into a straight line, as shown in Fig. 13.51. 
Kondner (1963) recognized that the shape of the stress-strain curves for many soils could be 
approximated by a hyperbola. The equation for a hyperbola is ::?- - j2 = 1, and it can be transformed 
into a straight line by plotting ylx versus x. As shown in Fig. 13.51(a), the equation for a hyperbolic-
shaped stress-strain curve is: 
. 
. ; 
i 
. . (13.25) 
where E; = initial tangent modulus, and 
~ ' 
( u 1 -
u 3)ua = asymptote to the ultimate or peak principal stress difference. 
674 
Chapter 13. . Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
(ut- u3)ult 
e 
(a). 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.51 
Hyperbolic representation of a stress-strain curve: (a) actual soil, 
and (b) transformed (Duncan et al., 1980). · 
.. Equation (13.25) can be transfci~~ed i~to a straight. lin~: 
c 
, 
_,.. j 
' 
· 
' • 
L 
, 
~ 
8 
. 1 
8 
. 
( a1 ...:. u3)' = E; + ( o'1 -
a3)~lt • · 
' • 
,' 
' j 
I ' ~ 
' 
-: ; 
\ 
(13.26) 
:As shown in Fig.13.51(b), the slope ofthe line is l/(al .~ d3)ult and theintercept is 1/E;.As explained 
in Sec. 13.8.1, determining the initial tangent modulus E; is often problematic. for especially non-linear 
a-8 relationships. So this transfcinnation can provide a good estimate of E;. 
· 
' 
For many geo-materials, stiffness and modulus increase with increasing confining pressure. Thus 
a power relationship similar toEq. (8.21) is appropriate for both the unload-reload modulu·s Eur and 
the bulk modulus B. For the Eur 
· · 
· 
· · · 
' 
' 
· • : 
' 
(T3 
.( )n 
Eur ,;.., KurPa Pa . 
(13.27) 
where Kur = the unload-reload modulus number, a dimensionless constant .The other. variables were 
defined in Eq. (8.21). For the bulkmodulus, the relationship is 
. . 
. . . 
. 
. . ((T3)"! 
B ~- KbPa Pa . 
(13.28) 
,, ~: ' 
where· Kb = bulk modulus number, and 
m = dimensionless bulk modulus exponent; 0 < m < 1.0. 
When the Mohr...:.coulomb failure criterion is included in th~ hyp~rbolic mocl~l, the mathemati-
cal expression for the tangent modulus E 1 is (Dunc~n et al., 1980): 
···[ 
R1(1- sincf>)(al- a3)]2 
(a3)n 
E = 1-
. 
Kpa -
1 
2c cos cf> + 2a3 sm cf> 
· 
Pa 
(13.29) 
where R1, K, and n are model parameters; the other parameters were defined previously. The model 
parameter R1 is the failure ratio, or (a1 - a 3)· = R1 (a1 :_ a 3)ult· The-modulus number K determines 
1 • ~ 
13.8 Modulus and Constitutive Models for Soils 
675 
400 
ro 350 
c.. 
6 
(!) 300 
(.) 
c: 
.:~ 
(!) 250 
:::: 
'8 
~. 200 
~ 
c;; 150 
··~··. ;, 
'g 100 
~ 
50 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Axial strain(%) 
-- Hyperbolic curve fit 
Confining pressure (kPa) 
X 102 
•• •52 
... 25 
12 
14 
16 
FIGURE 13.52 Hyperbolic 
curve fitting of triaxial test 
data on a poorly graded 
subangular RMC sand; 
K.= 850, Rt = 0.73, n = 0.5 
(Lee, 2000}. 
the scale of the soil modulus, and the modulus exponent n defines the hyperbolic relationship between 
. th~ soil modulus and confining p~essure. The values of R1, K;and n can be determined from your own 
· tests or from the data base in Duncan et aL (1980). 
· 
For phine strain loading conditions,the stress-strain relationships are different than for triaxial 
conditions (Sec. 13.11). Therefore, different hyperbolic model parameters are required. Lee (2000) 
adjusted the model parameters from triaxial tests to plane strain loading' conditions, and some of his 
· results are shown in Figure 13.52 .. · ' • 
· .· ' 
· 
· 
· 
· 
The Duncim...:.Chang hyperb-oliC parameters ·are not fundamental but are empirical coefficients 
that represent thebt:haviorof soil under a'limitedrange of conditions. The values of the parameters 
depend on the density of the soil, the water content, range of testing pressun!s, and the 'dniinage condi-
tions. The laboratory test conditions should be representative of the soil behavior in the field. 
A big advantage of the Duncan...:.Changhyperbolicinodel is its versatility and generality. It can 
be used for all soils-'-sands, clays; gravels; rockfills, saturated arid unsaturated soils, and compacted or 
natural. But it does hilVe some limitations: Post~peak behavior is notmodeled, as shown in Fig. 13.52. 
As Duncan (1980) noted, it does not account for volume changes or dilatancy, so its accuracy for pre-
'dictirig deformations in in dense sands under low confining pressures is limited. . 
, · .. Iri spite of its limitations, the Duncan-::Chang hyperbolic model is one of the most practical and 
._'.successful of the.~vailable constitutive models (Yong ~~~ ~o, 1980)> . 
. 
13.9 
FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF THE DRAINED STRENGTH OF SANDS 
·· · In Chapter 12, we described the stress-strain and V:oluine ~hange behavior of sands during drained 
shear. we ·also discussed the effect of void ratid and confining pressure, as well as the various factors 
that affect the CD strength of sands. In this se8tion; we take a more fundamental look at the frictional 
strength of granular soils, as well as the important char·acteristicof dilatancy of dense sands. We end 
this section with a discussion of curved Mohr envelopes, because, although they are usually assumed to 
be straight, they are actually curved, especially over a wide range of confining stresses. 
13.9.1 Basics of FriCtional Shear Strength 
In Sec. 11.4.2, when we discussed the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion, y;e arbitrarily assumed that the 
analogy between sliding friction of solids and the internal friction in soils was valid. Undoubtedly, 
676 
Chapter 13 · · Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Coulomb was aware ofAmontons' laws, the two basic. laws of friction, which were well stated by 
Lambe and Whitman (1969) as follows: 
1. The shear resistance between t~o bodies is pro{>Ortionalto the normal force acting between the 
two bodies. 
· 
2. The shear resistance between two bodies is independent of the dimensions of the two bodies. 
' 
., 
According to Lambe and Whitman (1969) these Jaws were originally stated by Leonardo da Vinci 
about 1500 and then rediscovered about 200 yr later by the French engineer Guillaume Amon tons. 
Equation {13.30) is an expression of the First Law, the ratio of the shear force T to the normal 
force N acting on the plane surface between the two solid bodies. This ratio is, of course, the coefficient 
of friction, p., or in equation form 
· 
· 
T 
IL = N 
(13.30) 
The coefficient of friction p. can also be expressed as the tin gent of the angle cf>~'- between the N force 
vector and the resultant of theN and the T vectors just as the block starts to slide. When that happens, 
T = T rna~· Thus J.L = tan cp~'-; Go back and look at Fig. ll.ll.for an explanation of sliding friction and 
what happens to that angle prior to slippage. 
. , 
... : . ·' 
The next important developments in our understanding of frictional resistance between solids are 
attributed to Terzaghi (1920 and 1925, pp. 50-52), who postulated that solid friction was caused by small 
imperfections or asperities inevens'mooth solid surfaces. The contact area at these asperities changes 
due to plastic flow that occurs due to normal and shear stresses, As noted by Mitchell and Soga (2005), 
··these concepts were further developed by Bowden and Tabor (1950, 1964), and the Terzaghi.:..Boden and 
Tabor hypothesis is now known as the adhesion theory of friction. This theory suggests that two impor-
. tant features of the contact surface affect frictionai resistance: surface roughness and surf!lce adsorption . 
. The h1fluences of both features are described in. some detail by Mitchell and Soga (2005). When we 
. think of soils, both surface roughness and the presenceof contaminants or even water. on the mineral 
surfaces can influence their frictional resistance. · ·. 
· . . 
. 
· · · · · . . . • • . · 
· 
The frictional resistance between mineral surfaces' for some common minerals found in soils has 
been tabulated by Mitchell andSoga (2005) under avariety of tests and conditions. It is interesting that 
water has been found to increase the friction angle, e~pecially for very smo'oth surfaces, but this effect 
decreases as the surface roughness increases. Because all naturally occuring soil mineral surfaces are 
'undoubtedly rough and not chemicaily clean, we report only those values of friction angle that seem 
'. practically relevant or are available in Table 13.5. An exception is the sheet minerals (layer silicates-
Chapter 4) such as mica and chlbrite that have a natural cleavage; for these minerals water apparently 
acts as a lubricant to reduce friction. 
Other Models of Granular Soil Behavior, . Other approaches to explain. the behavior.of granular 
soils have been described by Scott (1963). His analysis began with simplified models of cohesionless 
soils, the application of failure theory, the influence of intermediate principal stress on failure, the 
effects. of stress history and strain rate on failure, . and . finally pore water. considerations and 
drainage effects. 
· 
Mitchell and Soga (2005) provide considerable detail about physical interactions among granu-
lar particles. They discuss the effects of buckling, sliding, and rolling of particles, fabric anisotropy, 
changes in number of contacts with shear, and the effects of particle shape and angularity. 
. 
Finally, Harr (1977) takes a different approach to the mechanics of particulate media using the 
methods of statistics and probability theory. 
· 13.9 Fundamental Basis of the Drained Strength of Sands 
677 
TABLE 13.5 
Mineral 
Quartz 
Feldspar 
Calcite 
Mica....: Muscovite 
Mica-Biotite 
Chlorite 
1}'pe of Test 
. ~article. to particle 
Particle to plime 
Block on block 
Along cleavage faces 
Along cleavage faces 
Along cleavage faces 
After Mitchell and Soga (2005). 
13.9.2 Stress-Dilatancy and Energy Corrections 
Conditions 
Saturated 
Saturated 
Saturated 
!
Dry 
·· 
Saturated · 
!
Dry 
Saturated 
I
D 
. 
sa7urated 
26 
29 
34 
23 
13 
17 
. 7 
28 
12 
It has long been recognized that dense sands expand when sheared. Osborne Reynolds of Reynolds 
Number fame tried to explain the phenomenon and first called it dilatancy (Reynolds, 1885).Although 
. it is often assumed that the behavior of granular material is relatively simple in comparison with that of 
fine-grained soils, in reality this is 'not necessarily the case, as we· show in this' section. · 
· 
Figure 13.53 shows schematically what happens to a volume of dense and loose granular soils when 
they are sheared. Both volumes are subjected to the same normal stress u n [Fig.13.53(a) and(c)lThen the 
shear stress T is applied, as shown in Fig. 13.53(b) and (d); in this figure, the vohime change is indicated by 
the symbolllH. The dense sand expands and llH is positive; the loose sand contracts, so llH is negative. 
We begin this section with attempts to explain dilation by the mechanical energy required to over-
come the shear resistance during direct imd triaxial tests on sand. While' simple,these analyses considered 
only the external energy' required for shear:Toaccount for the internal energy'expe'nded during shear, we 
need Rowe's elegant' stresscdilatancy theory.'· 
. . 
' · • 
. 
'. . · '. ' . 
We then show. how the components of dila.: 
tion or contraction, grain crushing, and grain-
. to-grain· mineral friction· all contributed io • 
·the Mohr failure envelope (MFE) of sands. 
Next we describe the important contributions 
of Bolton (1979 and 1986) on dilation; con-· · 
tractions, and critical states. Finally, we give· 
some data on· the magnitude of the dilation 
angles at high and low confining stess. 
.. 
Energy Corrections Taylor (1948, pp. 345-6) 
explained the expansion or dilation due to 
the interlocking of the grains in a dense sand 
by the mechanical energy expended in a 
direct shear test. Figure 13.54 shows typical 
direct shear results for a dense sand and a 
loose sand. During shear of the dense speci-· 
men, at llH, T max is still increasing and doing 
work against the normal stress 'uN acting on 
the shear plane. 
, · · · 
(c) 
(d) 
' . 
. 
FIGURE 13.53 
Effects of shearing on a volumes of dense 
and loose granular soils: (a) dense before shear; (b) dense 
after shear; (c) loose before shear; and (d) loose after 
.shear (Leonards, 1962). · 
678 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
T 
T 
'I: 
~--------------~----~8 
~--------------~8 
k=~~--~----------~~8 
r---------------~8 
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.54 Shear and volume change behavior in a direct shear test on 
, (a) dense sand and (b) loose sand. 
To find the part of the total shear energy T required for expansion r.,.we equate the expansion 
shear energy r.A8 to the vertical expansion energy irNA !l.H; or, 
r.AB ;, uNA !l.H , , 
', 
(!l.H) 
Te =uN ,~ 
• 
• 
' 
' 
' 
• T 
' • 
• 
where the quantity (!l.H/8) equals,the slope of the !l.H-versus-8 curve. This slope is defined as the 
, dilation angle v. For a dense sand, we have friction plus interlock, whereas for a loose sand, we have 
friction only (with no or negative !l.H). The dilation angle v can be found geometrically as shown in 
Fig. 13.54(a). A positive dilation angle, +v, indicates expansion or dilation whereas a negative dilation 
, , angle, -v, indicates contraction, as shown in Fig.13.54(b)., 
',' 
Bishop (1954) performed a similar analysis for an ordin'ary triaxial compression test. We don't 
include it here, because, as Rowe (1962) and Rowe et al. (1964) showed, both the previous analyses are 
technically incorrect, since they consider only the external work caused by dilation and neglect the 
additional internal work required by dilation. Rowe's (1962) stress-dilatancy theory correctly accounts 
, for this internal work, and the basic stress-dilatancy equation is: 
u1 
( 
dv) : (,. 
4>~'") 
----; =, 1 +-
tan2 --: +--
u3 
de1 
, 
4 
2 
where v = dV/V 0 = differential volumetric strain, 
e = !l.HIHo 
dv , 
•, 
,_d . = slope of dV IV 0-versus-ei curve,and 
81 
¢~'" =basic mineral friction-for example, as given inTable 13.5. 
(13.31) 
Figure 13.55 shows the various component of the total friction angle in drained shear, cPd· 
According to Rowe (1962), there are three components of the total friction angle: (1) mineralfriction, 
(2) particle reorientation, and (3) expansion (dilation). 
' 
' 
T 
,• 13.9 Fundamentai·Basis of the Drained Strength 6f Sands 
679 
46% 
Loose 
. 
. 
. 
;' 
Extrapolation from 
· /( 
</>' 
. 
; 
34%' 
' 
~ ·. 
; . ' 
Dense·. 
'}o (%) 
Measured 
MFE~ 
. ''• 
FIGURE 13.55 · Components· 
o(the friction angle as a function 
of porosity; n0 = initial porosity, 
<!>,. = mineral friction already . 
defined, cf>d :=.the measured 
CD friction angle, and 
<!>dr = <!>d - dilatancy effect. 
low confining··~···. 
; 
· 
·pressure:s~·~·§. ~;~~~~~~~~i~~~~~~~~ 
,'~ 
; 
· .. .. , ,, ,' 
:;/ 
. ·FIGURE 13.56 . Compon·ents of 
, " 
. :: · 
the Mohr failure envelope for a 
granular soil over a wide range 
·of confining pressures (after Lee 
a 
and Seed, 1967) .. 
At high confining pressures, we have a fourth component, particle crushing, reflecting the fact 
that, after an initial decrease or flattening ofthe MFE slope, the slope tends to increase as pressure 
increases. Note that crushing requires considerable energy. As pointed put by Lee and Seed (1967), 
the measured strength = sliding friction ± dilatancy + particle rearranging + particle crushing, as 
shown in Fig; 13.56. 
· 
· 
Dilation, Contraction, and Critical States We can summarize behavior of CD DS tests on sands as 
follows (Bolton, 1979, 1986): 
1. A given sand has an approximately unique ¢J~11 , that is, it is independent of the initial void ratio 
and density ( e0 and p0 ). Also c/J~tt is essentially independent of the effective normal stress a~ in a 
DS test (and the effective confining pressure a~ in a CD triaxial test). · 
2. For dense sands, cP~eak and T peak >> cP~!t and T ult. 
• Beyond the peak, thin rupture zones or dislocations develop, and sometimes as shearing 
continues, these dislocations split into branches called bifurcations. 
. 
• The initial void ratio and initial density approach the critical void ratio ecrit or the critical 
· · · ··density Pc;it due to dilation; as the volume increases, the density decreases. · 
' 
; 
' 
~· 
! . 
• . 
; 
' 
3. Loose sands strain to reach ultimate or maximum strength, and thereis no peak in the curve. This 
. phenomenon is shown in Fig. 13.54(b) above. iri this case: as the volum~ decre~ses, the void ratio 
decreases and density increases until the critical void ratio ecrit and critical density Pcrit are reached. 
4. Magnit~de of the peak shear stress is a f~n~tion~f the,r~te of dilation.·· 
... , ' 
·. 
680 
Chapter13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
In order to understand the frictional behavior of sands, the concept of the critical state is important. 
When a sand is sheared, it eventually reaches a critical state which has a unique ratio of ria' = tan cf>~rit on 
the shear planes. According to Bolton (1979) at the critical state in the zones of shear, the critical void ratio 
ecrit is a logarithmic function of the stresses. Figure 13.42 shows the critical state lines in two-dimensional 
T-a' and e-a' space. Figure 13.42(c) indicates that e,.-ln a' data is usually linear over the stress range of 
interest. If you read Sec.13.7 on CSSM, then Fig~ 13.57 should look familiar. Figure 13.57(b) is the same as 
Fig.12.8. We could also depict these concepts is in a three-dimensional r 7 a' -,-e plot, similar to the Peacock 
diagram (Fig.12.11) .. : 
· 
You can also see from Fig.13.57 that the magnitude of Tutt or Tcrit is independent of e0 for either 
e1oose or edense· If the specimen is initially loose, it contracts until it reaches the CSL at ec and a~. Similarly, 
if the specimen is initially dense, it expands or dilates until it reaches the CSL at ec and a~. Although the 
critical state model is useful; it does not explain the peak strength of dense sands. For this we need a 
stress-dilatancy model, for example the Rowe (1962) theory described above. 
Because it dilates, the dense sand mobilizes a greater angle of internal friction than cf>~rito 
or 
cf>' = cPmax = cPcrit + V ;;:::: cP~rit 
(13.32) 
As shown in Fig. 13.54(a), the peak of the stress-deformation response corresponds to the maximum 
dilation angle +v, and its magnitude depends on the amount of expansion and on the characteristics of 
the sand grains such as particle shape, particki roughness, and grain size distribution. Beyond the peak, 
the dilation angle decreases and cf>'--'; cf>~rit at the ultimate or critical state where the dilation angle is 
zero and the measured friction angle cf>' = cf>~rit· This is called the fully softened critical state strength. 
The loose specimen [Fig. 13.54(b)] of course does not reach maximum shear stress until the critical 
state, where the dilation angle is negative or -v. 
T 
(kN/m2) 
ec 
eo 
(]"~ 
CSL: T = u' tan cf>~ 
· u' (kN/m2) 
e 
u' (kN/m2) · 
. ~ilation ~; 
. 
'I, 
I 
I 
In u~ 
FIGURE 13.57 Critical state lines (CSL) in T-u'-e space:'(a) T versus u'; <i>) e versus u'; 
and (c) e versus In u' (after Bolton, 1979). 
· 
· · 
· 
· 
In u' 
-• 13.9 · Fundamental Basis ofthe Drained Strength of Sands 
681 
In Sec. 12.3, we mentioned that CD triaxial specimens of dense sand usually fail along distinct 
planes. This is because when a dense sand is sheared past the peak, strain tends to concentrate in a thin 
rupture zone called a straiw localization. Sometime the localization bifurcates into two or more 
branches. Localization and bifurcations ar~ characteristics of dense sand at large strains. This is not true 
'- for loose sands, which experience a more general distortion and shear strains all the way to ultimate 
shear stress at the critical state. 
. 
Magnitude of the Dilation Angle According to Bolton (1979 and 1986), typical values of dilation angles 
are 10 to 20 deg for granular soils tested at confining pressures higher than 100 kPa. What happens if the 
confining pressures are less-a situation quite common in practice? Lee (2000) found much greater dila-
tion angles, some as high as 25 to 40 deg, in both triaxial and plane-strain tests performed on dense sands 
(I D ~. 90%) at confining pressures between 25 and 100 kPa. Even for materials prepared in a loose state 
(I v ~ 50%), the measured dilation angle was 26 deg at those same confining pressures. In some numer-
ical modeling work (e.g., Lee, 2000), the dilation angle has an enormmis effect on the predicted deforma-
tions. So, if you are working at lower confining stresses and predicting deformations is important to your 
problem, then you need to acc~rately _measure the dilation angle in the appropriate soils tests. ; 
13.9.3 Curvature of the Mohr Failure Envelope 
In Sec.11.4.2, we gave the following eql!~ti~nforthe.~ohr-:Columbfailuretheory:,, 
Tff = uff tan 4> t c 
• (11.9) 
~·-
~ ; 
) . 
I 
. 
' 
' 
. 
' . -
-
f 
, 
' ' ' 
'. 
' 
' 
' ' 
. 
- ' ' -
,• 
•• ' • 
I 
' ' . ' ~ 
: 
• 
. 
. ' 
··We mentioned that this equation is a straight-line approximation of a curved Mohr failure enve-
lope over a' given stress ninge, usuallythat anticipa'ted in the field. 
'' 
' 
; '; ' ; ' ' ') 
. Later, in Sec. 12.5, when we introduced 'the shear 'strength properties of sands; we mentioned 
that the Mohr-Coulomb failure envelopes were curved, especially over awide rarige of confining 
stresses. This is also shown in Fig. 12.12. The source of the curvature is thought to bedue to particle 
rearrangement and crushing, as'shown in Fig. 13.56. Evenwith'a modest curvature of the envelope, 
a straight line approximation will often 'show an intercept on the T-axis at u ~· 0. This intercept is an 
artifact of the envelope geometry, and the shear strength of the soil at zero confining stress is zero. 
A curved failure envelope starting at the origin of a Mohr diagram also means that at small confin-
ing stresses, the secant Mohr failure envelope is very steep, and thus the angle of internal friction 
can be quite large (see, e.g., Fannin et al., 2005). 
,· .. • 
:: 
· 
Of course, with a curved MFE, its slope is constantly reducing from a-very steep initial tangent 
. ·.value to what might be a rather modest' slope if the confining pressure were large. Therefore we need 
'.some expression that takes into account this reduction in friction angle as the confining pressure 
. . increases. Probably the. simplest way to do tbis is to use the expryssion developed by Duncan and 
- · Wright(2005). Consider first the slope of the secantfriction angle that is defined by the slope of a 
. straight line drawn from the origin and just tangent to the Mohr's circle at failure: Duncan and Wright 
(2005) use this expression to reduce the secant friction angle: 
. . . 
' ' 
' 
' 
" 
. 
. ~ 
,_- , . _ . · · 
.. 
o-3 · 
, cf>sec -
cf>o -
Ac/> log 
-
. 
-
, .Pa 
(13.33) 
. whe~e cf>~ec ;;; secan.t angle of internal friction, 
cf>o= value of cf> when u3 :;_ 1 atm ~ orlOO kPa, 
Acf> = the reduction in cf>' for a 10-fold increase in confining pressure, 
_ u3 = the confining pressure, and 
· : 
ol-' 
· Pa = atmospheric pressure, 1 atm ~ 100 kPa. 
682 
Chapter 13 •: Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
,,·. 
c <Po 1 • 
~;::--------'----'--~ 
c: 
' 
.Q 
~-
' ~ 
(ij 
E 
2 
.!: 
0 
(I) 
c;, 
c: 
<( 
10 
logu' 
Effective confining pressure u3 
_ Atmospheric pressure · 
Pa 
j' ,, 
FIGURE 13.58· Relationship between</>' and u3 
(Duncan and Wright, 2005). 
Figure 13.58 shows the relationship between ¢' 
and u3, which is a plot of the secant friction angle 
for a series of triaxial tests versus the effective con-
fining pressure of each test. The slope of the line 
indicates the reduction in friction angle 11¢ with 
confining pressure for that test series. 
Baligh (1976) developed a somewhat more 
- complex expression ·for the, reduction in secant 
friction angle due ,to the curvature of the Mohr 
failure envelope, which is 
T = rr~an ¢ref + tan a (2~3 .- log ;J] 
(13.34) 
where ¢ref and a are constant angles defining the 
. MFE (a 2: 0 and ¢ref >. 0), and Uref is an arbitrary 
reference stress. Note that when a = 0, ¢ref = the 
secant angle of friction ¢sec. 
13.10 
BEHAVIOR OF SATURATED SANDS IN u·NDRAINED SHEAR. 
In the introduction to Sec. 12.8, we mentioned that when sands are loaded statically, because they have 
_such a high hydraulic conductivity as compared to silts and clays, they drain as fast as the load is applied. 
'Thus undrained loading of sands under static conditions happens only in the laboratory, and it is largely 
of academic interest. Dynamic loading is, of course; another matter, imd we discuss the behavior of satu-
rated sands under dynamic loads:_ for example, due to blasting, pile driving, 'or earthquakes-later in 
'this chapter.· 
.. · . ·· 
. 
. 
··. 
· · . 
. 
· .. 
·· " 
'· .· 
_· 
· 
-In this section, we describe and 'explain the results of both CU and UU tests on sands. This sec-
• tion ends with a brief discussion of strain rate effect~ in sands, because the rate of application of the 
shear stress determines whether drainage is lik~lyto occur during shear. _· ' 
· 
· 
13.10.1 Consolidated-Undrained B~havior 
. 
. 
The main difference between drained and undrained triaxial shear is that in an undrained test no vol-
ume change is allowed during axial loading, therefore ec is the same at the end of the test as it was at 
the beginning. However, unless the confining pressure just happens to be at a3 crit. the soil will tend to 
-change volume during loading. To understand what happens with undrained loading, we can refer again 
to the Peacock diagram in Fig.12.11. Because with undrained loading, there is no volume change, all of 
the action takes place on the plane WOP. 
' ' 
. 
. 
' 
· 
First, let's look at a soil specimen set up at a void ratio ec and tested undrained at a confining pres-
sure u3. This test corresponds to point C in the Peacock diagram. Because 'u3c > u3 crib as explained in 
Sec. 12.4, the sand specimen would behave as if it were loose. Thus it tends to decrease in volume, but it 
can't. As a result, a positive pore pressure is induced, which causes a reduction in the effective stress. The 
limiting or minimum effective pressure at failure is u3 crib because at this pressure 11 V IV 0 is zero. If no 
tendency toward volume change takes place, then no excess pore pressure is induced. So the maximum 
possible pore pressure in this example is equal to u3c ..:. u3 crib or the distance BH in Fig.12.11. 
The Mohr circles at failure for this case are shown in Fig. 13.59. The solid circles E represent the 
effective stress conditions, whereas the dashed circle T is in terms of total stresses. Since the effective 
stress equation [Eq. (6.8)] always holds, the two circles are separated by the value of 11u induced at any 
13.10 Behavior of Saturated Sands iri Undrained Shear 
683 
T 
T 
ec = constant 
u3c > u3crit 
ec = constant 
u3c < u3crit 
'I 
u;, 
,,, (b). 
,,;, 
FIGURE, 13.59 The Mohr circles 
, for undrained and drained triaxial 
compression tests: (a) case where 
, u3, > u3 crit or "loose" behavior; 
.. ·.(b) case where u3,. < u3 crit or 
"dense" behavior. · · 
· 
< 
i 
' 
~ .• ~ 
,, 
. ' 
• 
~'' 
. 
• ' 
> 
". ~,. 
'·~ 
• '. '. 
• • 
, 
time duririg the test. Since the volume change tendency is to reduce, a positive change (increase) in pore 
pressure is caused, which in turn results in a reduction in the effective stress. Thus, for this example at 
failure, Aut :=. B- H = a3, :- a3t .=. a3, -::: a3 crit· 'Ibe_( a 1 -
a 3kis given byEq. (12.3) when the 
confining pressure at failure is a3 crit· 
· 
.... 
Also, if we were to run· a drained test with the confining .pressure equal to a3, ai point c, the 
, drained strength would be much larger than the undrained strength since its Mohr circle rriust be tan-
gent to the effective Mohr failun! ·envelope. Just look at the relative sizes of the two effective Mohr 
circles in Fig. 13.59. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. ...... . 
A different response occurs when we run a test with the effective confining pressure less than 
u3 crit such as point A in Fig. 12:11. From the Peacock diagram, we would expect the sample to tend to 
dilate (ordinate RD). Since the specimen is prevented from actually expanding, a negative pore pres-
sure is developed that increases the effective stress from D (A) toward H ( a3 crit)· Thus, as in the previ-
ous example, the limiting effective stress is the critical confining pressure a3 crit· (The situation may 
arise where the negative pore water pressure approaches.;., 100 kPa or -1 atmosphere, and unless back 
684 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
pressure is used, cavitation occurs). The whol~ point of this exercise is that we are able to predict the 
undrained behavior of sands from the drained behavior when we know the volume change tendencies 
as idealized in the Peacock diagram. We will do this in the next section. 
The Mohr circle representation for the case where (T3c · < u3 crit is presented in Fig. 13.59(b ). The 
undrained test starts out at u3c, point A, and since the induced pore water pressure is negative, the 
effective confining pressure increases until failure is reached at point H. Note that the effeCtive stress 
Mohr circles Eat failure in Figs.13.59(a) and (b) are the same size because, for this void ratio ec, the 
effective stress at failure is the same, u3 crit· If the effective stress and void ratio are the same, then the 
specimens would have the same compressive strength, ul.r - u31, thus the circles have the same diam-
eter. Note that the total stress circle T, at failure, is also the same size as the effective stress circle 
because ( u 1 -
u 3 )1 is the same for both T and E; also T lies to the left of E. This case is the. opposite 
of Fig. 13.59(a). (The total stress Mohr failure envelopes have been omitted from both figures for 
clarity.) Note also that the drained Mohr circfe for this second case is substantially smaller than the 
effective stress circle for the undrained case. As before, the circle starts at u3c, and it must be tangent 
to the effective Mohr failure envelope. Since the void ratio after consolidation ec is a constant for all 
the tests shown in Fig.13.65, all the effective Mohr circles must be tangent to the effective stress failure 
envelope. 
A summary of the main points discussed above is presented in Table 13.6. 
The stress-strain and pore pressun!~strain curves for · CU and CD tests, both "loose" and 
"dense," are shown in Fig. 13.60(a) and (b). Also shown are the results for the volumetric strain ver-
sus axial strain. These results correspond to the behavior in Fig. 13.59. We mentioned above that the 
limiting effective stress in any specimen of sand undergoing undrained shear is the critical confining 
pressure u3 crit· In a dense sand; the limitation on how negative the pore water pressure can be is the 
vapor pressure of water, -1 atm or about -100 kPa (Sec. 6.2). At that point, cavitation. will occur 
unless back pressure is used [Fig. 13.60(b )]. If cavitation occurs, the volume of the specimen 
'increases, the effective confining stress decreases, and the strength of the specimen will not be as 
great. However, if back pressure is used, then the pore pressure can continue to go negative as long 
as the total cell pressure is less than ( u3 crit _;: 1 atm). Thus means that thestn;ngth of the specimen 
is basically controlled by how much back pressure is used and the maximum pressure capacity of the 
~u~~-
~ 
For a more comprehensive treatment of the undrained strength characteristics of sands, see Seed 
· and Lee (1967). 
·' 
·' 
TABLE 13.6 A Summary of Concepts Shown in Fig.13.59 
Effective 
Consolidation 
Pressure 
,. : ~;' , 
' 
CT3c · > CT3 crit 
u3c < u3 crit 
, -
., 
CT3f,= CT3crit, 
Drained; Effective = Total 
· • Larger than undrained 
Smaller than undrained 
All cirCles would be the same; 
because no volume change' tenden-
cies exist, 8u = 0 during the test'' 
Mohr Circles 
Undrained, Effective 
Smaller than drained: 
' Left of total stress' circle 
'u3r < u3c 
Larger than drained: 
'Right of total.stress circle 
CTJf > CTJc 
Undrained, Total 
· Sinaller than drained: 
Right of effective stress 
circle 
. Larger than drained: 
Left of effective stress 
circle 
'l .•...• 
~ 
I 
ec = constant 
u!Jc > u!Jcrit. 
Axial strain, e 
(a) 
· Exan1pre' 13.9. 
Given: 
13.10 · Behavior of Saturated Sands iri Undrained Shear 
685 
Axial strain, e. 
with u0 
(b) 
'',\' 
; , FIGURE 13.60 The stress-
strain, .volumetric strain versus 
. axial strain, and pore pressure-
strain curves for CU and CD 
tests on sands: (a) case where 
u3, >-u3 crit or "loose" behav-
ior; (b) case where u3, < u3 crit 
or "dense" behavior. 
' .... , 
Figure 12.11, but scaled to the idealized behavior of Sacramento River sand (a co~bination of 
Figs.12.7 and 12.9); u3 crit = 0.4 MPa and ec = ecrit = 0.8. 
Required: 
Describe the. undrained behavior of this sand if the test void ratios after consolidation at 
u3c = 0.4 MPa are (a) 0.85 and (b) 0.75. 
" ; 
686 
Chapter 13 ... · . Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Solution: Since a3c and ec are at critical, there is by definition no volume change during shear. Thus 
our test plots at point H in Fig. 12.11, with the values of a3 crit and ec as given. (You can verify these 
values in Figs.11.6 and 11.8.) 
· 
a. When sheared the specimen would tend to decrease in volume, but since it is undrained it 
cannot. Therefore the specimen would develop positive pore water pressure along with a 
concurrent ·decrease in a!J. In Fig. 12.11, the test coordinates must remain on the e = 0.85 
line and in the plane WOP. The only way this can happen is for a3 to decrease, which makes 
sense in view of the increase in pore water pressure. 
· 
b. In undrained shear, the tendency towards volume increase would cause the pore water pres-
sure to decrease and the a3. to increase. This is what happens when our test coordinates 
remain on plane WOP; that is, a3 increases. 
Example 13.10 
Given: 
Figure 12.11 is scaled. to the. behavior of Sacramento River sand (Figs. 12.7 and 12.9), with 
ecrit = 0.6 and a!J crit = 1.6 MPa. 
Required: 
Describe the behavior in undrained shear if we maintain this void ratio of 0.6 and test the speci-
men with a3c of (a) 1.5 MPa and (b) 1.7 MPa. 
Solution: 
a. In undrained shear, the tendency will be for dilation, which is prevented; we must remain at 
ec = 0.6 and on plane WOP. Therefore a3 must increase, which makes sense physically since 
the induced pore water pressure tends to decrease. 
. 
.. 
b. In undrained shear, the tendency towards compression would result in positive excess pore 
pressure and a decrease in a!J. 
' 
Example 13.11 
Given: 
The test specimen of Example 12.8 was sheared undrained at the same total cell pressure 
(150 kPa). The induced excess pore water pressure at failure l::!.u1 is equal to 70 kPa. · ·· 
Required: 
Evaluate the the following. par~meters: 
a. aJ.1, 
b. (al- a3)f, 
c. 
cp in terms oftotal stress, and 
d. the angle of the failure plane a1. 
13.10' Behavior of Saturated Sands in Undrained Shear 
687 
Solution: a and b. Since the void ratio after consolidation would be the same for this test as for 
Example 12.8, assume 4>' is the same. You can do this problem either (1) analytically or (2) graphically. 
1. Analytically: We know from Eq. (12.3) that 
\, ~: . 
a:3t = u3f - llut = 150 - 70 = 80 kPa 
So 
(ul- u3)f = 80(3.7- 1) = 216kPa 
uit = (u1- u3)f + u3t = 216 + 80 = 296kPa 
These are the answers to parts a and b. 
c. we'can write Eqs. (11.13) and (12.l) in' terms of total stresses. Using Eq. (11.13), 
' 
. . 
' 
• 
j 
' ·' 
. 
' 
; 
• 
• 
' 
: .-
" ~ 
• 
' 
• 
· . 
' u1 __.: u3 
. . 216 
. . : 
sm cf>total = Ut + u3 = (296 + 70) + 150 = 0.42 
4>totai = 24.8o · 
Using Eq. (12.1), 
Utf 
(296 + 70) 
( 
cp) 
u
31 (no primes)~ . 150 
= 2.44 = tan2 45° + 2" 
.' 
! 
' 
2. Graphically: Plot the Mohr failure envelope with 4>' = 35° on a Mohr diagram (Fig. Ex. 13.3). 
There is only one circle that· is tangent to. the envelope and. with u3t = 80 kPa (150 - 70). 
Once the circle is drawn (trial and error), u11 is a'utomati~ally determined (u!t = 296 kPa) as 
is ( u 1 -
u 3)t, the diameter of the failure circle ( = 216 kPa ). 
T (kPa) 
--- Effective stresses 
------Total stresses .·· 
u, o:' (kPa) 
u31 = 80 kPa 
FIGURE Ex. 13.11 
688 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength ofSoils and Rocks 
, " 
, ·· . The Mohr circle at failure in terms of total stresses has the same diameter since 
_,.' 
(a1'-:- a3) = (a1- a3): Yo~ can plot the total stress circle starting at a31 = 150, the total 
cell pressure, and determine cf>total· Compare Figs. Ex.13.2 and 13.3 with Fig~ 13.59(a). 
d. From Eq. (11.10), at = 45° + cp'/2 ,;; 62.SO. . 
.. . . . . . 
. 
':;, 
,1· .. 
Example 13.12 
Given: 
The same sand as for Examp~e 13.11 except that the cell pressure is 300 kPa. 
Required: 
t1u1. 
{' 
', 
Solution: There are several approaches to this problem. Graphic~lly, w~ could construct a total stress 
circle tangent to the total failure' eri~eiope shown in Fig. Ex.13.1l.but starting at d3c = a3f = 300 kPa. 
Then shift your compass (or circle template or AutoCAD circle maker) to the left until the circle is just 
tangent to the effective Mohr failure envelope.· · · 
' 
' 
,.;.-
' 
tluf = a3f- a3t =,300kP~-;- 160 = 140kPa 
Analytically, use Eq. (12,1) and (a1/a3)total from Ex.13.11 
· (a1) 
· 
alf =;a3f -
=;300(2.44) = 732kPa 
a3 total 
' 
Utf -
a3f = 732 - 300 = 432 kPa 
.,, 
• 
·., 
' 
,_ 
< 
• 
' 
. ·From Eq. (12.3) arid ( al/a3)1 ;,_''3.7 (Example 12.8),. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
> li 
(al- a3)f 
· 423 '" .: 
'~ 
' 
a3t = (al/a3) _ 1 = 3.7 _ 1 = 160 kPa 
tlut = a3f -
a3t = 300 - 160 = 140 kPa 
Check: t1u1 = a11 -
a;_1 = 732 -:::}.7(160) = 140 kPa 
13.10.2 Using CD Tests to Predict CU Results 
We suggest you do a quick review of the drained shear strength tests in Chapter 12.There we saw that 
the stress-strain and volumetric strain (t1V/V0 ) data plots may l:ie.used to determine the volume 
change at failure for different void ratios and effective confining pressures, using the' idealized figures 
in Fig.12.10(a) and (b).Also,in our previous discussion ofthe shear strength of sands in Chapter 12, we 
defined the critical void ratio, ecrit as the void ratio at failure for a given effective confining pressure in 
a drained test where the volumetric strainisequal to zero. Further,we definedthe critical effective 
confining pressure, a3 crit as the effective confining pressure at failure when the volumetric strain is 
. zero. See Fig. 12.4. 
· ' ' · 
.'./ 
•' 
13.10:' Behavior of Saturated Sands in Undrained.Shear 
689 
Using a section of.the Peacock diagram (Fig 12.11) where the. void ratio after consolidation is 
ec, an effective confining pressure cr~ to represent the conditions at the time of the consolidation 
phase of an undrained test. If the effective confining pressure is located at point A, we see that the 
positive volume change tendency at point D results in a negative pore pressure during an undrained 
test. Ori the other hand, if the effective confining pressure is at point C, we observe that the negative 
voh.ime change tendency at point B results in a positive pore pressure resulting for an undrained test. 
These changes in pore water pressure affect the strength of the soil under undrained testing. As we 
shall see shortly, the rule is: with positive volume change tendency, a negative pore pressure results; 
likewise with a negative volume change tendency, a positive pore pressure results. · 
Let's assume that the void ratio at the time of consolidation is ec and is a constant. (Of course 
whenever we consolidate a granular material with an in situ void ratio of ea. at different confining 
pressures in the triaxial test, for example, the void ratio after consolidation will be different with 
each confining pressure. The higher the confining pressure, the lower the void ratio after consolida-
--;;, 
"' b 
g) I 
~ b 
ca-: 
c_(]) 
·-
0 
Oc: 
.£.(]) 
c:~ 
~ 
0 a. 
'6 
3 
. 
tion. We will ignore this fact for our present 
discussion.) 
Start of cavitation 
Axial strain, e (%) 
A lot depends on the void ratio. For 
. soils that are loose to medium dense, the 
pore water pressure will be positive. On the 
'other hand, soils that are medium to dense 
will tend to dilate with a resulting negative 
pore pressure. Another look at the Peacock 
Diagram will· show this for conditions (ec 
. and cr~). to the left of the critical state line, 
· WHP (where for any void ratio, the resulting 
volume change fOr drained tests would be 
positive). For those soils in the undrained 
· states with positive volume change tenden-
cies, the resulting induced pore pressures 
·will be negative. So, for soil conditions of this 
type; the pore water pressure would slightly 
I rise initially and then become' negative. At 
'the point whe'n the negative pore pressure 
reaches -1 atm, the specimen cavitates 
(water vaporizes and bubbles form) and the 
volumetric strain increases, as shown in 
Fig. i3.61! (Comparethis figure with the CU 
part ofFig.l3.60.) 
· 
· 
. , 
· Review Fig. 12.29. for information on 
. , the use of back pressure when conducting 
· · consolidated undrained tests (CU) on soils. 
·Back pressure is the use of an artificial posi-
tive pore pressure u0 , to ensure that the soil 
is saturated prior to the consolidation and 
shear phases. Increasing the back pressure 
while at the ·same time increasing the cell 
pressure cr3 by the same amount, maintains 
the desired effective confining pressure. 
FIGURE 13.61 
Typical stress, volumetric strain, and axial 
We will consider five possible cases 
strain for a medium dense sand during undrained loading. . (summarized in .Fig. 13.62) of how the 
690 
Chapter 13 ··.·Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
~ 
rt 
CD -----:c~1 ·®: 
, . 
II 
. 
<®· . 
'ec is a constant 
Units: atm 
U~c 
,·:, 
case 
CD 
· .. ''® 
@) 
((2) 
® 
.. u 
u; 
Failure 
Usc<< uscrit 
U0 = 0 
Cavitation 
, :_ , 
~ 
U0 ~ 0 
. 
I 
U3c -. U3 crit . 
U3crit 
,,.; 
(us crit -
1) < Usc< Us crit 
·U0 = 0 
Uscrit 
;,, l!3c? a_3criL . -
U0 = 0 
u3crit 
'Usc<usbrit<u3c;ll 
u0 1arge 
a3crit 
FIGURE 13.62 The five cases are summarized on a between the volumetric strain and effective confining pressure 
showing their range of stress conditions. Note: ec is a constant . 
. 
. undrained shear strength will vary depending' on the void ratio after consolidation, the consolidation pres-
sure a3c and the critical confining pressure. In each case, we will be using a "slice" of the Peacock diagram 
(Fig. 12.11), specifically volumetric strain versus effective confining pressure, to illustrate the effect on 
· • undrained strength. After these cases are described, we show a numerical example for one of these cases. 
' 
. In Case· I,. a3c is much less than a-3 crit and the pore pressure becomes negative until cavitation 
occurs (in this case with zero back pressure). As a result, the strength of the specimen is controlled by 
cavitation with u1 = -1 atm. Thus, the range of this type of failure is g~verned by 
0 < O"Jcell = u3c < (a3crit- 1) 
',· 
a3t = u3crit 
Case III involves a situation where the cell pressure is between ( a-3 crit - 1) and a-3 crit· As we 
expect for any sand with a confining pressure less than the critical confining pressure, the volume 
change tendency results iri a negative pore pressure and an increase in effective stress. In this case, the 
effective confining stress equals the critical confining pressure ( a-3 crit) before the specimen cavitates. 
· · • ·The range of confining stresses for this case is 
· 
~ 
(u3crit- 1) < afc < u3crit 
(uo =~0) 
In Case IV, when a sand specimen is consolidated with zero back pressure at a greater pressure 
than the critical confining pressure, the resulting pore pressure is positive causing a gradual decrease in 
. ·;; effective stress. When the effective stress lowers t~ the. critical confining pressure, volume change ten-
. dency becomes zero and the confining pressure ·at failure a-31 is equal to the critical confining pressure. 
The limits for this case are 
· · 
. 
' 
· 
' 
u3crit < u3c < 00 ' (uo ~ 0) 
·13.1 0 · • Behavior of Saturated Sands in Undrained Shear 
691 
Case V is the first case we discuss with a back pressure greater than zero. Such a case represents 
most field conditions with a ground water table. The critical confining pressure controls the undrained 
shear strength. As stress is applied to the specimen, the negative ':'olume change tendency causes an 
increas~ in pore pressure, and this reduces the effective confining pressure until the critical confining 
pressure is reached. No additional volume change tendency occurs, and the test stops at the critical 
confh1ing pressure. The limits for this case are 
Example 13.13 
Given: 
The initial stress conditions for Case I. Let u 3 crit = 10 atm, point H, and u3c = · 4 atm, point D on 
Fig.12.11. 
Required: 
Evaluate the total, pore water, and. effective ~tresses at the end of consolidation, during shear, 
and at failure for an undrained compression test. Show these stresses on the specimen for the vertical 
and horizontal planes for these stages. 
· 
· 
Solution: Fig. Ex.13.13a shows the initial and final conditions. The test starts at pointD and as the 
principal stress difference is applied, the positive volume change tendency causes a negative pore 
pressure. The pore pressure in Case I continues to go negative until cavitation occurs at -1 atm. 
Failure occurs at Point D' when u1 = -1 atm and u 31 = u3~ - ( -:-1) '= u3c + l = 5 'atm. The initial 
and final conditions are shown in Fig. Ex. 13.13b. In order to plot the Mohr circles for the case, the 
principal stress ratio (uifu3)t = Kt would have to be known for the void nitio after consolidation. 
Note that Aut = (ul - u3)p = u3t(Kf - 1); u3crit =: 10 atm. 
. 
. • 
· · · 
. " ' • 
+ 
' 
' 
' 
' 
,, 
< 
u3crit = 10 atm 
';., 
,, 
FIGURE Ex. 13.13a 
Case I. Volumetric 
u3 
'strain versus effective· confining pres-
sure for a consolidation pressure of u3, 
and constant e,. The test starts out 
with u3, = 4 atm {Point D) and ends at 
u3t at 5 atm at Point D'. 
692 
Chapter 13 . :Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
'!.: 
< 
·!:·' 
At end of 
consolidation: 
. . 
, 
Pore . 
1 
, Total, u 
= 
. pressure, u + Effective, u' 
lu1 =4 ··,· 
~ ' 
' 
~ 4 = u; =: u!Jc 
D· G ·D·-··· 
· · 
4 = u!Jc 
{
~~u 
Uj 
~4 
u; = u!Jc + ~u ± ~u 
"~ 
D,,,, '"'"' . o~ . Q O:cu" 
FIGURE Ex. 13.13b Case I. 
Conditions in specimen during 
a consolidated-undrained 
At failure: 
triaxial compression (CU) test.' 
Void ratio after consolidation= 
ec = a constant. 
One last point. There are tw~ different 
ways to test. soils in the laboratory .triaxial 
· device. The usual way is to set 'up specimens 
with the same initial void ratio at increasing 
confining pressures. The second' way is to 
compact at some initial void ratio and then 
consolidate to some pressure to obtain the · 
same void ratio ·after consolidation. This 
approach is very time-consuming and there- . 
fore very costly. We end up reconstituting 
sand specimens at the estimated in situ void 
ratio and subjecting them to increasing con-
solidation pressures. 1\vo things occur. The 
first is that the shear strength will be higher 
. , ± ~u· 
~~Uf 
~4 
u;, = u3c + ~u- (-u1) 
= 5 + ~Uf 
~ 
'·' 
' 
o~ m O:r.:.-(-,,) ~, 
u1= -1 
! ~ 
~ 
~VIVo. 
) 
::::; 
:J 
'"",!" 
~ 
.a u3c 
Decrease in void · 
ratio due to consolidation 
due to the increased consolidation stress 
e 
above the critical confining pressure. The sec-
ond thing that occurs is that during consoli-
FIGURE 13.63 The Peacock Diagram showing an exag-
gerated change in the critical confining pressure and a 
decrease in void ratio after consolidation: 
. dation;· the void ratio decreases. We also 
know, that when the void ratio changes, the 
critical confining pressure also changes. With . · 
a decn!aiie in ec, the a3 c;it increases. Just look at Fig. 13.63, in which there is an exaggerated change in 
u3 crit: The higher consolidation pressure results in a decrease in ec, which results in an increase in a3 crit· 
The end result is an increase in the undrained shear strength with increasing consolidation pressure. 
''13.10 Behavior of Saturated Sands in Undrained Shear 
693 
13.10.3 Unconsolidated-Undrained Behavior 
Seed and Lee (1967) explained what happens during UU tests on saturated sand. They considered two 
cases. For Case I, the cell pressure ere is less than the critical confining pressure a-3 crit minus the atmos-
. pheric pressure, or 
· 
· · 
U'c < a-3crit- 1 atm 
(13.35) 
In Case II, the confining pressure is greater than the critical confining pressure a-3 crit minus the 
atmospheric pressure, or 
· 
· U'c > a-3 crit - 1 at~ 
(13.36) 
• Figure 13.64 shows what happen~ to the total, pore pressure, and effective stress conditions at all 
stages in the test for Case I. In order to give the specimen some initial effective stress a-~0
, we apply a 
hydrostatic cell pressure of a-co with the drainage valves open. Now we close the drainage valves, and 
increase the cell pressure a-cl· Because no drainage is permitted, all this increase in cell pressure goes 
into the pore pressure ~u. which is now equal to crc1 - a-co- Note that the effective stress in the speci-
men remains the same as before, or a-~0 = a-co. 
;Now when the axial stress ~a- is applied to the specimen, the specimen tends to dilate because 
the total cell pressure ere is less than the critical confining pressure a-3crit - 1 atm. Concurrently, the 
· pore pressure decreases, but it cannot go lower than about 1 atm because 8.tthat pressure; the pore 
water cavitates. Thus at failure for Case I, ~Ut = -1 atm, cr!t = ~a-f.'+ 'del.+, 1; and ~.a-3t = U'cl + 1. 
For Case II where the confining pressure is greater than a-3 crlt - '1 a tin, 'th(driitial conditions 
are the same as in Case I, that is a-co< a-3crit (see Fig.13.65). When the cell pressureis increased to 
U'cz > U'co with the drainage valves closed, all the increase in cell pressure goes intothe pore pressure 
Initial 
conditions 
(S = 100o/~)} .. 
Pore pressure, u 
M;~ U
00 fol 
u-
·LJ 
Close drainage valves. 
Increase cell 
. pressure to u c1: 
Apply axial · 
load llu: · 
llu= -1 
Effective, u' 
·.[}:·,.·.·.' 
Uco = Uco 
', 
,; 
:,', 
• 
••• 
j' 
' -
~- .:· .. · :~O'co-:- Uco 
; 
\' 
'>' ; 
' 
• ~, 
il 
1:, 
,, \" 
·. '[1 
.. u; = llu + Uc
1 
+ 
1 
. .FIGURE 13.64. Total, pore 
. 
. u[J = 'u c1 + 1 
pressure, and effective 
' 
' ·: · : · · 
· '~-' ' 
· · · stress conditions in a uu 
· · 
' · ··. 
· 
'· 
· · 
·specimen of saturated sand; 
Case I with u, < u3crit- 1. 
694 
Chapter 13 , .. Advanced Topics in Shear Strength 9f Soils and Rocks 
'>' 
'·, ~-
,;, 
··:!; 
,·.-·;,; 
.; 
t 
~ 
': 
Total, a 
Pore pressure, u . Effective, a' 
' 
? 
''·Initial· 
conditions . 
(S = 100%}: 
D-·~ G 
Close drkinage vaiv~s .. 
Increase cell 
pressure to 
a c2 > a3 ~~;!--' 1 :. 
' •: .. :)z;·, 
Cb 
'
c2 ___ .,. n_ 
..• 
. ... " JJJ 
. ,.-
flu.~ ac2- a co·: '' 
~o=aco 
ua~=aco 
·L}···,_;_"· 
. aco.- ac~ -
·. 
~·· 
Uco-O'co 
- ·:. ;-; ',' -t 
f ' ~ , ; ; 
r ,, 
·" FlGLJRE13.6s 
Total,'p~re .. _ 
pressure, and effective stress' '• 
. ' conditions in a UU sped men· 
of sand; Case II with 
·lad. ·tt 
-. _ ·-·._· .ac2-·_._·_ ·." 
. :. ;., 
'· .l ·uc2 
n_--_ 
.. 
tp 
: ,· ; : [}' 
•. ·.~; ~.a 
__ a+ a3crit 
. 
' 
,, 
I 
·'•· · 
· 
ascrit 
'• 
. ·.,, . ·'-:., 
flu= (a c2 __: a3 c'rit) ., 
a~> a3 crit- 1 atm. 
,, 
;).,. .. 
Au, and Au = u c2 - u co. As in Case I, the effective stress in the specimen remains the same as 
before, or U~o = Uco· Now when the axiaLstress Aa'is applied to the sp'ecimen, the specimen still 
tends to dilate because a-~0 < a-3 crii and Au tends to decrease. But before the pore pressure can reach 
· -1 atm, the effective confining stress u~·increases from a-~0 to a-~2 to a-3 crit·· Of course, at a-3 crit• e = ecrit 
and no further tendency towards volume change will.occur. Thus at "failure" or maxirimm principal 
stress difference, u3t = u3 crit> and u!t. = tlu f + a-3 crid 
• 
. 
, 
: 
. . , . • 
·. 
The Mohr's circles and Mohr failure envelopes for both cases are 'shown in Fig.13.64. For Case I 
. ~hen u c < a-3 crit - 1 atm, theporew~ter pressure at failure is -1 atm (Fig.' 13:64), so the total stress 
-circle plots to theleft of the effective stress circle. Both failure envelopes begin at.the origin, so the total 
stress envelope must be curvedas shown in Fig. 13.66(a). Note that the eff~cti~e stress UU friction 
angle, <f>uu f'd <Pen· 
· · -- ·- · · 
· 
. For Case II when (J' c > a-3 crit -'-1, tile pore pn:!ssun.! at failure is AUt = Uc2 :- u3 cri;, and the 
effective stresses on the specimen are a-3 crit and u!t =.Auf + · u3 crit· -Thus the total stress. circle will 
plot to the right of the effective stress Mohr's circle, and this will b(!the case for all total stress circles . 
. with cell pressures greater than a-3 crit ..:..: 1. Thus the totai stress failure envelope will be horizontal, as 
shown in Fig, 13.66(b) for all confining pressures greater than this value. Note that there is only one 
effective stress Mohr circle when a-3. > _ u3 crit· Case II is of course analogous to the UU test results on 
cohesive soils shown in Fig. 12.39: the total stress envelope is horizontal and there is only one effective 
stress Mohr circle. 
· · 
-
· 
· · 
Just as with the CUtest, the behavior in tbe UU. tests is strongly dependent qn the back pressure. 
· . Back .pressure:prevents cavitation, so that theinduced pore water pressure can go much more negative 
. than -laim.: This means that the eff~ctive cmifining stress can incr~ase much more than without back 
· . pressure, and that the specimen can be much stronger than without back pressure. · 
· 
' 
: 
; 
' 
• 
' 
• 
' 
~ 
'. 
> ' ' 
' 
'13.10 
Behavior of Saturated Sands. in Undrained Shear 
695 
E 
J a, a' 
a!Jcrit- 1 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.66 Mohr failure envelopesforUUtests on saturated sands: (a} Case I, ac < a3 crit- 1 atm; 
and (b) Case II, a c > a3 crit -
1. atm. Case I is an enlarged view 9f Case li near, the origin. : 
. ' 
13.10.4 Strain-Rate Effects in Sands · 
For sands, the effects of rate of shearing on stress-strain-strength properties do not become significant 
until extremely high rates are imposed-:-for example, by earthquakes, vehicle wheel loadings, blasting, 
pile driving, and projectile and other rapidly penetrating objects.Ofthese, only the example of rapidly 
penetrating objects and projectiles is monotonic; all the other examples are of cyclic and mostly aperiodic 
and random loading. In this section, we describe the results of research on high rates of monotonic load-
ing. The properties of soils subjected to vibratory and cyclic loading are discussed in Sec. 13.12. 
The rates used in undrained triaxial compression experiments reported by Whitman and Healy 
(1962) resulted in times to failure from 5 min (approximately 0.03% strain per sec) to 5 msec (approxi-
mately 2650% strain•per sec), and they found no dependence of friction on strain rate. The other 
component contributing to shear strength is excess pore pressure development, and this was found to be 
independent of strain rate in dry sands (obviously, since. there is no pore pressure) and dense saturated 
696 
Cha~ter 13 , Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
sands (which have negative excess pore pressures leading to cavitation). For tests on loose Ottawa sand, 
the rate dependence of excess pore pressure led to a 40% increase in strength when the time to failure 
went from 5 sec to 0.025 sec, and a 100°/; increase in strength for Camp Cooke sand for times to failure 
ranging from 3 min to 0.2 sec. 
' 
·. 
However, as Whitman and Healy (1962) pointed out; such tests are fraught with potential errors, 
including membrane penetration effects leading to.'localized volume changes, inertial effects as the 
specimen expands radially, and the influence of nonuniform strain conditions within the specimen 
resulting from end restraint. Yamamuro and Abrantes (2005) addressed these issues in drained triaxial 
compression tests on crushed coral (D, = 58%). By maintaining a 98 kPa (1 atm) vacuum in the pore 
water system, no excess pore pressures could be sustained even at the highest strain rate used, 1764% 
strain per sec. The drained conditions eliminated the membranepenetration problems, and the 
researchers used high-speed photography and digital image analysis to examine deformation patterns 
through the specimen height. Thus any nominiform deformation observed could be characterized, 
although lubricated end platens were used to reduce non uniformity: Finally, their results showed that 
inertial effects were not significant beyond relatively small strains. At the lower confining stress tested 
(98 kPa), the shear strength increased about 25% from a strain rate of 0.23 to 1764% strain per sec, 
with a corresponding decrease in strain to failure. At the higher confining· stress of 350 kPa, the 
strength increased about 50% when the strain rate increased from 0.23 to 1495% strain per sec. 
When compared with strain rate effects in clays (Sec. 13.13.7), a significant strain nite effect on 
sand shear strength requires much higher rates of loading for a large change in shear strength. 
13.11 
PLANE STRAIN BEHAVIOR OF SANDS 
In Sec.11.5.2 we described that what we commonly call triaxial testsarereally cylindrical compression 
tests, in which the test and stress conditions were shown in Fig.·l1.15. We call these stress conditions 
axi-symmetric, because the stresses acting in the horizontal direction (the cellpressure) are equal in all 
directions. We have also mentioned before (Sees. 11.5.2 and 12.8) that laboratory strength tests are 
attempts to model the drainage conditions that we think exist in the field, and that also applies to field 
. stress conditions. What about axi-symmetric stress conditions? Do they exist in the field? Yes, and 
some examples are circular footings, tanks 'on shallow foundations, piles and ddlled shafts, and cylin-
drical excavations. 
On the other hand, for many important geotechnical applications, two-dimensional or plane-strain 
conditions more reliably model field stress conditions. These applications include strip foundations, high-
way and railroad embankments, many earth dams, slopes, retaining walls, and some excavations...:.all of 
which have in common that they are long relative to their width or breadth. Plane strain conditions mean 
that the strain in the long direction of the foundation, earth structure, slope, or excavation is yery small 
compared to the other directions. So we can assume in our strength test that e2 = 0. Even then, the inter-
. mediate pdncipal stress a 2 is undoubtedly greater than zero, especially in field situations. 
· 
, . To investigate the influence of the intermediate principal stress, speCial tests such as plane strain 
or cuboidal shear tests must be used. We showed schematic diagrams of these tests in Fig. 11.16. In 
plane strain compression tests, for example, the principal stresses are a 1 > a2 > a3. If plane strain is 
more indicative of certain field conditions, why are plane strain tests not used more often in practice? 
For one thing, vey few plane strain devices have been built, and most 'of those are at university research 
laboratories. The equipment is considerably more expensive to develop and more expertise is required 
operate it than for traixialand direct tests. 
.. · ·' 
, 
· 
· 
In this section, we summarize the results of some plane strain tests on different sands so you can get 
'. ! an idea of the difference' in friction angle and modulus compared with conventional triaxial test results on 
the same sands. We use the symbol PS for plain strain and TC for triaxial compression. 
',;' 
Cornforth (1964) conducted a com-
prehensive· testing program of PS and TC 
tests on Brasted sand, a ·rather uniform 
(Cu = 2.1) medium (D50 = 0.25 mm) sand 
over a wide range of densities. Results are 
shown in Figs. 13.67 and 13.68. The angle of 
internal friction in plane strain is somewhat 
higher than in triaxial compression, espe-
cially at higher densities (lower void ratios 
and porosities): That the axial strain at fail- · 
ure is significantly lower in plane strain 
(Fig. 13.67) indicates that the PS modulus is 
probably much 'greater tliim the TC modu-
lus, and this is indeed the case, as indicated· 
by the test results shown in Fig. 13.68. In 
addition, the peak strengths are markedly 
greater, especially at higher densities. Esti-
mates of the peak secant moduli scaled 
from the figuresFig. 13.68 indicatedthat 
'the ratios of this modulus in plane strain 
to .the corresponding triaxial modulus was 
between 3 and 4.6; the lower values were 
for the higher densities. 
· Sultan and Seed (1967), in a study of 
the stability' of · slopillg · core earth dams, 
reported results of PS and TC compression 
tests on medium to coarse uniform Mon-
terey sand (Cu = 1.25 and Cc = 1.0) and 
Ottawa sand over a' range of void ratios, as 
shown in Fig. 13.69. 
Marachi et a!.' (1981). conducted a · 
comprehensive series of experiments, also' 
on Monterey sand, to examine the dfects 
· of a number of soil and test specimen vari-
ables on PS test results. Of interest-to us 
are the results shown in Fig. 13.70; which 
· are very similar in appearance to those of 
Cornforth (1964) shown in Fig, 13.68. Both· 
the peak strength and initial tangent mod-
uli are greater in plane strain. Peak secant 
fl-
c: 
~ 
. 'iii 
\Q) 
•',i.... 
·Ol 
·C: 
13.11; . Plane Strain Behavior. of Sands 
697 
All tests carried out at constant cell pressure 
of 276 kPa, axial stress increased to failure. 
• 
Plane strain compression 
-~ 38~----+---~~--~~-+------4---~ 
Q) 
.s::: 
'~ 36 1·--·-·-·-·"""""""'+---.... --.. --.... -.. + 
Q) 
~ 341------·----+-------------f··-----------+--------~~~· 
<( 
32L---~~~--~----~------~--~ 
36 
38 
40 
42 
Initial porosity (%) 
:-1·0 L_ __ ___j36 ______ 3_t8 ______ ,-L.-40-----4-'-2---
· Initial porosity(%) 
• 
moduli were scaled from these figures, and 
0 
36 
38 
40 
the ratios of PS to TC moduli ranged from· 
Initial porosity, n
0 (%) 
42 
· 3.7 to 1.9. In this'case, however, the denser 
FIGURE 13.67 Comparison of plane strain and triaxial-
, specimens apparently had the greater modu-
compression tests on Brasted sand at failure (Cornforth, 
Ius ratios-'--opposite of what Cornforth's · 
1964). 
·· -
· 
(1964) data showed. 
. . 
Marachi eta!. (1981) verified that the PS friction angle is greater than the TC friction angle, espe-
cially for denser sands. These results are given in Fig.13.71 in terms of initial void ratio, and in Fig.13.72 
yersus confining 'pressure. 
, 
! 
·' 
• 
698 
Chapter-13-
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
_200 
-~ 
~ _160 
!'! 
"' 
c;j 
.9-" 
~ 
c 
~ 
Ol 
E 
::::J g 
(a) 
(b) 
Axial strain (%) 
Axial strain (%) -
(c) 
.I 
... 
(d) 
. 
FIGURE 13.68 Comparison of plane-strain and triaxial-compression tests at different densities: (a) dense, 
D, = 80%; (b) medium dense, D, = 65%; (c) loose, D, = 40%; and (d) very loose, D,;, 15%' (Cornforth, 1964). 
' • 
~ 
' 
• 
-
' 
I 
~ 
c: 
0 
~ 
E 
"iii 
E 
CJ) 
.£ 
0 
CJ) 
0> 
c: 
<( 
45~--~--~~,_~-r--~----
0.50 
0.55 
0.60 
0.65 
0.70 
0.75 
Void ratio 
:FIGURE 13.69 Angle of internal friction for 
Monterey and Ottawa sands as determined-
by PS and TC tests (Sultan and Seed, 1967). 
-Boyle(1995) conducted a few PS and TC tests on 
very dense (D, = 96%-,101%) specimens of uniform 
(Cu = 1.7) _and round-grained Ottawa sand and a 
slightly better graded ( Cu = 2.9), coarser, and very 
angular Rainier sand. The TC tests_were conventional 
strain-rate controlled, while the PS tests were conducted 
in a special PS device that used incremental (stress-
controlled) loading. The_ test results for the two sands 
are shown in Figs. 13.73 and 13.74. The ratio of the PS 
toTC secant modulus ranged from 0.9 to 2.1 for the 
Ottawa sand and from 2.9 to 4.2 for the Rainier sand. 
, A summary of the test results for both sands is 
shown in Fig. 13.75. The difference in PS versus TC fric-
-tion angle is significant for the. angular Rainier sand, 
especially at low confining pressures. 
, _ - In summary, based on considerable experimental 
evidence, it is generally accepted that the PS friction 
'angle is significantly greater than the_ friction angle 
· measured in TC tests, especially. for. denser sands and 
sands with friction angles ,greater than about 35°. The 
tests on uniform sands. with rounded· grains such as 
Ottawa sand indicated that the PS .friction angles were 
only slightly higher than triaxial friction angles at low 
.Q e,. 
l:l 5 
~­
Cii 
Cii c. 
·o 
8 ,----,.........,..------, 
Medium dense 
e0 = 0.65 
• Plane strain 
• Round triaxial 
13.11• Plane Strain Behavior of Sands 
699 
8 .---------, 
Loose 
eo= 
······-·-
7 ......................................... .............................................. 
7 1--·-·--··-··-··-··-··-··- ·+-·-··-··-····-·-·-··-·--1 
c: 3 ............................................................................ _... 
3 
&:: 
FIGURE 13.70 Stress-strain 
relationships for PS and TC 
tests on Monterey sand at 
three densities; all tests 
conducted at u 3 = 70 kPa 
(Marachi et al., 1981). 
1'----L....--l.......L_'--......l_-.J 
1'---L---'---'--'---.....L..-.J 
2 
3 
4 
5 0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0 
54 
c 50 
c: 
0 
~ 
E 46 
Cii 
E 
Q) 
5 42 
0 
Q) 
OJ 38 
c: 
<( 
34 
0.5 
c 50 
c: 
0 u 
Axial strain (%) 
0.6 
0.7 
Initial void ratio 
u 3 = 70 kN/m2 
(10 psi) 
0.8 
2 
3 
5 
FIGURE 13.71 
Angle of internal 
friction versus void ratio for PS 
and TC tests on Monterey sand; 
all tests conducted at u 3 = 70 kPa 
(Marachi et al., 1981). 
' 
E 45~--.~~~-~~~~4-~~~----~~ 
Cii 
E 
Q) 
-~ 40 ---------
0 
Loose 
.!!! 
e3 = 0. 5 
. ~ 35 :---~---]0 ::--:-~~~+::::::::~ 
.. 
30~~~~-~~-L~~~W-~~~~~~~ 
10 
30 
Confining pressure (psi) 
FIGURE 13.72 .... Relation between 
friction angle and confining pres-
sure for PS and TC tests on loose 
and dense Monterey sand (Marachi 
et al., 1981). 
· 
.. 
· 
700 
Chapter,13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
~ :1 
I 
I 
I I l 
s 
§ 
o· 
~ 
1 
§ 
o" 
~ 
-·---·-·-··----·-···~ 
"' "' 
lll 4 IIJII"'r~~-----+----------+------------~ 
~ 
1ii 3 
Cii 
u3(kPa) 
~ 
1ii 
Cii 
c. 
c. 
• 25 
'() 
c 
2 
·g 2 
;t .. 
' 1 
• 50: 
~ 
0"3 (kPa> , . 
.. 75, 
)0 
01 
I 
I 
I 
I • 11 I 
0 
_2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Axial strain, 81 (%) 
6r-----r-----r-----r---~~r-~ 
5 1-----1---·--+----~-1---f/ 
~ 
0 
I 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Lateral strain, 83 (%) 
4 
5 
2r-----r-----~----~-----r----~ 
;;g 
~4 
~ 
-~-
I c 
"' c: 
·e 
1ii 
oS 
c: 
-~ 
1ii 
.g 2 
JJY~-+. 
l 
0 
·;:::: 
'li) 
E 
:::> 
0 > 
~~ 
u3(kPa) 
0 ~~------+-------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------· 
• 25 
• 50 
... 75 
-1 
• 100 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Axial strain, 8 1 (%) 
(a) 
'li) 
~ 0 ~~=---t-----i-=::::_-+--~ 
~-
~1~----~----~----~----~--~ 
0 
2 
3 
Lateral strain, 83 (%) 
(b) 
4 
5 
FIGURE 13.73 Test results for Ottawa sand: (a) triaxial, and (b) plane strain (Boyle, 1995). 
confining pressures. Research ~u~m~dzed by Ladd et al. (l977) indicated that the PS cp is larger than 
the TC cp by 4° to 9° in dense sands and 2° to 4° in loose sands. This effect is even greater at very low 
confining pressures (see, e.g., Lee, 2000, and Fannin et a1.,2005). 
Lade and Lee (1976) proposed the following empirical equations to convert.triaxial friction 
angles cfJ1x to plane-strain friction angles c{Jp., or 
cfJps = l.ScfJrx - 17° 
cfJps = cfJrx 
(cfJrx > 34°) 
' ( cfJrx :5 34°) 
(13.37a) 
(13.37b) 
Lee (2000) -found th~t these equations were able to predict the PS soil friction angies within a degree 
or twofor sands with angular grains at low confining pressures, but they significantly overpredicted the 
.,• PS frictionanglesof rounded grain Ottawasandatlow confining pressures. So, use Eqs. (13.37a) and 
(13.376) with some caution. 
.2 
·4 
6 
·8 
Axial strain, e1 (%) 
6.-~-,---.~--,--,---. 
Sf-------i--------+---------1---------1 
• 25 
• 50 
.. 75 
• 100. 
~1~----~----~----~--~~----~ 
; 0 
. 2 
8 
-10 
Axial strain, e1 (%) 
(a) 
"' 20 .------.-'----,--'---'---r---,------, 
Lateral strain, e3 (%) 
.(b) 
5 
FIGURE 13.74 Test results for Rainier simd: (a) triaxial, and (b) plane strain (Boyle, 1995). 
150 
200 
a~c or aN (kPa) 
' 
~ : 
FIGURE 13.75 
Summary of all plane-
strain, triaxial, and direct-shear test 
results conducted by Boyle (1995) on 
Ottawa (O) and Rainier (R) sands. 
701 
702 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Although published test results a~e somewhat inconsistent, it appears that the PS modulus at 
higher densities is between two·and four times the TC modulus for most medium to 'coarse uniform 
sands. There is some evidence· (Lee, 2000) that the initial tangent moduli are even greater,' by as much 
as a factor of seven, than those val~es, especially for dense angular sands, but only about twice as great 
for loose angular materials. The differences in secant moduli can be somewhat less, depending on the 
percent strain used to determine it. 
·· 
· 
13.12 
RESIDUAL STRENGTH OF SOILS 
So far in this chapter and in Chapter 12, the ~rimary focus has been on a soil's peak sh~~r strength, 
since that is typically used for design purposes, usually after applying an appropriate factorof safety or 
another type of resistance factor. However, in some important applications, the soil's shear resistance 
after it has undergone significant deformation beyond that at peak shear strength is needed.A soil's 
minimum shear strength reached at large deformations or strains is referred to as its residual strength. 
In particular, this is used to analyze the stability of slopes that have experienced prior movement, and 
in the case of sands, for postliquefaction analyses of earth dams and embankments. As in many areas of 
geotechnical engineering, the approaches foranalyzing the two classes of soils are very different; and 
there has been con.siderable progress in understanding these concepts over the past 30 years or so. 
13.12.1 Drained Residual Shear Strength o.f Clays. 
·'. 
The primary application for residual shear strength in clays is the analysis of slopes that have previously 
experienced significant movement due to landslides, interbedding slippage, or slippage in joints or 
faults. If such preexisting movements exist at a site, the' slip surlace may represent the critical'su.rface 
along which future movements may occur. Overconsolidated clays are particularly susceptible to resid-
ual strength failures, since these clays terid to soften dramatically with additional deformation after peak 
shear strength, which is related to their dilation and subsequent increase in water content. Normally 
consolidated clays tend to experience much less softening, in so~e cases having a residual strength quite 
close to their peak strength values. 
As a result of these softening behavior characteristics, the residual strength of clays has been 
analyzed using drained tests to accourit for the more critical case of overconsolidated clays. The to~sional 
or ring shear test [Fig. 11.17(a)] is used to measure the drained, large strain strength of clays. Soil is 
trimmed into an annular specimen, a normal stress is applied to the flat surface, and a torque applied to 
shear the top portion of the soil over the stationary lower portion. The rotation essenthilly allows unlim-
ited deformation to be applied to the soil. · 
After performing ring shear tests, Lupini et al. (1981) examined the specimen soil fabrics using 
polarized light on thin sections and electron microscope images. They identified three modes of 
residual shear behavior in clays. Turbulent mode occurs iJ?. soils with round particles (e.g., clays with 
significant sand content), or those with platy particles that have high interparticle friCtion (they 
specifically looked at halloysite and ailophane from Java). Because these soils don't tend to: develop 
any preferred particle orientation, their residual strength ( rR) and residual friction angle ( cf>k) 
remains relatively high. Sliding mode occurs in clays with platy, low-friction particles (the majority of 
clays), with a strongly oriented structure developing at larger deformations, leading to low TR and cf>k 
values. In between these two extremes is what they teimed transitional mode, for soils that do. not 
have a predominant particle shape; cf>k values for these soils are highly dependent on soil gradation. 
·Figure 13;76 shows cf>R = tan-:
1 (rR/u~), where u~ is the appliednormalstress, versus clayfraction 
(percent less th~m 2-fl.m particle size) for the ring shear tests performed, where the _individual num-
bers refer to specific soils tested, given in Table 13.7. With the' exception of the soils numbered 48, 
' 
~ 
' 
• 
• 
' 
• • 
1 • • 
• 
· 13.12 . ·Residual Strength of S,oils 
703 
40°r---~------------~~--------~ 
48 •. .. 
,,,,:·· 
42,4~ 44 
,49; 
• 
.~ 5~ ' 
• 
:';' 
FIGURE 13.76 Residual friction , 
· · Clay fraction (% <: 2 fLmf 
' 'angle' versus clay fraction {aft:er.''. 
'.Lupini etal.; 1981). 
· 
TABLE 13.7: ·Ring Shear Test Results for Various Clays Shown in Fig.13.76 
Liquid 
Plasticity • · • Clay fraction, ·-
, Best~fit envelope 
' Site and Soil'JYpe ' 
c:~v kP11 
.. 
No. 
limit,LL' 
index,PI· 
· % <2 fLm. · 
</>', ~ ' 
3 
Bury Hill-Etruria marl 
: 71• 
43 
. 3.4 
7.1 
5 
Mam ToroCarboniferous clay 
59 
31 
43 
1.9 
8.1 
6 
Holme Hse. W.-Carboniferous clay 
57' 
33 
50 
2.9 
9.4 
7 
,Taren slip-Carboniferous clay 
26 
6 
32 
·. 8.1 
10.1 
'. 8 
Taren slip-Carboniferous clay • 
31 
12 
32 
... 
7.4 
12.1 
,, 
9 
Arlington-WeaJd clay 
65 
33' 
51 
6.1 
8.7 
11 
Barnsdale-Lias clay 
82 
49 
67-74 
3.6 
11.1 
14 
Empinham-Lias clay 
59 
29 
50 
5.2 
9.2 
15 
Empinham-Lias clay 
59 
31 
5.4 
8.6 
16 
Wansford-Lias clay 
63 
37 
51 
3.8 
7.3 
26 
Herne Bay-London clay 
95 
61 
59 
3.1 
9.4 
27 
Hadleigh-Landon clay {brown) 
82! 
54 .. 
57 
.·. i.2 
8.4 
28 
Walthamstow-London clay {brown) 
66 
42 
53 
1.4 
8.0 
30 
Swindon-Gault clay 
62 
36 
46 
' 1.4 ·' 
8.2 
31 
Swindon-Gault clay 
62 
36 
46 
1.2 
7.8 
32 
Folkestone-Gault clay 
85 
58 
50 
1.4 
6.6 
(montmorillonitic) 
'· 
','• 
33 
Folkestone-Gau!t clay (kaolinitic) 
58 
32 
52 
6.2 
10.7 
34 
Amuay-Venezuela clay 
59 
36 
51 
4.9 
7.1 
35 
Cotsgrave-Rhaetic clay 
93 
61 
60 
4.0 
7.0 
37 
Kent alluvium 
94 
60 
50 
2.7 
12.6 
38 
Oslo-Studenterlunden clay 
41 
20 '. 
38 
3.3 
28.7 
39 
Bingley till 
29 
13 
26 
1.5 
25.3 
41 
Cowden till 
34 
18 
28 
5.8 
23.8 
45 
Penwortham till 
42 
23 
14 
3.9 
24.4 
48 
Java~allophane 
165 
46 
65 
0.0 
39.0 
49 
Java-halloysite 
95 
76 
3.9 
35.0 
51. 
Java-halloysite 
. 83 
4.9 
24.5 
704 
Chapter 13 , Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
49, and 51 (the aforementioned clays from Java), it is clear that as clay fraction increases, sliding 
behavior predominates and c/Jk falls below 10°. Table 13.7 gives the best fit linear regression results 
(residual intercept ck and friction angle c/Jk) for the' soils shown in Fig. 13.76 that were reported 
with a full record of results (it is assumed that other soils shown iri Fig. 13.76 must have had their 
values inferred). 
. , . 
·. · 
. . 
· 
.. 
While the values of c/Jk reported are based on the assumption of a linear failure envelope (with 
either an assumed ck = 0 or an intercept from linear regression), it· has been found that residual 
strengths tend tO lie on a nonlinear envelope, SO that the relationship between TR and CT~ Will depend 
on the soil and the a~ level. 
· 
· 
13.12.2 Residual Shear Strength of Sands 
Steady state behavior of sands is.when a specimen 'continues to deform at some constant effective 
stress and constant void ratio (Poulos, 1981). These were previously referred to as the critical con-
fining stress, a3 crib and critical void ratio, ecrit• respectively, and the framework of the Peacock dia-
gram (Fig. 12.11)·was presented to summarize·the behavior under any combination of a3 and e 
conditions.' So, for all practical purposes, the shear strength· at steady state and the residual strength 
for sands are essentially the same thing (Sladen et al., 1986). The primary application of sand resid-
ual strength is for the analysis of embankments, slopes, and earth dams that have significant sand 
percentage as part of their. composition. Unlike clays, the most critical case for sands is the 
undrained case, and cu tests have been performed to evaluate the residual strength under these 
conditions. In addition, standard penetration test (SPT) results have been correlated to CU residual 
strength tests by Seed (1987), and this is shown in Fig.13.77, where (N1) 60is the SPT blow count nor-
malized for an effective vertical stress of 1 ton/ft2 and 60% of the theoretical energy applied to the 
hammer. Like many such correlations in geotechnical engineering; it can be argued that the correla-
tion is somewhat speculative; however, it provides some guidance on deducing strengths needed for 
stability analyses from a common field test that can be performed at relatively close spacing over a 
field site. 
· 
2000r---~--~----~--~--~~--~--~ 
~ 1600 
S'' 
~-~ 
.c 
0, 
c: 
~ 
Cii 
'iii 
:l 
'0 
·u; '' 
Q) 
a: 
800 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
Equivalent clean sand, (N1)60 
FIGURE 13.77 Tentative relationship between residual sand 
strength and SPT N-values for sands (from Seed, 1987). 
13.13 . 'Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
705 
13.13 • :STRESS-DEFORMATION AND SHEAR STRENGTH OF CLAYS: SPECIAL TOPICS 
' 
In this section we discuss some special topics on the str'ess~&:formation and shear-strength pr~perties of 
clay soils. We begin with a brief discussion of the different definitions of failure in CU tests. Then we dis-
cuss the Hvorslev strength parameters tha·t were considered for many years the "true" strength parame-
ters. Hvorslev's work was the basis for Critical.State Soil Mechanics (Sec. 13.7). Next we discuss the 
T rfu~o ratio, a very useful practical relationship, in some detail. Inch.ided an: effect. ?f stress history on 
shear strength, and the Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, another practical application of the T rfu~0 ratio. 
. Because undisturbed sampling' is so important to good estimates of the shear strength of cohe-
sive soil deposits, we describe two approaches to overcoming sampling disturbance. Finally, the section 
ends with a discussion of anisotropy and the plane~strain strength of clays. . . 
. 
. 
13.13.1 Definition of.Faiiure in CU Effective Stress Tests 
In Chapter 12, we gave some typical values for c' ariih/>' determined by CD triaxial tests. The range of 
values indicated is typiCal for effective stress strengths deterniiried iri CU tests with pore pressure mea-
surements, with the following reservation. In our discussion so far, we have' tacitly assumed that the 
Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters in terms of effective' stn:sses determined. by CU tests with pore 
pressure measurem.ents would be the same as those determin'ed by CD tests; We used the same symbols, 
c' and¢', for the parameters determined both ways. This assumption is not strictly correct. The problem 
is complicated by alternative definitions of failure. We have used the maximum principal stress differ-
ence ( u 1 -
u 3)max to define failure throughout this chapter, but often in the' literature and sometimes in 
practice you will find failure defined in tenris of the maximum principal effective stress ratio ( ul.fu3)ma~• 
which is the sameasthe maximum obliquity [Eqs. (11.14) through (1L17)]; Depending' on how the stress 
difference and the pore water pressures actually develop with strain, these two definitions may indicate 
different c's and ¢'s. This is especially true for sensitive clays, as shown in Fig.13.78.·' . ·, . 
. 
Bjerrum and Simons (1960) studied this problem in some detail, and their results are summarized 
in Fig. 13.79. Here, ¢' as defined at ( <TJ.!u3)max and ( u 1:- u 3)m:x are plotted versus ¢d, the effective 
stress parameter determined in drained tests. Note that¢' from the maximum'pfincipal effeCtive stress 
ratio (the dots) is from oo to 3° greater than ¢d· Also iw,te that¢' atmaxiimimprincipal stress difference 
(the squares) is less thanboth ¢d and¢' ~t the maximum principal effective stress ratio. In one case the 
difference is about 7°. 
· 
· 
II. 
o-
0 At (u1 - 1T3)max 
• At (u1fu!J)max 
Overconsolidated 
.specimen 
. ;. 
Envelope at . 
(u;!u!J)max 
~· 
. · 
· , · (u; + u!J) 
p = . 
2 
. 
. FIGURE 13.78 Typical fail-
ure envelopes for CU tests 
on a sensitive cl~y. illus-
trating the effect of differ-
ent failure criteria on the 
slope and intercept of the 
Mohr-Coulomb failure 
. envelope (after Ladd, 
1971b). 
i ': 
706 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks . 
•14 
Another factor to be considered in trying 
to determine the shear strength parameters is 
the influence of soil structure and yielding of 
especially sensitive clays on the shear strength 
parameters c' and cf/. In view of our earlier 
discussion of ' critical state soil mechanics 
(Sec.13.7), different values of these parameters 
are obtained, depending on which yield surface 
40 I. 
..1 
• '</>' at(u1fu3)max 
· is used to define them. For inany clay deposits · 
o 
that are nearly normally or· only lightly over-
~ 
consolidated, the c' and cf>' at yield are larger 
than these parameters at the critical state or . 
large strain state. Another consideration is how 
to express the undrained shear strength-for 
example, as determined by the field vane shear 
test (Sec. 12.11.4)-in terms of effective' 
stresses, something you might want to do for a 
stability analysis in terms of effective stresses. . . 
Terzaghi et al. (1996) give an excellent discus-. · · 
sion of all these factors and their practical 
engineering implications. 
· 
· 
In any event, you should be very careful 
when studying published data or engineering 
test reports to determine exactly how the · 
strength tests were conducted, how failurewas 
. defined, and how any reported Mohr~Coulomb · 
parameters were determined. The misinterpre-
tation of strength tests and the incorrect use of 
the shear st~ength parameters ha~e occasionally 
'resulted in stability failures and costly lawsuits. 
13.13.2 Hvorslev Strength Parameters 
_., 
""-, 
10 
Clay 
1 Cornwall· 
2 Cornwall 
3 Bersimis 
4Weald 
5 London 
60slo 
. 7Fredrikstad 
8Lodalen 
. 9 Fornebu '·' 
10 Drammen . 
11 Okernbraten 
12 Seven Sisters 
13 North Ridge 
14 Organic 
15 Boston blue 
16 Weymouth 
17 New Haven 
18 Haslemere 
19 Wiener Tegel 
20 
' 30 
40 
<Pd r> 
State 
Reference 
u 
Kenney 
R 
" 
R 
"' 
R' 
Henkel 
R 
" 
u 
N.G.I. .· 
u 
" 
u 
... 
u . 
'" 
u 
" 
u 
" 
u 
Casagrande and Rivard 
u 
" 
" 
u 
Casagrande 
u 
" 
u 
Hirschfeld 
u 
" 
R 
Skempton and Bishop 
R 
Hvorslev 
U = undisturbed 
R =remolded 
Because of their variability and heterogeneity, it 
is virtually impossible to perform a sufficient 
number of strength tests and with controlled 
variables on specimens of natural clay deposits. 
Consequently, much of ~ur basic understanding 
of the shear behavior of saturated cohesive soils 
was developed from tests on sufficiently homo-
geneous remolded clays. 
This was the case for Hvorlsev (1937), 
.. who worked in the soils laboratory at Technis-
che Hochschule in Vienna with Prof. Terzaghi. 
Because .this. work was published in German 
and the .. Second World. War intervened, 
·FIGURE 13.79 Relationship between <!>d determined 
from CD tests and </>' determined from CU tests with 
pore pressure measured. Two failure criteria are indi-
cated for the undrained tests (after Bjerrum and 
Simons, 1960). 
Hvorslev's pioneering work on shear strength was, with few exceptions, ignored until he summarized 
his thesis research in English (Hvorslev, 1960). According to Bjerrum (1954a), Hvorslev can be cred-
ited for confirming that Coulomb's friction law is valid for soils. 
13.13.: Stress~Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
707 
We have already seen that neither the. effective consolidation stress nor the void ratio or water 
•· content at failure is sufficient to determine the llndraif!ed shear strength. You'll see this is the case if you 
· , go back and look at Fig. 12.26. Specimens B arid E are at the same effective normal stress, but they have 
··.different shear strengths. Similarly, if you 4raw a horizontiilline at any convenient water content or void 
.... ratio between D and E, you'll see that the shear strength of the NC spe~imen on the virgin compression 
.curve (VCC) will have different shear strength than the OC specimen at the same w"or e~ 
· These observations were the basis for the shear strength theory developed by Hvorslev (1937). 
:He showed the how the measured shear strength could be separated into two components, one depen-
dent on water content at failure and one dependent on the effective normal stress at failure (Lambe 
and Whitman, 1969), or · 
: Tff = f( w1) + f( uj1) 
where w~,= water content atfailu~~·. ~Jid 
.. : . 
.. , u'tt = average normal stress at failure. 
eorw 
The following is onlya brief summary of Hvorslev's· impor-
tant contributions. 
· 
First we define the equivalent consolidation pressure, 
u~. See Fig. 13.80. It is the effective pressure , that. corre-.. 
sponds to the void ratio e on the virgin consolidation curve, . 
or theVCC. This is irnporta1lt for normalizing the results of' 
tests on overconsolidated specimens. ' . 
. ' 
Because ·the triaxial test was invented· only in the 
early 1930s and not universally available, Hvorslev used 
direct shear tests and conducted them slowly enough to 
consider the tests fully drained. The results of a series of 
CD direct shear tests on clays remolded near their LL and 
then consolidated are shown schematicallyin Fig. 13.81. 
Note that this figure is similar to Fig.12.26 .. · 
u' 
{a) .. 
(13.38) 
eorw 
u~ 
log u' 
FIGURE J 3.80 
Definiti~n' of equivalent 
consolidation pressu're; u~. 
,.<'' 
' 
{b) 
FIGURE 13.81 
Results of a series of CD dire.ct shear tests on remolded saturated clays: {a) void ratio or water 
content at the end of consolidation; and {b) shear stress and volume change at failure in shear. 
, · 
708 
Chapter 13 
:Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks ' 
'Tf 
-,-
' Ue 
· ,., From these results, Hvorslev showed that 
the shear strength on the failure plane at failure 
'·i..__r-·. ---
' : was a function of the effective normal stress and 
the void ratio, both at failure, or, TJJ = f(a;,e1). 
This function is almost unique and independent of 
stress history. When Hvorslev plotted the results of 
many tests and normalized them with the equiva-
lent consolidation pressure for their void ratios, he 
· got results similar to those shown in Fig. 13.82. 
O"f 
-,-
Ue 
FIGURE 13.82 Results of many CD direct shear·' 
tests normalized with their equivalent consolida-
tion pressure. 
Because the straight line through all the 
data points in Fig. 13.82 reminded Hvorslev of the 
typical Mohr-Coulomb relationship, he then 
derived an expression for the shear strength on the 
failure'plane atfailure as a function of the inter-. 
cept K and the slope' angle cp~ (Hvorslev, 1960); or 
TJ/= f(cp~, Ce) ' 
• 
• 
I 
• 
(13.39) 
where cp~ = Hvorslev effective friction parameter, and , 
Ce = Hvorslev effective "co~~sion'' parameter'= Ka~ 
Terzaghi (1938) showed that it is po~sible to get the Hvorslev strengtbparameters,'cp~ and ce, 
directly from the results of CD direct shear tests, as shown in Fig. 13.83. The basic assumption is that 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
' 
. 
w, 
Tf 
at constant iv1 (and constant 
structure assumption) 
'---- Cew = T 1 - u;tan cp~ 
Shear-strength line for 
constant water content 
u; 
u; 
FIGURE 13.83 Determination of the Hvorslev shear-strength parameters from CD 
direct shear test results on a saturated remolded clay at a constant water content; 
13;13 ,Stress~Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
709 
for a constant water content, the Cew• void ratio, and soil structure are constant Of course, it is 
doubtful that the soil structure is constant, but for remolded specimens, the assumption is approxi-
mately OK. 
' · · ' 
· 
Bishop and Henkel (1962) suggested two ways to obtain 4>~ and Ce from CD triaxial tests. One 
way is 'to conduct a series of triaxial tests in a similar manner to the direct shear tests shown above. 
Another way is to use the follo\Ving equation: 
(IT}- IT))f 
·21T~. 
e -----'--=---- + -
. . 
c' 
cos 4>~ 
c3t ( 
sin 4>~ · 
.. )· ·. 
IT~ (1 - sin 4>~) 
IT~ 1 +sin 4>~ 
(13.40) 
(a' - a') 
-' 
_·' 
... 
' 
f 
I 
1 
3 
, 
IT3 
h 
. F" 
3 8 . 
. 
I 
-
. h I" 
-Th' 
h H 
I . 
I we p ot 
2a~ 
versu~ IT~ .as s own m 1g. 1 . 4, we get a most a strmg t me. 
en t e 
vors ev 
parameters, 4>~ and c., are determined from 
. • , -
tan 133 
sm cf>e - 1 
, and 
· 
-.. +tan 133 
(13.41) 
c3(1 - sin 4>~) 
'-
, ____ _ 
Ce,- ITe 
. A.' 
COS '+'e 
(13.42) 
. . Lambe and Whitman(1969) replotted some test data on NCand OC specimens of Weald clay, 
probablyfrom Henkel (1958), in conventional stress path' ( q-p') space(Fig; 13.85). The dashed lines in 
the figure were determined from data similar to the top part of Fig. 13.83. and indicate constant water 
content values w/. These lines are"C:alled Hvo~slev failure lines, and onlypj varies ,along these lines; 
everything else is constant. They all have different intercepts, but the slope or friction angle is the same. 
The Hvorslev failure lines'(the shortdashed lines in Fig. 13.85) define the Hvorslevshear strength 
. parametersc~ and cp~; or 
-
-
. 
. 
. 
. . . 
. 
·, ,: 
. 
(13.43) 
For exampl(!~ look at tlieshmt dashed F~~ for w1 '== 23.5o/o and the two-data points represented 
by solid dots. Because they are at the same water content, :y9id ratio, and density, the only difference in 
strength for the one with p' l'::j 9 psi (q1 l'::j.4psi) and the other one at l'::j 20 psi (q1 .. l'::j 7.5 psi) must be 
FIGURE 13.84 Plot of CD triaxial 
test results as suggested by Bishop 
arid Henkel (1962). 
710 
Chapter 13 
. Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks • 
'20 
i 
. 
• NC and OC specimens with w 1 = 23.5% 
. . . q,vs. Pi 
~·.· . 
. 
. 
for p' 
= 120 psi 
• NC and OC spec1mens With w1 = 21.3% 
max 
· 
'' 
I 
' I ' 
. . 
. 
l10-~--~---"_j__,_ 
--
-- ~.r-----
1 C\J 
q1vs.p' 1. 
. 
J ... ;::::::: ... 
~ 
for w1 = 21.3~· 
, 
' ...... ;::::::: .... ... 
-
' ,.,..,..,.,.-"! 
I 
II 
for Wf = 23.1
5 
,.. ,.. ,.. ,.. ,.. ,.. 
, • · 
-
, 
r:~:;........ 
q,vs. Pi 
o-
............ ~... 
for NC 
.,. ... .,. ... .,..,. 
... 
... ... 
............ 
J 
0~--------~----------~----------~----------~ 
0 
10 
20 
30 
( '+ ') 
, 
U1f 
U3f 
( 
') 
Pr=. 
. 2 
ps1 
FIGURE 13.85 Construction to obtain Hvorslev parameters for Weald clay (after 
Lambe and Whitman, 1969). 
40 
due to different degrees of internal fricti<m mobilized at the different values of p'. It cannot be due to 
any volume changes or differences in void ratio or density. TheHvorslev friction parameter cf>~ is 18° 
for both water contents shown in Fig.1.3.85. ' ' 
. 
· · · 
. · 
. · 
. 
. Others as well as Hvorslev have found that for many clay soils, cf>~ is essentially independent of 
. water content; also Ce versus log wjis a straight li~e. Con~ideration~ such as these have led researchers 
consider the Hvorslev strength parameters more fundamental than the traditional Mohr-Coulomb 
parameters. Thus the ct>~ represents the actual interparticle friction, dep{mdent only on effective normal 
stress between particles, and "cohesion" of the clay being primarily dependent upon void ratio or water 
content. 
Validity of the Hvorslev Parameters-For much of the middle of the last century, the Hvorslev 
strength parameters were called the "true" shear strength parameters.' Because most of the verifica-
tion tests were performed on remolded, saturated homogeneous clays, results tended to confirm that 
supposition. However, when researchers tried to determine the Hvorslev parameters on ~ndisturbed 
natural clays, especially if they were sensitive, structured, or heavily overconsolidated, the results 
were less encouraging; Similar conclusions were found for tests performed on clays at natural water 
contents near the PL-i.e., stiff clays with LI;::;; 0. See, for example, Brink (1967), Chandler, (1967), 
and Karlsson and Pusch (1967). 
In conclusion, the shear strength is not a function.of u[ and e1 only. Natural soils especially are 
very complex, and void ratio is not a sufficient measure of soil structure and fabric. The Hvorslev para-
meters are not the "true" shear strength parameters. We really do not know what the "true" parameters 
are, but we do know they are parameters of shear strength and not fundamental properties. This point 
was also made in the previous section. 
While the practical use of Hvorslev's parameters is limited, they led to further developments 
regarding the interrelationship between void ratio, effective stress, and shear strength. It is fair to say 
that Hvorslev's work:ultimately formed thebasis for critical state soil mechanics (Sec. 13.7) and the 
development of other constitutive models for soils (Sec. 13.8). 
13.13 · Stress:Deformation 'and Shear Strength' of Clays: Special Topics 
71.1 
13.13.3 The Tflu~0 Ratio, Stress History, and JOrgenson-Rutledge Hypothesis ; 
In this section, we discuss a very useful practical relationship, the r1 1a~0 ratio, and how it might be 
obtained theoretically as a function of the basic soil properties K 0 , A1, and¢'. Then we consider the 
effect of stress history on shear strength~ and the Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, another practical 
application of the r1 1a~0 ratio. 
· 
• 
~,. 
'' • ••-
" 
A>, 
0 "' 
oO 
; 
; 
'": 
The rlu~0 Ratio-One of the more useful ways to express the undrained shear strength is to normal-
, ize it by the vertical effective overburden pressure a~o·. Sometimes this ratio is called ,the dp ratio. In 
natural deposits of sedimentary.clays the undrained shear strength has been found to increase with 
depth, and thus it is proportional to the increase in effective overburden stress with depth. 
It was first observed by Skeinpton and Henkel (1953) and confirmed by Bjerrum (1954b) that 
the r1 1a~0 ratio tended to increase with increasing plasticity index. Bjerrum's (1954b) results are shown 
in Fig.13.86 along with those of several other researchers, as well as several best-fit correlations. Tiiere 
is a lot of scatter, so Fig. 13.86 sho~ld only be l!Sedwith c~uti6n. Howe~er, as with Fig. 12.25, such cor-
relations are useful for preliminary estimates and for checking lapor~tory data. 
Kenney (1959) and Bjerrumand Simons (1960) presented sollle t}leoretical r1la~0 ratios versus 
PI based on the correlations of Fig. 12.27, K 00 and the Skempton pore pressure • parameter A 
(Sec. 12.14). These theoretical relationships tended to decrease rather than increase with PI, but the 
agreement was satisfactory for PI > 30.· Kenney (1959) concluded that r1 1a~0 was essentially inde-
pendent of PI after all; rather, it probably depended more on the geologic history of the clay than on 
its plasticity. 
. 
. 
Bjerrum and Simons (1960) also presented the relationship between r1 !a~0 and liquidity index 
(LI) for some Norwegian marine clays, as shown in Fig. 13.87. As you know from Fig. 12.48, the quick 
clays are those with very high LI's. Therefore it appears that Norwegian quick clays have a r1 !a~0 ratio 
of about 0.1 to 0.15 . 
. You should be aware that the rjler~o ratio depends strongly on the total stiesspath;This point is 
discussed by Bjerrum (1972) and Ladd et al. (1977), among ~thers. In other \Vprds,youprobably will 
0.8 
0.6 
Tf 
U~o 0.4 
0.2 
00 
100 
Plasticity index, PI 
• Bjerrum (1954b) 
o. Osterman (1960) 
• Leonards (1962) 
FIGURE 13.86 Relationship bet~een. ttie'rati'a ~~lu~0 and plasticity index for normally 
consolidated clays. 
400 
712 
Chapter, 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks · 
Tf 
-,-
CTvo 
, l r ~ ' • ' 
0.4 .-------.-----.-----,-------, 
• • 
• 
• • 
FIGURE 13.87 Relationship between r1/u~0 
. Liquidity index, Ll 
. 4 
and liquidity index for Norwegian clays (after 
Bjerrum and Simons, 1960) . 
obtain different values of 7-tfu~~.depending on whether you run field vane tests, axial compression or 
axial extension triaxial tests, or direct simple shear tests. 
It is possible to derive a theoretical equation for Ttlu~~ in terms ofKo, At, and cf/ (Leonards, 
1962)~ First; consider the Mohr:.:.Coulomb obliquity relations (Sec. 11.4.3 and Fig. 11.10) in terms of 
· ·effective stresses: 
· 
,·1; 
' , 
. , 
O'lf- 0'3[ 
2 
sin ¢' = ul.t + u31 
cos ¢' 
. 
+ c--:-;;; 
. 2 
sm'l' 
(13.44) 
B 
· 
h 
(ul. - u3)t 
h 
h' 
· 
· 
b · d f 
h M h 
· I · 
y assummg t at.r 1 = 
2 
, you can see ow t 1s equat10n 1s o tame 
rom t e 
o r cuc e m 
terms of effective stress shown in Fig. 13.88. 
T 
LL 
u3r 
j 
.1(u1 + u3) 
'cos cp' 
2 
c sin cp' 
CT3f 
.. --- .... 
,... 
...., 
·;' 
T', 
• u;, 
' \ 
\ 
\ 
I 
CT1f 
~au,~ 
T (u1 - u3)t 
Tt= 
2 
u,u' 
FIGURE 13.88 Mohr circles at failure for a normally consolidated clay. 
' ' . ~ 
' 
·[. 
13.13 . Stress~Deforniation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
713 
Rearranging Eq. (13.44), 
· 
uJ. + u3 
·. ··· · 
T 1 = 
2 
sin ¢' + c'. cos ¢' 
, 
, 
= u1 - u3 sin A-.' + u' sin A-.' + c' cos A-.' 
2 
~ . 
3 . 
~ 
• 
.~ 
• 
' 
'<, 
! 
' 
·, 
= Tf sin¢' + (u3 -
u) sin¢' + c' cos¢' 
Thus 
'c' c~s ¢' + (u3 __: u) sin¢' 
.Tf = 
. 
· ,1--:- sin¢', 
(13.45) 
From the initial mid at-failure stress conditions in situ shown Fig. 13.89; similar to those shown in 
Fig.12.29,we obtain • 
· 
· 
· 
U3 :- u =: KoCT~o + .ld-3 -.,. ur 
~ .Ko~~~+ Li<J"3.::- [.l?"3 + Ar(.i;1'- ~u3)] 
= K0CT~0 -
Ar(.lu1 :: du3) 
We also know from Fig. 13.89 that . 
. 
1 
' 
1 
. . 
. 
.. 1 
. 
. • 
' 
Tf = z(ul,,:-: u3)f = z(du1- du3).+ z(1 -:-K0 )u~0 
so 
· du1:- du3 = 2Tr -
(1 -
K0 )CT~0 
'·. 
Combining Eq~. (13.46) and (13.47), we ~btain . 
1"'11" 
r-S' Ku 
conditions:_ . ~ 
.. vo 
?'3 - u = O:~o[ Jfo + Ar(1 - K 0 )] -
2ArTt 
Pore pressure, u 
Effective, u' 
CJ
. 
,-
; : 
0 or U0 . 
fl 
u 
+~u, 
u' 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.· 
• (<,.;, 
'i 
:, 
' 
' 
I" 
<.: 
·FIGURE 13.89 · Initial and final stress conditions in situ for a normally consolidated clay. 
. 
(13.46) 
(13.47) 
714 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Now we can put this expression into Eq. (13.45), or 
. c' cos¢' +, u~0 sin ¢'[K0 + At(l - K 0 ) 
T = 
f 
1- (2A1 - 1) sin¢' 
(13.48) 
For normally consolidated clays, we usually assume that c' P:J 0, thus Eq. (13.48) becomes 
TJ = sin cp'[Ko + Af(1 -
K 0 )] 
u~0 
1 + (2At - 1) sin¢' 
(13.49) 
From this equation, we see that the Tflu~o ratio is a constant. Recognize that this is for normally 
or near normally consolidated clays with Ka <: 1 and a negligible c'. So, it is theoretically possible to 
determine the Tf/U~o ratio in the field with a knowledge of the¢', K 0 , and A1 of the clay deposit. But 
how easy is it to obtain reasonable estimates of these properties from laboratory or field tests? Except 
for¢', not so easy. We mentioned the difficulties of obtaining a good estimate on K 0 in Sec.12.13, even 
in relatively homogeneous natural deposits of soft clays. Thus reliance on simple correlations with clas-
sification properties such as the PI is the only feasible approach, and we have already mentioned the 
scatter in that data. Finally, obtaining good estimates of the Skempton parameter A1 is often difficult, 
because it is very sensitive to sample disturbance. Furthermore, you must use the correct definition of 
At for your stress path in the field (see Law and Holtz, 1978, and Appendix B.3). 
What do you do about overconsolidated soils when K 0 > 1 and c' ,p 0? What does Eq. (13.49) 
look like for OC clays? To obtain this equation for overconsolidated clays requires a good understand-
ing of the fundamentals of the shear strength properties of clay soils, and it is one of the homework 
problems at the of the chapter. 
· 
In laboratory studies of clays, researchers often normalize the undrained shear strength with 
respect to the effective consolidation pressure u~c· Thus the ratio becomes T 1tu~c· We did this in Exam-
ples 13.6 and 13.7. But what do you do when testing specimens of overconsolidated natural clays? In 
this case, it is better to normalize the undrained shear strength with respect to the preconsolidation 
stress u~, rather than use the effective overburden stress. For these test specimens, the undrained 
strength is really controlled by the effective consolidation pressure (or stress history) rather than the 
existing effective overburden stress. Thus the ratio becomes T 1tu~. 
Bjerrum (1972), in a study offailures of embankments constructed on soft foundation soils, 
hypothesized that the ratio between u~ and u~0 would vary with PI, as shown in Fig. 13.90(a). So-
called "young" clays are normally consolidated recent sediments, and thus they haven't had time to be 
overconsolidated by any of the factors listed in Table 8.1. On the other hand, "aged" clays are slightly 
overconsolidated, and Bjerrum found that the amount of overconsolidation increased somewhat with 
the PI [Fig. 13.90(b )]. The resultingeffect on the stn!ngthwas indicated by the dashed curves labeled 
"Bjerrum (1972)" in Fig.13.86. 
Bjerrum (1972), in a study of failures of embankments constructed on soft foundation soils, found 
that the field vane shear test (VST) in many cases tended to seriously overpredict the back-calculated 
undrained shear strength at failure. (See Secs.11.6.1 and 12.11.4 for a discu'ssiort of the VST.) The degree 
of overprediction appeared to be greater with higher-plasticity clays. Bjerrum's empirical correction fac-
tor fL as a function of PI was shown in Fig. 11.19 and should be applied to the undrained shear strength 
as determined by the VST. For convenience, this figure is reproduced without all the. data points as 
Fig.13.90(c). 
, 
Mesri (1975) discovered a very interesting relationship between all these observations. Combin-
ing Figs.13.90(a) and 13.90(b), Mesri obtained Fig. 13.90(d), T1 !u~ versus PI, which shows essentially 
the same behavior for "aged" and "young" clays. Now apply Bjerrum's correction factor fL for the field 
13.13 : Str:ess-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
715 
··: ,' 
0.6 
Tf 
u~0 0.4 . 
LYoung 
0.2~ 
0 
20 
40 
60 
PI 
(a) 
PI 
(b) 
80 100 
1.0 
Tf · 
.U~o 0.8 
0.6 
0.4 rA~· 
g~ --. =. 
• ? 
0.2 
-
. ·.· 
. 
: 
· 
· ""-.:... Youn · 
; 0 
. 
: . 
. 
120 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
1 00 
PI· 
(d) 
r::r-:·.:::1 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 1 00 
PI 
(e)'' 
FIGURE 13.90 (a) Tflu~0 and (b) u~lu~0 for normally consolidated late glacial clays 
(after Bjerrum, 1972); (c) Bjerrum's (1972) correction factor for the vane shear test 
(Fig. 11.19); (d) Tffu'p from (a) and (b); (e) Jl(Tflu'p) (after Mesri, 1975). 
vane shear test to obtain the in situ strengths; the result is Fig.13.90(e).In other words, ( r1
Ja~c)field is 
almost a constant equal to 0.22 and independent of PI! 
(13.50) 
There is great uncertainty in· such a conclusion because of the scatter in the empirical relation-
ships upon which it is based, and the relationships shown in Fig.l3.90(d) and Fig.l3.90(e) may be only 
. a coincidence. However; the possibility that. the in situ r1 Ja~ may well exist within a rather narrow 
range for soft sedimentary clays has tremendous practical implications (Ladd et al., 1977). 
Stress History-Another factor which strongly affects the undrained shear strength of clays is stress 
history. We mentioned this factor. when we pointed out the difference in behavior between normally 
consolidated and overcori.solidated clays (see, for example, Figs.·12.30, 12.31, imd 12.34). Let's first con-
.. sider some data showing how the normalized undrained strength r1 /a~cvaries with the overconsolida-
tion ratio (OCR). These data are shown for six clays in Fig. 13.91. If you take the ratio of the r1
!a~c 
ratios, as shown in Fig. 13.92, all these soils fall into a rather narrow band, with orily the varved clay 
716 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks., 
Tf 
~ 
1 8 
' 
· 
No. LL 
PI 
L1 I 
,_. !:! : ~i~:= ~A-)~~::.~:~~:' 
1.4 
fA\ ·- . 
1~ clay 
~ 71 
41 
-
G)Maine ' 
.. 
organic clay 
® 
41 
21 
0.8 
1.2~-65139 
I® I 35 
12 
1.0 
0.8 .. ·-·--·--·--·-·-·--"" 
7Jttrr~:~~;~~:~ 
0.6 
0.4 ' 
., ..... .,, 
...~ .. 
"' 
' Note: 
Tf = (rh)max 
0.2 
01 
2 
4 
6 
8 10 
OCR= u: 
Uvc 
(rrlu~c)oc 
(rrlu~c)nc 
OCR= uJ,. 
C!~c, 
FIGURE 13.91 
Undrained strength ratio versus overconsoli-.. 
dation ratio from direct simple shear tests on six clays (after 
Ladd and Edgers, 1972, and Ladd et al., 1977). 
FIGURE 13.92 Relative increase in undrained 
strength ratio with OCR from direct simple shear 
tests (soils 1 through 6 are identified in Fig. 13.91) 
(after Ladd et al., 1977). 
somewhat lower. Ladd et al. (1977) showed that this ratio of ratios is approximately equal to the OCR 
to the 0.8 power, or 
(rtla'·) 
vc 0 
. (rtla' ) 
·~ (OCR)o.s 
v~ nc 
, 
.1: 
'· 
(13.51) 
''· 
Relationships such as this can be useful for comparing strength data from different sites or even from 
the same site. 
· Jiirgenson-Rutledge Hypothesis-Rendulic (1936; 1937) first postulated that, for normally consoli-
dated saturated clay, the water content (and therefore the void ratio) during shear was a unique func-
tion of the principal stresses aJ.; u2,, and a3. Henkel (1958) verified this uniqueness hypothesis with his 
triaxial tests on saturated remolded Weald clay (see Leonards, 1962, and Lambe and Whitman, 1969). 
However, Skempton and .Sowa (1963) showed that the relationship .was not strictly unique but 
.· depended somewhat on the stress path. 
13.13· Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
717 
Rutledge1 (1947) reviewed the results of the Cooperative 
Triaxial Shear Research Program of the U.S. Army Corps of Engi-
neers. The U.S. Army Waterways Experiment Station, MIT, and 
Harvard had performed several hundred .triaxial tests on many · 
clays, and all these results were available in about 17 data reports; · 
Rutledge's job was to summarize all these results and data and to· 
draw some final conclusions from all this research. Among his sev- · 
eral conclusions were the three following observations, based on 
Fig. 13.93, whkh became known as the Rutledge hypothesis: 
1. There is a unique curve (A) of (T~c (or uic}vers~s ef (or Wt)· 
2. There is ,a unique curve (B) of ( u 1 - u 3)1 versuse1 (or w1). 
3. Curves (A) and (B) are essentially parallel in the virgin 
compression region. 
Important implications of the Rutledge hypothesis' are: 
e 
(or w) 
(A) log a~c 
' (B) log (a1 - a3)t 
FIGURE 13.93 Illustration ofthe 
Rutledge hypothesis for clay soils. 
1. Consolidation, either 1-D compression or 3-D triaxial consolidation, yields the same result-
independent of u 2, u 3 , and the stress path. 
2. The compressive (and thus the shear) strength (u1 -
u 3)1 = (u1- u3)1 = f(e1) and therefore 
of u~c only. This implies that stress path, stress history, etc. are not important factors affecting the 
shear strength. 
· 
3. Approximately parallel curves are an empirical. observation of the results of many tests, as 
shown in Rutledge (194~). 
· 
4. From parallel lines, it can be shown that 
"/ 
'Tf 
-, = -, = const. 
Uvc 
Ute·· 
(13.52) 
The relationship inEq. (13.52) was first noticed by Jurgenson (1934). Therefore a better name for this 
hypothesis is the"iiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis. 
· 
. How valid are these three observations? 
1. Number 1 is not strictly true; u~c is also a function of u/.c (or Uzc and u3c), but it is reasonable for 
NC and slightly OC clays. 
· 
2. From Rutledge's review of lots of test results, Curve B seemed to be independent of how one 
gets to' failure; therefore he concluded that the shear strength was a function of e1 only and was 
not path dependent. Again, however, this is not strictly true, as the shear strength may also 
involve some effect of the intermediate. principal stress uzc, stress history, and the soil structure. 
But it is approximately reasonable for NC and slightly OC clays. 
· 
· 
3. Satisfactory by emp~rical observation, although there is some scatter. 
Three examples. of data provided by Osterberg (l9.67). from the Cooperative Triaxial Shear 
Research Pr~gram performed at Harvard arid Northwestern are shown in Figs .. 13.94, 13.95 and 13.96. 
. 
-~,_ 
, 
'-
'> 
. ' 
.. 
"' 
' 
" 
1Historical note: P. C. Rutledge obtained his Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1936 as Prof. Arthur Casagrande's first 
Ph.D. student. He taught soil mechanics at Purdue University from 1937 to 1943, when he became Chair of the 
Department of Civil Engineering at Northwestern University. In 1952 he went into full-time consulting practice with 
Mueser-Rutledge in New York. He was the Fifth Terzaghi Lecturer in 1969. He retired in 1977 and died in 1986. 
718 
Chapter13, 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of. Soils and Rocks : 
2.1~--~----~---,--~,-----~~~--~~~~ 
2.0 l---+----J--
1.91 
IJ 
~ 
I 
I 
~ 
..2 
~ 
co 
.Q 
'§ 
1.8 
\ 
1.7 l·---+----+-__:_:_..:.__f\ 
1.6 1---+---·----+--:----1 
~ 1.3 
> 
1.2 l····-·-······1··-···-·:·-·-··--+·:····-----+ 
1.1 
1.0 
0.9 l-------
!---------~ 
0.8 1--------+---------+-:··-----1 
0.710 
50 
100 
' 500 
1000 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
Log stress (kPa) 
~ 300~--~---+----~--~---G' 
~ 
00 
~ 200~-+---+--~ 
m 
~ 
~ 
100~-~~!;--~ 
00 
200 
400 
600 
Normal stress (kPa) 
800 
5000 
1000 
FIGURE 13.94 ·Results from consolidation and CD, CU, and UU triaxial tests 
on clay from Massena, NY, performed at Harvard (Osterberg, 1967). 
13.13 Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
719 
1.7.----.------.----.----.-------r----r----~-----. 
\() 
1.6.------.-....;~~ I . 
. 
1.5 1-----i--··---~ 
--·--·-+··-~-----·--·.:..-J,--·-+-----+-----
~ i\ 
14 ---~~ 
--'\\ 
...... : ... , .............. ____ .......... +-·· .. -· ............ +.-···-·-·· .. ·-.. -+·-·-···-·--.. --.-1 
j1.3 
'"' 1\ 
I 
ro12 
X i -~ 
!.K 
\ \ 
·o 1.1 
......._~ --·--······-···· -·--·-··-f':···-·--···'11.
1
···-·-·-···-···+·-.................. _ .... ~, ......... _ .. _ ............... , 
> 
~ . ~.; 
1-0 
"~\-~-'\~ 
0.9 
~~I 
M 
I 
I 
.so 
100 
500 
1000 
5000 . 
Log stress (kPa) 
500.---~--~--~----~---r---.----.-------~----~--~ 
Normal stress (kPa) 
FIGURE 13.95. Results from con~olidation and CD and CU triaxial tests on Chicago 
clay performed at Har~ard(Osterberg, 19,67). 
The Massena (NY) clay is from the St. Lawrence Valley and is representative of the sensitive Laurentian 
or Leda clays of Ontario and Quebec. Soft Chicago clay is thought to be a glacially reworked lacustrine 
clay that is quite silty. Glacial Lake Agassiz clay is typical of the clays from the Red River of the North 
valley of Northern Minnesota, Eastern North Dakota, and Southern Manitoba; All three tests tend to 
verify the Rutledge hypothesis. 
720 
Chapter :13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
i-·---:-----i-·--·-·----·+--·--·-···---·-.1 
!1:! 
:::s s 
<a 
0 e 
·\ .. ----.----+--------.. ·+----------·-"' 
"'0 
·a 
1.3 
> 
-\·-'"·f-.................. +-·-·-'"""""''"""-""1 
1.1 
+----·-------!--·-·---.. \·--------+----------
0.9 
0. 8 1-----+----------+-------+------+---------+------+--------~ 
10 
50 
100 
500 
1000 
5000 
Log stress (kPa) 
500~-,~~--,--,~-r~~~---r~~~~~ 
~ 400r---+---+---~---r---+~~--~~--t~~+---,_--~ 
D.. 
-"' l : 
_ =
1
t=~~l---+----L J cu ,isiS ~r-. _;. .. J 
. -· 
"'. 
VE.LOPE rOn ---~---
-
.... -
~ 
· · · 
· · 
· · · t:Av~:J-.!lr--;·r--:--=F .... · I· ' ·. / · 
CIJ 100 
.. 1 ___ ._.,_~ 1 .... __ .., r AVE~NVELOPE FOR UUTE~>TS · · ·' 
· .. 
or::::s?: 
0 
,..._<-r 
J/ 
, 
! 
·~ 
IV-.~ 
I 
\1 
ll 
1 1 s r s~ s 
1 
, 
r s 
, .600 
. 
. .BOO 
, 1000 
Normal stress (kPa) • 
... 
• ·FIGURE 13.96 ·: Results from consolidation and CU 'and UU triaxial tests on Glacial' 
· · Lake Agassiz clay performed at Northwestern (Osterberg, 1967).· 
· o; 
e 
(orw) 
13.13 Stress-Deformation.and.Shear. Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
721 
Another important feature of the JUrgenson-Rutledge hypothesis is that if you have the results 
of a consolidation test and you know the relationship between the compressive strength and the void 
ratio (or water content), then you can theoretically obtain the results of both CD and CU triaxial tests 
on that same soil (Fig. 13.97). 
1. For a CD test on NC clay: 
Start at a given value of aie as indicated in Fig.13.97. Because it is a drained test, the spec-
imen will consolidate during shear and end up at a![. Note that ait - ( a 1 - a3)t = a31. There-
fore the distance~ = a31. Since it is a semilog plot, there is only one value of w1 (and e1) where 
the difference ~ between the curves is a3 = a 3 • In a' CD test they are, of course, equal. It is a 
trial and error solution. By using different hypothetical values of the effective consolidation 
pressure a3 one can construct the Mohr failure envelope and determine the ¢' for a hypothetical 
CD test on the clay. 
· 
2. For a CUtest on NC clay (Fig. 13.98): 
This is a traditional hydrostatically consolidated CU total stress test conducted at a con-
stant cell pressure a3e =' a3e = aid; As shown in Fig. 13.98, these pressures correspond to the 
consolidation water content We· Because the hypothetical specimen is sheared undrained, both 
the water content and void ratio at the end of consolidation and at the end of shear are the same; 
e.g., We = w1 = constant and ee = e1 = constant. Also. the constant cell pressure is a 3e = 
a3e = a31 , and the distance ~ = a31.- (a1 - a3)1. For this cell pressure, the compressive 
·strength at failure is ( a 1 -
D-3)1at w1 and a 31. Again, because the plot is semilog, this value of~ 
is not a constant-it changes throughout the stress range. If we repeat the process at different 
water contents ordifferent cell pressures, we can construct the hypothetical Mohr failure enve-
lope in terms of total stresses and thereby determine the hypothetical ¢r. · 
Now we have both¢' and ¢T without conducting any triaxial tests! 
Finally, in spite of the assumptions and uncertainty associated with the Jurgenson-Rutledge 
hypothesis, there are some practical applications that you niay find useful:: ' 
1. The JUrgenson-Rutledge relationship can be used with the results of in situ tests such as the VST 
to estimate the Ce, ¢', ¢r, and other properties, as shown in Fig.13.99. This information would be 
useful for preliminary work on a project at a new site. 
2. Different soils will have different Jurgenson-Rutledge relationships-e.g., as shown in Fig.13.100. 
Consolidates 
during 
·shear 
log u; 
log (a-1 - a-3), 
u1c= u3c(std test) 
= 0"3( 
.CT3c· 
(= u3c=u3r) 
FIGURE 13.97 Using the JOrgenson-Rutledge hypothesis 
to determine the results of a CD triaxial test. 
FIGURE 13.98 'Using the JOrgenson-Rutledge hypothesis 
to determine the results of a cu triaxial test. 
' 
722 
Chapter 13 
.Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks • 
,, 
.e,w 
\X 
'\ )\• 
\ 
\x 
\ :x, 
't 
~ 
·. 
'{ 
X 
.: ~-
i 
log u', (u1 - u3) 
FIGURE 13.99 Using the VST or other estimates of the 
'· 
i 
'., "\.i 
l, 
~~ 
Xxx 
X 
~,f. 
.. xx 
i 'xx "" 
x<x 
X 
X 
'} 
.. log u', (u1 - u3), 
• . in situ undrained shear strength and the vee to establish 
. the JOrgenson-Rutledge relationship for a· clay deposit;; . 
FIGURE 13.100 Different JOrgenson-Rutledge 
relationships for different soil deposits. 
. 3. u the deposit is silty, there is often a large scatt~r in: ( 0"1 .:.:. u;)t. results; i.e., they do not follow 
the Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis {developed for clay soils), This means that basically they 
. behave as granular soils, imd, for example, a stability analysis in tenus of total stresses would not 
be appropriate for this site:· · · · 
· 
· 
·" · 
· ' · 
· 
· 
• 
' 
' 
-' -
~ 
I ' • 
• : • • 
Remember that you still have sample quality and disturbance issues; especially in deposits of soft 
sensitive clays, butfor these sites, the assumptions of Jiirgenson-Rutledge are basically no worse than 
we usually make for strength and consolidationtestirig in geot'echnical practice. 
· 
' 
. 
. 
13.13.4 Consolidation Methods to Overcome Sample Disturbance , 
.· 
'. . 
"' 
•' 
. 
,., ' 
. 
'' 
Several times before, we have mentioned that soil ·samples are taken•from the subsurface for subse-
·quent.testing in the laboratory in order to obtain their engineering properties:.Because those proper-
ties in situ are so dependent on everything from their water content and density to the soil structure 
and stress history of the deposit, we usually attempt to take soil samples that are as undisturbed as pos-
sible. Subsurface investigation and undisturbed. soil sampling are usually discussed· in courses· and 
books on foundation engineering; see also, for example, Hvorslev (1949), Lowe and Zaccheo (1991), 
and Becker (2001 ). We also recommend an educational video on drilling and sampling by DeJong and 
. Boulanger (2000) that is available online. 
. 
The three primary factors that cause the measured shear 'strength to be less than in situ are: strain 
rate effects (described in Secs.13.10.4 and 13.13.7); anisotropy (different behavior in different directions 
and measured under different stress systems-discussed in Sec.13.13.5); and sample disturbance. Sample 
disturbance results from shear distortion, changes in water content and density, and other effects on the 
soil as it is extracted from the ground. 
Soil samples are most commonly obtained in thin-walled steel (Shelby) tubes or some other type 
of cylindrical container. The samples are extruded from the tubes, and individual specimens are 
trimmed appropriately and placed in the testing apparatus. This entire sampling and testirig process has 
several opportunities for mechanical disturbance and changes in water content and void ratio that will 
cause the measured behavior. to be very different than the behavior that will occur in the field. In 
Sec. 13.6, we briefly described the stress path when we take samples of normally consolidated Ciay from 
' 
,, 
. 
. 
.. 
. 
. 
13.13 · · Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
723 
a soft•clay deposit; they are always disturbed 
to some extent. We mentioned that the mea-
sured undrained shear strength will be lower 
than in situ, even with perfect sampling. 
. 
In Sec.' 8.5, the effects of sampling dis-
turbance on the one-dimensional (1-D) coni-
pression· curve were described. Figure 13.101· 
shows how the laboratory reconsolidation 
curve on a disturbed sample differs from the in 
situ compression curve. Such disturbance can ·· 
also have a profound effect on the measured 
shear strength of the soil and thus contribute 
to the misrepresentation of field behavior in 
conventional laboratory· strength tests. The 
test designation uuc represents a unconfined : 
compression tes't, and CK0U indicates a triax-
ial test that is one~dimensionally consolidated 
( CK0 ) prior .to being sheared undrained (U). 
c 
·~ 
(i)l;' 
·Recompression 
CK0U Test 
Lab CK0U 
.Consolidation stress, 0:~ (log scale) 
FIGURE 13.1 01· .. Schematic of laboratory reconsolida-
tion procedures to overcome sampling disturbance 
effects (after Ladd and DeGroot, 2003). 
. 
In order to minimize the effects of 
sampling disturbance on measured shear 
·behavior, two methods have been developed · · 
in which the test specimens are reconsoli-
dated prior to applying the shear stresses to 
failure. These are the (1) Recompression and 
(2) SHANSEP techniques (SHANSEP stands for Stress Historyand Nonnalized Soil Engineering . 
Properties): While:both of these methods involve reconsolidation; the principles are fundamentally 
quite different. · :· 
In· the Recompression method, developed at the Norwegian· Geotechnical Institute (NGI) by 
Bjerrum (1973) and coworkers, the in situ a~0 and a/z0 are reapplied in order to recover strains imposed 
on the soil during sampling and to expel any water that 'may have been absorbed due to sampling-
induced swelling of the soil. The Recompression method reapplies stresses from the sampling effective 
'stress (a~ at Point 1 in Fig.13.101) to the a~~·and a/z0 at point 2; Once this stress state is achieved, the 
· usual shear testing 'of the· soil occurs. 
The SHANSEP method (Ladd and Foott, 1974) assumes that for niany clays, the behavior in 
a given mocte of shear (e.g., compression or extension) is determined by the clay's overconsolida-
' tion ratio (OCR). Specimens'of clay can either be' loaded in leD compression' beyond their precon-
solidation pressure (a~). to a normally consolidated state. (points A I and B in Fig. 13.101) or 
· unloaded to a particular OCR that corresponds to that in the field (points C and Din Fig. 13.101). 
By normalizing the measured stresses during shear (typically dividing by the final consolidation 
' pressure CT~(.), one cim then estimate behavior at the same OCR, but at different consolidation a~c 
: ·:values (for example, at the in situ a~0 in Fig. 13.10i). In fact, a generalized equation can be devel-
oped to predict'the undrained shear strength Tj for any OCR for a particular soil sheared in a given 
mode: 
···' · 
· 
. 
. . . :2_,; S(OCR)~ 
I a~C ,, 
', •< 
• 
' 
(13.53) 
:, where S = the value ofT11a~0 for OCR= 1, and 
m = a constant determined from the test data. 
724 
Chapter 13 · Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks. 
·So, which method is better or more valid? The Recompression method was originally developed 
for more structured and sensitive clays, and because. this method•reconsolidates to a~0 , which is less 
thana~, it does not destructure the clay priortoshear. However, the methodrequires high quality 
samples so that points 1 and 3 in Fig. 13.101 are not significantlydifferent. If these points have signifi-
cantly different strain levels orvoid ratios (due to sampling disturbance), deceptively.different labora-
tory behavior can result. In comparison, the SHANSEP method, by consolidating clays well beyond 
a~, ·significantly destructures the·. soil in order. to •·· impose a ·new . stress history to it. As a result, 
' SHANSEP tends to be better suited for soft or even stiff clays that have been mechanically overcon-
solidated (versus those that have been ·affected by salt or other cementation effects), and it provides a 
conservative estimate of strength for more structured soils. 
.·, , 
3.13.5 Anisotropy 
' 
' ;. 
'. 
• 
~-' ' 
• 
'J i 
-
• • 
' ' .•• 
You probably recall from your basic mechanics courses:that,anisotropic material has the same 
mechanical properties in all directions, while the properties of an anisotropic material are direction-
ally dependeni. We commonly assume 'that clay deposits areisotropic, but actually the mechanical 
behavior of most. clays)s directionally dependent~that )s, ,the shear. strength and. compressibility 
depend on the direction ofloading versus the direction of. deposition (typically, assumed to be verti-
. cal). This characteristic is fundamentally tlie result ofso-called inherent or intrinsic anisotropy result-
ing from the preferred particle orientation that developed during deposition and any subsequent 
stress history. Both the micro fabric a·nd macrofabric features such as varves and seams (see Sees. 4.8.1 
.· and 4.8.2) contribute the inherent anisotropy of the day deposit. . 
Inherent· anisotropy leads to variations. in undrained shear strength, modulus, pore pressure 
response during undrained loading, and Mohr-Coulomb parameters c' and¢' (for example;Hvorslev, 
... 1g60; Saada and Bianchini, 1g75; Ladd et al., 1g77). For shear strength, the angle ( 8) between the major 
·principal stress ( a 1) direction and theverVcal is used to denote the direction of loading. Thus, for tra-
ditional compression tests, 8 = 0°, and for extension tests, 8 = goo, Direct shear and. direct simple 
shear tests impose 8 angles atfailurethataresomewhere in betweenthis range, although where is not 
known exactly. 
. ,, 
· 
; . '·' 
. , , 
, .· 
. The measurement of anisotropy in days is confusing because. of another type of anisotropy, 
called by various authors stress system, induced, apparent; or evolving anisotropy. It occurs when a 
soil is consolidated under Ka·Conditions, and then sh.eared:in such a way that the principal stresses 
rotate and the angle 8 changes during shearing. For exampl~, a .specimen K 0-consolidated in a triax-
.:,. ial cell to a normally consolidated state ( a3cla1,; and K 0 < 1), then sheared in axial extension, starts 
at a 8 =0° state (a!c is vertical during consolidation), and,thenthe principalstresses rotate as the 
stress path moves into the extension shear.stress range, Then 8,:=90~ and q = l/2(av :-:- ah) < 0 
(see Fig. 13.23). This goo rotation in the direction of a 1 results in a significant change in the soil's 
apparent anisotropy. Ifthe loading in extension were stopped prior,to failure and then axial com-
,;,, pressive stresses were applied, a much lower compre~sive strength would result than if the princi-
pal stress rotation had not occurred in the first plact:;. Thus, axial extension shearing changes the 
:, .·preferred anisotropy of the soil from its original compression orientation to a,more neutral state, 
.. ·., , .. leading to lower compressive strength. A similar kind of experiment could be done on a soil that is 
· 
K 0-consolidated, unloaded to a heavily overconsolidated state (K0 > 1), and then sheared in axial 
. compression. 
To study both types. of anisotropy, specialized testing devices such as the. directional shear 
cells (Arthur et al., 1g80), cuboidal or true triaxial cells, and torsional shear hollow cylinder devices 
(Sec. 11.5.3) are used. As noted by Ladd et al. (1g77), often for practical purposes it is sufficient to 
characterize the combined effect from inherent and induced anisotropy, and this is best done using 
tests in which specimens are K0-consolidated to theirin situ stress state prior to shear. 
13.13 Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
725 
Anisotropy is important in practice because it affects such factors as the modulus and the yield 
surface and thus the shear strength of clays, as we have just explained. An important illustration of the 
importance of anisotropy is in the choice of shear strength for stability analyses. For example, consider 
the embankment on a soft soil shown in Fig. 13.102. The variation of shear strength along a potential 
sliding surface can vary significantly, and to measure the correct shear strength, a different type of test 
would be appropriate for different portions of the potential sliding surface. 
Bjerrum (1972, 1973) suggested that the best way to estimate the stability of embankments on 
·soft clays was to use AC triaxial tests, direct simple shear (DSS), and AE triaxial tests, all reconsoli-
dated to their in situ state of stress (the Recompression method described above in Sec. 13.13.4), as 
shown in Fig. 13.102. Different shear strengths would be appropriate for different segments of the slip 
surface, typically l~J _liJ _liJ each, for the embankment case. 
A summary of T1!a~0 data me.asured in K 0-consolidatedACtriaxial tests(TC), direct simple shear 
(DSS), and AE triaxial tests (TE) on several NC clays is shown in Fig. 13.103. You can see that the 
. undrained strength. can vary significantly depending on the type of test. Jamiolkowski et al. (1985) con-
cluded that: (1) less plastic and more sensitive clays have more anisotropy as 'compared with high plastic 
clays; and (2) the use of only hydrostatically consolidated undrained triaxial compression tests or even 
• 
' 
• 
' 
;;,;;j < 
I 
Extension 
test 
Direct 
simple 
shear test : i : 
:\f 
:_~jJ 
t 
Compression· 
test 
A 
'A' 
'A:' 
. 
. 
:, 
: .. ' 
.
. tfu4::. .
.. 
A 
TC· 
. ·A, 
-~~-~-----------------~-------------
' A 
rJl 
o 
DSS ----o 
Q) 0 
------6--~ 
'A 
...,..--
0 
' 
' 
0 
CCV co 
T~...;.. v 
~"if---\ ' 
--~ 
v 
A Triaxial compression (TC) . Tr = q, 
o Direct simple shear (DSS) Tr = Th(max) 
v Triaxial extension (TE) 
r 1 = q1 
90 
Plasticity index, PI 
'\ .. 
FIGURE 13.102 
Relevance 
of laboratorY shear tests to 
' the shear strength required 
for stability analyses (Bjerrum, 
1972; 1973). 
. 
FIGURE 13.103 Undrained shear 
·strength anisotropy from Ko-
consolidated undrained triaxial 
tests on NC clays, with data from 
from the University of British 
Columbia, Sherbrooke and Laval 
Universities in Canada, MIT in 
the United States, and the 
Norwegian Geotechnical Institute 
(after Jamiolkowski et al., 1985). 
726 
Chapter 13 
AdvancedTopics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks; 
),', 
i 
'J 
'i 
~ 
K 0-.consolidated undrained triaxial compression tests to obtain. the undrained shear strength Tf for sta-
. bility analysis is generally unsafe for clays of low to moderate OCR. This is because the shear strength 
. measured in triaxial compression is greater than measured by the other two types of tests. Using only the 
·ACstrength would seriously overestimate the calculated safety factor, and an unsafe design could result. 
. . 
.. So what should you do? Similar to Bjerrum (1972 and 1973), Jamiolkowski eta!. (1985) recommend, 
'if at all possible, conducting DSS tests, triaxial extension, and triaxial compression tests on high quality 
undisturbed specimens.)f such a. test program is not possible, then perform consolidation tests on high 
. quality samples (e.g., Holtz eta!., 1986) to obtain the u~ and OCR; then useEq. (13.54) to estimate Tf lu~0 : 
~ 
=•(0.23 ± 0.04)(0tR) 0·8 
Uvc .·.. 
' 
. 
, · 
· 
·'. 
(13.54) 
. . . . . . 
Th~y strongly suggest ~hat ~sing this empirical eq~ation i;m be more reli~ble. than conducting 
.. ,., 
only hydrostatically consolidated undrained triaxial compression tests to determine the undrained 
. ' .. shear strengthfor stabilityanalysis! . . : .... :' . 
. ' . ' :· 
. 
. .· 
: ; '' . . 
In Sec~ 13,13.3, when we discussed the itlu~oiatio; we mentioned the interesting discovery by 
Mesri (1975) th.attherriobilized undrained shear strength in the field was almost equal to 0.22 u~ and 
independent of plasticity of a soft clay [Fig.13.90(e) and Eq. (13.55)]: 
Tf = 0.22u~ 
, 
Up, 
(13.55) 
Mesri (1989) in a reevaluation showed that essentially the same relati~nship can be obtained 
from laboratory shear tests, provided that the anisotropy and strain rate are correctly accounted for. 
We have discussed the vaneshear tests in Secs.11.6.1 and 12.11.4, when we mentioned that the VST is 
a common in situ test for determining the undrained shear strength of soft days. The Bjerrum's correc~ 
tion factor JL (Figs. 12.45 and 13.90) was probably due to anisotropy and strain rate effects not 
accounted for by the VST. Although, as 'Ye mentioned, Bjerrum (1973) ~ecommended the use of 
recompressed AC, DSS, and AE triaxial tests, he recognized that such an approach may not be practi-
cal for most projects. Therefore he suggested that the corrected undrained VST strength could be used 
instead. In' other words, Tj(mob) determined from a program ofhigh quality and expensive laboratory 
strength tests may not be significantly different from corrected Tf determined by the VST. 
. 
To the lab test results shown in Fig. 13.103, Mesri added some VSTdata (FV curve = 
"field vane"), as shown in Fig.13.104 and then assumed that Tflu~ f::! Tflu~c· 
In spite of the scatter, the results were encouraging. Next, Mesri applied the correction factor JL 
for VST [Figs.12.45 and 13.90(c)], as well as corrections for strain rate summarized from severalstud-
ies by Chandler (1987). These results are sho~n in Fig. 13:105 .. The two· curves are (1) JLR 1oo for 
t 1 = 100 min, a typical time to failure for laboratory strength tests, and (2) Jl.R 10000 for t1 = 10000 min 
or about 1 wk, a typical time to failure foran embankment.Also shown in this figure are the correction 
factors wand Jl.R; the first is from Figs. 12.45 and 13.90(c) and the second is from Bjerrum's (1973) 
modification for strain rate effects. It is remarkable that it matches Chandler's Jl.R 10000 data so well. 
• .. '' . .•. . Me sri then applied the ratio of ILR lOooO and !LR.lOO to the T tfu~ from the AC, DSS, andAE tests to 
.. ' . 'one~ third of the failure surface in Fig. 13.103 to get the ratio T f(mob/u~, or . 
. ~ 
' . 
', 
' 
,: ' 
' 
~ 
' 
: 
' 
' 
. . 
. 
·, 
Tf(;,ob) -. 1 [·( Tf) ,., ·,·,. ... ( Tf )' . ·; ( Tf) J 
Jl.R 10000 
--.,- -::-.3 
I 
··. +. •I• 
+ .I 
---
; 
Up 
. 
. • Up TC. 
. Up pss 
~p. TE 
Jl.RlOO 
(13.56) 
•.. When: this is pl~tted in Fig:13.106, we see that the ~/(mob)/~~ is indeed independent of PI; or 
Tf(mob(;, 0.22u~' 
(13.57) 
13.13 . Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Cl_ays: Special Topics 
727 
0.3 
0.1 
::!..1.0 
..... 
~ 
~ 
§ 0.8 
~ 
~ 
0 
(.) 0.6 
PI 
• Field vane 
1::. Triaxial compression 
o Direct simple she~r · · 
v Triaxial extension 
FIGURE 13.104 Values of 
rrluf, from Jamiolkowski 
et al; (1985) and Chandler 
100 
(1987), as compiled by 
Mesri (1989). 
_ 0.4 t_ __ 
~___---...~_:_ _ 
___J. __ 
---~. __ -:'----"J .: FIGURE 13.105. Correction 
0. 
120 · : factors for VST test (Bjerrum, 
PI 
. :. 1973; Chandler, 1987). 
Example 13.17 
Given: 
Tf(mob) -1 ~ Tf )' · ·(!!_) · · +(!!_) ] ILR10000· 
--,-- 3 ---, TC + u' DSS 
u' T'J Jl.R 100 
Up 
Up 
, .. p 
p 
. 
PI · 
The data in Fig~l3.105. 
Required: 
" 
If the PI is 40, show that Eq. (13.57) is satisfactory. 
FIGURE 13.106 Mobilized 
field undrained shear 
strength from laboratory 
tests (Mesri, 1989). 
728 
Chapter 13 · 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Solution: From Figs. 13.104 and 13.105, and using Eq. (13.56), we obtain 
T~ = 1!3[TC + vss + TE] 11R 1oOOo =:· 1/3[0.310 + o.245 +0.195] 0
0"7
8
6
5 = o.244 
0" p 
·. .. 
. . 
.·.· : 
!J.R 100 
• . . 
. 
i 
· 
Therefore, Eq. (13.57) is quite satisfactorY. 
As Mesri (1989) notes, becaus~ Eqs. (13.50) and (13.57) were obtained from such different analy-
.sis sets of field and laboratory data,itis amazing that they agree so well, in spite of the scatter of the 
data imd the simplifying assumptions used in the 1989 analysis. The practical conClusion, as noted 
· abov~, is that use of the more time-consuming and thus more expensive sampling and laboratory test-
•. ing program provides, at best, results comparable to those from corrected VST testing for undrained 
stability analyses of soft clays. 
13.13.6 Plane Strain Strength of Clays 
In Sec.13.4, we described field situations in which plane strainco~ditions exist and are therefore more 
appropriately modeled using plane strain laboratory testing, in which strains in one axis are prevented 
[Fig. 11.16(b) ]. Plane strain conditions can exist for all types of geotechnical materials. We discussed the 
plane strain properties of sands in Sec.' 13.11, but in contrast, there have been few ~tudies of the plane 
strain properties of fine grained and cohesive soils. Perhaps the most complete data set was presented 
by Vaid and Campanella (1974), who compared plane straintest results with those from triaxial tests 
on undisturbed specimens of normally consolidated Haney clay (LL = 44, PI = 18, and sensitivity 
6-10). Specimens were Ka consolidated prior to shear, then loaded in ACandAE stress conditions, 
both undrained and drained. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
Results are shown in Table 13.8 in terms of both maximum principal stress difference and maxi-
mum obliquity. Also given are axial strain, vohimetric strain (for drained tests), the undrained strength 
T 1 normalized by uJ. (for undrained tests), the obliquityvalue, u1fu3, and effective friction angle c/J'. The 
drained test specimens did not strain-soften during testing, so their failure states are defined by the 
condition at ( ulfu3)~ax. From these results, the following conclusions cari be drawn: 
• In comparison totriaxialtestresults, plane strain tests ga~e undrained strengths that were about 
10% higher in compression, and about 25% higher in extension; the increases in maximum cp' 
values were 2° and 0.5°, respectively. Shear-induced pore pressures were approximately the 
same for compression and slightly higher in the plane strain .extension tests than those for triax-
. ial extension. ... 
. 
. 
.. . • 
.. . 
.. . 
. 
. 
· · • For the drained tests, both compressionand extension plane strain tests gave higher values of 
( ul/u3 )max. Increases in cp'were only 0.4 o to 0.8° for unloading tests (compression and extension), 
but this difference was 3.2° for AC tests. 
Ladd et al. (1977) incorporated these results from Haney clay with those from other clays and 
found that for the undrained strength of clay for compression (based on six clays including Haney clay) 
T [(plane strain/'~" [(triaxial).= 1.03 to 1.15 
(13.58) 
and for extension (based on three clays including Haney clay) 
T f(phme strain/'~" [(triaxial) ~ 1.19 t~ 1.25 
(13.59) 
13.13 Stress-Deformation and Shear Strength of Clays: Special Topics 
729 
TABLE 13.8 Comparison of Triaxial and Plane Strain Results on Normally Consolidated Haney Clay* 
At maximum principal stress 
At maximum 
difference, ( Ut -
UJ)~ax' 
obliquity, ( al!a3)max 
Axial 
Volumetric 
Axial· 
Volumetric 
Test conditions 
strain(%) 
strain(%) 
r1!a1 
a!! a] 
</>' (0) ' strain(%) 
strain(%) 
ajJa3 
</>' (0) 
Undrained compression 
Plane strain 
0.4 
0.296 
2.48 
25.2 
4.5 
3.20 
31.6 
Triaxial 
0.35 
0.268 
2.15< 
21.4 
12 
2.98 
29.8 
Undrained extension 
Plane strain 
-10.5 
0.211 
3.57 
34.3 
-10.5 
3.57 
34.3 
Triaxial 
-13 
0.168 
3.49 
33.8 
-13 
3.49 
33.8 
Drained loading compression 
Plane strain 
4.5 
0.9 
2.93 
29.4 
4.5 
0.9 
2.93 
29.4 
Triaxial 
15 
3.2 
2.84 
28.6 
15 
3.2 
2.84 
28.6 
Drained unloading compression 
Plane strain 
-9 
-0.8 
3.65 
34.7. 
-9 
-0.8 
3.65 
34.7 
Triaxial 
-14 
0.7 
3.60 
34.3 
-14 
0.7 
3.60 
34.3 
*All samples initially K0 consolidated., 
From Vaid and Campanella (1974). 
13.13.7 Strain Rate Effects 
We discussed strain rate effects ill sands in Sec.13.10.4, concluding that the effects are ~ost important at 
relatively high rates of deformation. Because of clays' viscous nature, their mechanical behavior tends to 
be highly dependent on the time scale over which they are loaded, and over a much wider range of 
strain rates than sands. Two aspects of this dependency affect engineering practice. We discussed in 
Sec. 9.8 the'first one, tlie lon!Herm settlement due to secondary compression in. 'hie second is the effect 
of strain rate on undrained strength. To some extent, all clays 'exhibit strain rate dependence of their 
undrained strength, and usually the faster you !mid a clay soil, the stronger it becomes. 
We mentioned in Sec. 13.13.5 that strain rate effects were part of Bjerruni's correction factor for 
the VST conducted on deposits of soft clay. Taylor (1948) showed that the undrained strength of a 
.. , ; , remolded Bost<;m blue clay increased about. 10% per log cycle, of time increase in speed of shear 
, [Fig.13.107(a)]. Bjerrum (1972).showed about the same increase,!nCU tests on a Norwegian plastic 
, clay [Fig.13.107(b)]. Differencesbetween the Tate ofloadingin.thelaboratory andin the field can sig-
. nificantly affect theundrained shear strength. Ladd et a!. (1977) also discussed this point. 
One way to express the dependency of the undraine4 strength on strain rate, SR, is by rate effect 
strength parameter, 
.PSRo.=, (D.rtfrto)lt.IogSR 
(13.60) 
., 
where r10 is the undrained strength at some referenceaxial strain rate SR0 • The parameter PsRo is usu-
, ·,, ally expressed as a percentage; and it represents the change in T 1 over one logarithmic cycle change in 
· · strain rate. 
, , 
. Sheahan et a!. (1996) present data from a comprehensive set of K 0cconsolidated CU tests on spec-
, imens of resedimented Boston blue clay (LL · =; 45; PI = 24) consolidated to OCRs of 1, 2, 4, and 8, then 
730 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
,. ,. 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
Tf 
0.8 
Tto.s O.G 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
·•· 
50.·------,-------~------.-----~ 
.s:::. 
.c,~ 
cC\1· . 
. ~s 
. (/) .0 
w= 
-~ ~ 45 
~:I 
a. ._· .· 
E b 
s~ 
0.001 . 
40 10-4 
0.01 
Speed of axial compression (~lo/min) 
(a) 
Rate of shear strain (%ih) 
(b) . 
' 
: 
FIGURE 13.107 Effect of rate of loading onthe undrained strength,of (a)Boston blue .. 
clay (after Taylor, 1948); and (b) Dram men, Norway,· plastic clay: The strength ratio in 
. these latter tests is with respect to the strength at the NGI. standard rate of 0.6%/hr 
. }~.fter Bjerrum, 1972). 
· 
· · 
· 
· · 
· 
• 
· 
· 
'· ' 
l ' ~ 
; 1:· 
~ 'sheared at strain rates varying.from 0.05 to 50%/hr. Figure13.108 shows the summary of Tt normalized 
··by the maximum vertical effective stress. u~m versus· strain. rate: The value of PsRb is relatively' indepen-
• dent of OCR, averaging about 9.5%, across tile faster rates from 5%' to 50%/hr, but at lower strain rates 
the rate·dependence decreases with increasing OCR. Soils more structured than resedimented Boston 
. blue day can be expected to exhibit even. more rate dependence, regardless of stress history. 
The rate dependence of undrained behavior, if not properly accounted for,• can lead to overesti-
mates of undrained strength that may result in unsafe designs. Ladd and DeGroot (2003) estimate that 
when compared to r 1 values from laboratory K:,~consolidated CU tests (typically performed at 0.5% to 
1.0%/hr), uncorrected r1 values derived from cone penetration tests are 50% higher, r1 from lab uncon-
fined compression tests are 15% 'higher, and field strengths 'may be 10% lower. •! 
· 
· · 
'' · .. Another problem, not often mentioned, results from tryirig to determine the longcterin or effec-
tive stress strength parameters and the short-term or CU-total stress strength parameters from the same 
· · test series of CU triaxial tests: It is common practice when testing compacted specimens of core materi-
. als for the design of embankments to determine both the effective and total stress strength parameters 
13.14 Strength of Unsaturated Soils 
731 
· from the same test series. The rates of loading or 
strain required for correct determination of the 
effective stress strength parameters may not be 
appropriate for the short-term or undrained 
loading situation, because, as mentioned above, 
the stress-deformation and strength response of 
E 
_., 
~ 
l-
.£ 
c, 
c: 
!:? 
'lii 
"0 
(]) 
c: 
'iii 
.t; 
c: 
:::J 
"0 
(]) 
.~ 
'1 (ij 
'E 
5 
z 
0.35 
0.30 
0.25 
0.20 
: 
) = Po.s ' . jY< 
( 
....... 
0 
' ' 
1._6) 
0 
oc~?B~ 
1 e · · · 
· · · ~ 
. 
. 
~,.e,5 
~ 
' '' '. 
i ,. l 
. ; t3.5) <;;>·,;::;;--
'· '.. 5 5) . . ·..;..;..---
'• ~·' 
2 
<;> 
' 
' 
' 
. 
. 
• 
t7) 
0 
. (Ol 
t3.5LEI~ 
4' El 
a- . . .. 
.,.~~ 
(0) 
(0)' 
<J 
<J 
'' 
· chiy soils· is rate-dependent. Long-term or 
drained loading in the field may take many days 
or even weeks and months, so the effective . 
stress parameters shbuld be determined on a 
test conducted at a very slow rate of strain. On 
the other hand, for the short-term or undrained 
case, the rate of loading in the field may be quite 
rapid, imd therefore for correct modeling of the 
field situation; the rates of loading in the labora-
tory sample should be comparable. Thus the two . 
. 
. 
., objectives of the CU-effective stress test are 
Axial strain ra,te; Ba (%/h) 
'0.15 
0.01 
0.1 
10 
100 
really incompatible. The best thing to do, though . 
· 
· FIGURE 13.108 Effect of axial strain rate on normal-
it is rarely done iri practice, would be to have two · 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
· · 
· ized undrained shear strength of resedimented 
· sets of tests; i:me se. t CD modeling the long~ term.. 
Bosto blue cl 
at d'ff ent OCRs (f 
L dd 
d 
. 
. n . . ay . 
1 er 
rom a 
an 
situation and the' 'other set CU modeling the 
DeGroo( 2oo3, after Sheahan et al., 1996). 
shorHer.m undrained loading .. 
13.14 
STRENGTH OF UNSATURATED SOILS .. 
Virtually all of the presentati~n of soil shea~ strength in this book has assumed that the soil is either 
completely dry or completed saturated (S ,; 100% ). This stems from 'the origins ofm'odern soil 
mechanics and represents simplifying' assumptions; despite the' well-known fact that many important 
geotechnical applications involve saturation conditions somewhere between these' two extreme states. 
These include seepage problems, compacted soils for a multitude of applications (waste and contami-
nant isolation, constructed embankments, highway ~md building foundation soils: and so on) and soils 
prone to severe expansion ancl contraction associated with groundwater fluctuation (Fredlund, 1997). 
In addition, . any shear. strength applications for. soils above the. groundwater· table. should ideally 
include consideration of unsaturated 'soil mechanics. Much of this· section is based on Fredlund and 
Rahardjo (1993) and Lu and Likos (2004), and you can refer to those books to further understand all 
of the complexities involved in unsaturated soil mechanics. 
13.14.1 Matric Suction in Unsaturated Soils 
The most important differentiating aspect of unsaturated soil effective stress and corresponding shear 
strength is the existence of soil suction, usually termed matric suction. We have already seen a simple 
example of matric suction in our discussion of capillary effects (Chapter 6). While other factors such as 
. ; soil-water electfical interactions, particle-to-particle van der Waals attractive forces, and dissolved pore 
water solutes can contribute to soil suction (Lu· imd Likos, 2004 ), we will consider only capillary effects 
to understand fundamentals of unsaturated soil behavior. 
Recall from Chapter 6 that for a capillary tube (Fig. 6.2), the surface tension is related to the 
curvature of the capillary meniscus, the height of the capillary rise, and the capillary pressure in the 
pore water. As a soil goes from a saturated to a unsaturated state, the water in the pores is no longer 
732' 
Chapter 13 . ·:Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
"<l 
.-, 
continuous but starts to form these menisci, leading to changes in the effective stress state: In fact, a 
more generic version of Eq. (6.6a) includes consideration ofthe air pressure (u0 ) at the meniscus 
· interface: 
. • ' 
. :. 
'::; 
Ua -;-· Uw = -2Tirm . 
(13.61) 
. where Tis the surface tension and r m is the radius of curvature of the meniscus. This differ~ nee; Ua -
Uw' 
is the matric suction. 
' 
. . 
·· 
' 
. ·. ~ 
. · · · . 
. · 
. . . , . 
. 
·.·Just as in laboratory testing of saturated soils it is desirable to control the pore water pressure, 
in unsaturated soil~testing it is necessary to.controlboth 'the air'a~d water pressures. In all cases, 
, Ua > Uw, since thatis the condition under which. unsaturated soils exist. This is done Using what is 
known as a high air entry (HAE) porous stone (or, more likely, ceramic): To understand how the HAE 
: ceramic disk functions, a simple experiment can be performed using the setup shown in Figure 13.109, 
. in which:u·~ and Uw can be separately controlled,with'air and water phases separated by an HAE 
ceramic interface. TheHAE ceramic is specified by its air entry value, Uwa,tlie maximum pressure dif-
ferential that can be sustained across the ceramic material, which essentially functions as a: membrane 
between the air and water. So a'po~ous materiaiwith a "high air entry ~alue" leads to' some confusion: 
it does not mean that it allows a lot of air to enter ~r pass through it; it means that water saturating it 
forms a membrane that can maintain a high levdof soil or rnatric suction without air entering the 
water-pressure measurement system. The mairiC suction ratirigfor'a porous materialis thus inversely 
proportional to the pore diameter, with 15 bars (15 atmospheres of suction or -1500 kPa)being the 
highest rating cited. 
· 
· ' ,. 
·· 
· . · 
. 
, ::. ,, ·, 
·.· , · · 
... ·.· 
Again referring to Fig. 13.109, as long as the Uwa value of the HAE ceramic is higher than the Ua 
being applied, the HAE ceramic will be able to keep the air and water separated due to the surface 
tension at· the ceramic:...air-water interface. 
This simple experiment can now be extended to a corltrolied stress variable test setup that can 
apply a hydrostatic total stress to a soil specimen while controlling the pore air .and water pressures, as 
.. , 'shown in Fig.13.1io: It is easy to see that such'a setup could be adapted to the triaxial, dir~ct shear, and 
''·; one-dimensional consolidation testdevices. Just asinthe simple experiment shown in Fig.13.109, the 
.HAE ceramic disk' keeps air from entering the pore water pressure control system, and a low air entry 
disk (a coarse porous stone) allows the free exchange or' air. . 
. . 
. ' ' 
' ' 
' 
It is important to remember thatin such tests, a stress hierarchy must be maintained such that 
. . the total stress, u > Ua > Uw 0 When the magnitudes of these' stress components are. changed in equal 
; increments and in the same direction (either all increased ,or alldecreased), the matric suction and the 
, n~t normal stress, u . .:.;_ u0 , remain constant. This is referred to as null testing (Fredlund, 1973) . 
. 
' 
-
•' ', 
'• 
'. '' 
' 
·' 
. 
' 
r.:====A=i=r=p::Jreiucr=e=, u=a====;l 
· FIGURE 13.109 ; Equilibriuni'position 
, for air-water.,.HAE ceramic interface.· 
(after Lu and 'ukos, 2004) .. 
13.14 Strength of Unsaturated Soils 
733 
Hydrostatic stress u 
Confining cell 
''' . 
·• 
Confining stress Pore water, 
· 
(u) . 
pressure 
. FIGURE 13,110 Example of 
Pore air , . controlled stress variable testing 
pressure. using a hydrostatic stress cell . 
· 
. (uw) 
· (ua) 
· (after Lu and Likos, 2004). · · 
r 
: 1-. 
13.14.2 The Soil-Water Characteristic Curve 
From Sec. 6.8, you kno~ that the soil-water characteristic curve (SWCC) relates the soil's degree of 
· ; saturation to its matricsuction and is fundamental to the state of stress and the corresponding shear 
' behavior. Figure 13.111 shows the typical shape of this relationship. It is n~teworthy that the air entry 
value of soil occurs at a relatively high degree of saturation, typically greater than 90%.This is because 
the capillary action that determines the air entry behavior requires more or less continuous water 
"columns" through the soil void space: As the saturation level decreases along the flat· portion of the 
SWCC, the pore water regime remains continuous, until the residual saturation level is reached, when 
water forms distinct interparticle menisci. 
· 
15 .--------..-,----,---,---------,-,-----:,1 
. 
I . 
f'o-~-----:-1-
u 
I 
iil 
I 
o 
I 
~ 5 
· I 
::2 
Air entry suctron 
I 
Residual degree of saturation, s, •• 
0~---.~~--·----~------~----~------~--~ 
o 
~ 
~ 
w 
w· 
Degree of saturation, S (%) 
FIGURE 13.111 . Soil-water 
characteristic curve (SWCC) 
for a typical soil. ' 
734 
Chapter 13.; .•. Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
The SWCC, while a relatively simple relationship, is important as a framework for understanding 
. how the soil's physical state (degree of saturation) directly impacts a primary factor in its mechanical 
behavior (via lllatric suction). 
. . 
. 
13.14.3 The Mohr-Cbulomb Failure Envelope for Unsaturated Soils 
' 
I 
·" 
! 
. Bishop et al. (1960) conducted an extensive experimental program on ~nsaturated soils and introduced 
the parameter·. X to characterize the contribution of matric suction to effective stress. The resulting 
equation for a~ unsaturated soil was as follows: 
. 
a.i =(a- Ua) + X(Ua -·uw) 
. ' . 
. . 
(13.62) 
Until the mid-l970s, however, the~e ~as no systematic framework for. considering the shearstrength of 
unsaturated soils. Fredlund and Morgenstern (1977) presented a mecha~istic framework for describing the 
shear strength that was based on a stress state principle and a modified Mohr -Coulomb· criterion that con-
siders boththe pore water pressure, Uw, and pore air pressure, Ua. The-stress state On any normal plane for 
unsattirated soil is given by a combination of (a . .:.... Ua) and ( u~ - Uw); where a is the normal stress on 
that plane. When Uw and Ua are equal to one another (soil suction goes to zero), the second part of this 
stress state is eliminated, and we are left 'with the original effective stress principle, a' = · (a -. Uw). 
From this stress state concept, a modified Mohr-Coulomb equation was developed, where the 
shear strength, Tff, is given by 
Ttt = c' +(at- ua)ftancf>' + (ua- uw)ftancf>b 
(13.63) 
•wh~re cf>b == the angle repres~nting th~ in~re~se in shear stren~~hwith r~~~ect to a change in soil suction . 
. As we saw in SectionJ1.4, the.Mohr-Coulomb envelope for a•saturated (or dry) soil can be 
.obtained by plotting the effectivestress Mohr circles at ·failure, in .T versus (a. --: uw) space, and draw-
... ing a common tangent line to those circles, defining 'c' and cf>~. For unsaturated soils, the Mohr circles 
. are plotted in T versus net normal stress, (a .-:-: ua), space to determine c~ and cf>', but a third dimension 
is added to the plot, the matric suction, (ua -;: uw),to determine the anglecf>b. Referring to Fig.13.112, 
l-
ui 
Cll 
~ 
1ii 
(ij 
Q) 
.c 
(/) 
c't 
-
FIGURE .13.112 . Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope concept extended for unsaturated soils (after Fredlund 
and Rajardjo, 1993). 
one set of three tests a f. different effective 
confining pressures is shown for a saturated 
soil (ua- u;,; = 0), and a' second set is· 
shown for three tests. at some. nonzero 
matric suction. This results in a set of larger 
Mohr circles (because the matric suction 
. contributes to higher. shear strengths at a 
given cr - ua) that are offset by the matric 
suction; and are still connected by a com- · 
., mon tangent line at the same q/, but with a .. 
. higher cohesion'intercept The slope of the:. 
line connecting' the respective envelopes is 
· .(/},the increase in shear strength due to the 
matric 'suction. Referring to the:swcc in 
Fig; 13.111~ at higher saturation ltwels corre~ 
sponding to matric suction below the air · 
: entry value, the Mohr-Coulomb. envelope· 
·remains linear, cf} is close to cf>'; arid so the 
conventional . Mohr .:.Coulomb relationship· 
· can . be used. For matric suction values 
beyond the air entry value, the relationship ·· · 
between shear strength and the matric suc-
tion has been shown to become much more 
nonlinear, indicative of. the. more complex 
moisture regime that is introduced as satura-
tion decreases (Fig. 13.113). In other words; 
at lower saturation levels, cf>b is consistently 
lower than cf>', and the mechanisms for 
'strength development in this range arestill 
not well understood. 
13.14.4 Shear Strength Measurement 
in Unsaturated Soils 
As.noted in Sec. 13.14.1, conducting shear· 
·13.14 Strength of Unsaturated Soils 
735 
' ··Saturated·· • • Transition • 
I• 
regime 
regime • ; 1 
0 
.. 
0 
.Linear. · 
Strength at 
Residual 
regime. 
saturation 
o~~~~~--------------------~ 
' 0 
{U8 -
Uw)b 
Matric suction, U8 -
Uw 
FIGURE 13.113 Conceptual relationship between 
soil-water characteristic curve and unsaturated shear-· 
strength envelope {after Lu and Likos, 2004}. 
~trength tests foi.unsaturated soils is more · 
. . 
. 
. 
,.,complicated thanfor saturated or dry soils, ~ince the matric suction must also be controlled and/or 
' . measured in order to .obtain an accurate unders'tanding of the soil behavior. This is because, as 
Eq. (13.63) indicates .and Fig. 13.112 shows, not one, but two, friction angles must be determined: the 
r friction angle, cf>', related to the n'et nornialstress variable, ( U f -
Ua) f; and the angle, 'cf>b; associated 
, with the increase in shear strength due to matric suction, (ua - uw)f· 
, :· .. 'll'iaxial tests on unsaturated soils use manyofthe'same test designations as in saturated soil test-
. ing to describe the test conditions-e.g., consolidated-drained (CD), consolidated-undrained (CU), 
unconsolidated-undrained (UU), and unconfined compression (UCC). The pore air pressure is typically 
. , . controlled/measured through a coarse porous disc at one end of the specimen, and the pore water pres-·. 
sure controlled/measured using a high-air-entry porous disc at the other end. A test that is unique to 
unsaturated soils is the constantwater content test (CW), in which the specimen is consolidated and 
then sheared in such a way that the pore air pressure is maintained constant, but the pore water line is 
kept closed as in an undrained test. For a CD test, both the net confining stress ( cr3 - ua) 'and matric 
736 
Chapter 13 , 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
suction (ua - uw) remain constant during shear. In a CU, UU and UCC test, both air and water are pre-
vented from leaving or entering the specimen during shear. It is noteworthy that for undrained tests on 
specimens with a given initial degree of saturation, the higher the total confining stress, the higher the sat-
uration level becomes, leading to conditions that approach 100% saturation. This results in a flatter total 
stress Mohr-Coulomb envelope at higher confining stresses, consistent with total stress envelopes for 
undrained tests on saturated soils (Fig. 12.38). 
For direct shear tests on unsaturated· soils, the same. pore water and pore air control/measure-
ment capabilities must be in place as for the triaxial test on these soils. Typical values for c', ¢', and ¢b 
for a number of unsaturated soils from both triaxial and direct shear tests are given in Table 13.9. 
For unsaturated soils, a series of UU tests will define an initially curved failure. envelope 
[Fig. 12.38(b)] until the day becomes essentially 100% saturated, due simply to the cell pressure 
alone. Even though the drainage valves are closed, the confining pressure will compress the air in the 
. voids and decrease the void ratio. As· the cell pressure is increased, more and more compression 
occurs, and eventually, when sufficient pressure is applied, essentially 100% saturation is achieved. 
Then, as with the case for initiaily 100% saturated clays, the Mohr failure envelope becomes hori-
zontal, as shown on the right side of Fig. 12.38(b ). 
. . , · 
Another way of looking at the compression of unsaturated clays is shown in Fig. 13.114. As the 
cell pressure is increased incrementally, the measured increment of pore pressure increases gradually, 
until at some point, for every increment of cell pressure added, :an equal,increment of pore water 
pressure is observed. At this point, the soil is 100% saturated and. the solid (experimental) curve 
becomes parallel to the 45° line shown in the figure. 
· 
· 
TABLE 13.9 Experimental Values of Mohr-Coulo~b Envelope Parameters for Unsaturated Soils 
Water 
Dry 
Content' 
Density 
c' 
4>~ 
cf>b 
Soil'I)'pe 
(%) 
(kg/m3) 
(kPa) 
(deg) , 
(deg) 
. Test Pr~cedure 
Reference 
Compacted shale 
18.6 
-
15.8 
24.8 
18.1 
'Bishop et a!. 
(1960) 
Boulder clay 
11.6 
._ : 
9.·6; 
27.3 
21.7 
Undrained triaxial 
Bishop eta!. 
··t ' .. 
•'¥·' 
'1 ,, 
(1960) 
Dhanauri clay . 
. 22.2 
1580 
37.3 
28.5 
16.2 
CD triaxial 
Satija (1978) 
Dhanauri clay 
22.2 
1478 
20.3 
29.0 
12.6 
CW trlaxial ' 
Satija (1978) 
Dhanauri clay 
22.2 
1580 
15.5 
28.5 :· 
22.6 
CWtriaxial 
satija (1978) 
Dhanimrl clay 
22.2 
_; 1478 
11.3 
29.0' 
16.5 
u~drainect triaxilil 
Satija (1978) 
Madrid 'grey clay 
29 
·'·' 
. '·23.7 
22.5"' 
16.1 
' 
·< 
' 
. Escario (1980) 
-
CD'direct shear 
Undisturbed, decomposed. 
-
-
28.9 
33.4 
15.3 
CD multistage 
· Ho and Fredlund 
granite; Hong Kong 
triaxial 
(1982) 
Undisturbed, decomposed 
-
-
7.4 
35.3· 
13.8 
CD multistage 
Ho and Fredlund 
·rhyolite, Hong Kong · 
triaxial 
(1982) 
Tappen-Notch Hill silt 
21.5 
1590 
0.0. 
35.0 
16.0 
CD multistage·. 
Krahn eta!. 
triaxial 
(1989) 
Compacted glacial till 
12.2 
1810 
. 10 
25.3 
7-25.5 
CD multistage 
Gan eta!. (1988) 
), ',. 
,_~r 
direct shear 
a Average value:. 
After Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993). 
Llu 
/ 
/ 
/.' 
/ 
/ 
/ 
./ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
~5° 
13.15 Properties ofSoils under Dynamic Loading 
737 
FIGURE 13.114 · Results obtained 
from a PH test on an unsaturated 
compacted clay (after Skempton, 
1954, and Hirschfeld, 1963). 
' 
. 
'. 
13.15 
PROPERTIES OF SOILS UNDER DYNAMIC LOADING 
Most of the discusslon of soils and i~cks in this bo;k has dealt ~ith th6ir static pibperties, because for 
many important geotechnical problems' the loading or shearin'g of the geomaterialsoccurs so slowly 
that rate of loading does not influence their behavior. On the'other hand, the rate of strain does influ-
ence some soil properties, as described in Sec. 13.10.4 for 'sands and 13.13.7 for fine grained soils. We 
also mentioned the dramatic example ofthe Iiquefactionof loose saturated sands (see Sec. 7.6.3). In 
this section we describe the'propeitiesof soils when they'are 'subjected to dynamic, vibratory, or 
cyclicalloading conditions. 
' ·' · '' ' 
' · · 
Conditions causing dynamic load~ng include wind forces, wave action, pile driving, earthquakes, 
blasting, and steady state and transient vibrations due to traffic, compaction equipment, and rotating 
machinery. Vibrations can be of low or high frequency, periodic (cyclic) or 'aperiodic. The waveforms 
from these dynamic loadings may be steady state (periodic; sinusoidal), random, or transient; Fig.13.115 
shows some typical waveforms. 
. 
.. . 
, 
. 
. . . . . . . , . 
. 
. . Because . vibratory and dynamic loads can cause excessive deformations or even failure of 
' "foundations, ea~th slopes, and other.structures, specialized design procedures hilVe been developed 
for. the analysis and design'otfoundati~ns subjected .to vibrations (McNeill, 1969; Richart et al., 
1970), blasting and constructi~n vibnitions. (Dowding, '1985; 1996); and. geot~chnical earthquake 
engineering (Kramer, 1996). The Dep! .. ofDefense Handbook (1997) is a very useful and practical 
summary of the geotechnical problems due .to dynamic loads, including machine foundations, impact 
loading, and the effect of earthquake ground motions on slope stability, sheet pile walls, and pile 
foundations. 
;,L: 
13:1S.1Stress-StrainResponse of Cycilcally Load~d.Soii~P:i:.· 
The theory of particle mechanics; mechanical vibrations a~d vibratory m~tion, dyna~ics of discrete sys-
tems, and wave propagation in solids is well developed and is the basis for both the design references 
given above and our understanding of the dynamic behavior of geomaterials. From this theoretical 
background as well as the results of laboratory experiments, we know that the characteristics of a soil 
that most strongly influence its dynamic behavior are its shear modulus or stiffness, damping, Poisson's 
ratio, and density. Of these four, the most important are the shear modulus G and damping ratio A. Both 
G and A vary with shear strain. 
. ::; , 
738 
Chapter 13. 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
f ·• j <' 
FIGURE 13.115 Typical wave forms: 
·(a) periodic; (b) random; and (c) tran-'. 
sient motions (after Richart et al., 
'1970). 
I 
' 
'1 .. ·. . · .. 
·~.· 
(a) Periodic 
'*"":t 
z I 
~ AlA 1Ao(11\ . M·W'-·. 
··li\IFv··~r ·v'W'·vvv._ ~·· .• 
(b) Random 
'I n -~. 
• .. · .... ' 
. 
. 
. 
. " ;, ~-
~~"iff?V~ 
, ' 
• 
• 
• 
, , 
• " 
t 
, 
" 
' 
• 
' I, 
~ 
'1>-f 
(c) Transient 
In Sec. 13.8.1 we discu~sed 'th~· ~Irian ~tr~in stiffnes~ of soils. We ~entioned that the small-strain 
shear 'modulus G or' Gma~ is given by 
Gm~ = Ptv; 
(13.24) 
; 
' 
' 
.· 
•'. 
. 
whe~~ · p1 = total density, and 
Vs. = shearwave velocity. 
Why shear wave velocity? Because when waves propagate th~ough ge~materials,it isthe distor-
tion or shear waves and not the compression waves that cause the most deformation of the foundation 
or structure. This is why we use the shear moduhis'and 'not the Young's moduhis (Sec:13.8.) in soil 
! dynamics. From the theory of elasticity, the shear riioduhis can be related to the Young's modulus E by 
. 
. 
:1 
' 
E .. 
G = 2(1 + v)·•· 
(13.64) 
. 
,. 
where v' = Poisson's ratio. Note that both G a'nd E are strain d~pendent. 
,. 
When a symmetrical cyclic loading is applied to a soil, its shear stress-shear strain relationship 
typically has a hysteresis loop similar to that that shown in Fig. 13.116. The loop has an inclination that 
depends on the stiffness or modulus of the soil. As shown in Fig. 13.116; the modulus can be a tangent 
shear modulus Gtan that varies continuously, or a secant shear modulus Gsec that is the average slope of 
the entirehysteresis loop. 
" . 
" 
' 
' " i 
·, . 
. 
r~ 
Gsec = 'Yc 
(13.65) 
··The loop in Fig.13.116 indicates that energy is being dissipated during cyclic loading. The peak 
energy during one cycle Wis the area of the triangle OAB in the figure, or W == ~Tc'Yc = ~Gsec'Y~· 
7 
13.15 . Properties of Soils under. Dynamic Loading 
739 
The energy, dissipated during one cycle is d w, and it is shown 
by the area inside the hysteresis loop A 1oop. It is convenient to 
relate energy loss to the damping ratio A, usually defined as 
, 
it 'r' 
., 
, 
, 
, 
' 
l ,i W 
1 · A loop · · .. 
A=---=---
. 
41T W · 
21T Gsec'Y~ 
(13.66) 
As rioted by Kramer (1996), the parameters Gsec and A 
are 'often dlled equivalent linear materiiil parameters when 
' , '' ' they are used for ground response analyses in geotechnical 
• earthquake' engineering. 'However, the ·equivalent linear 
parameters are only an approximation of the actual nonlin-
ear soil behavior, and thus predictions of soil deformations 
with linear parameters may not be very accurate . 
'y 
FIGURE 13.116, Shear stress/shear 
·strain response of a cyclically loaded . 
soil showing a hysteresis loop and 
· , definitions of tangent and secant 
· shear mod~li (after Kramer, 1996). · 
. , 
The secant shearmodulus Gsec is strongly affected by 
the cyclic strain amplitude, meim. principal stress, the void 
ratio (imdthus the density), the PI if a fin;; gniined soil, and 
.:the OCR. The.shear modulus also varies with the number of 
' loading cycles, which means that at low strain amplitudes, the 
modulus· is high, but it decreases as. the number of loading 
. _ 
. cycles increases. If we plot the lo'cu~ of the tips of the hystere-
sis loops with 'the cyClic shear strain; the resulting curye is called 'a' backbone curve, as 'shown in 
Fig. 13.117(a). This.curve also shows that the shear modulus at zero strain is Gmax and that the Gsec 
decreases as the strain amplitude increases. 
.. 
· . 
·· . . 
·· •. 
· · . · ·.·. 
. . 
The decrease in shear modulus with increase in strain is shown in Fig. 13.117(b ), where the 
modulus ratio G!Gmax is plotted against log of shear strain y. The G/Gmax is 1.0 at zero strain and 
decreases as the strain increases; also shown is the corresponding ratio at 'Yc· When the modulus ratio 
is mentioned in geotechnical practice, the Gin the ratio is u~ually understood to mean Gsec .. 
The reason that Eq. (13.24) was defined for Gmax is because when G is determined using geo-
physical tests that apply shear waves, the strains are extremely small, usually less than 0.001%. This is 
why the modulusreduction curve in Fig. 13.117(b) is initially flat before it starts to decrease with 
increasing shear strain. The point when the linear curve starts to become nonlinear is called the linear 
cyclic threshold shear strain y 11 (Krart;~er, 1996). 
(a) 
'--. Backbone 
curve 
1' 
(b) 
FIGURE 13.117 (a) Backbone curve showing the reduction in Gmax with shear strain; 
(b) modulus reduction curve with shear strain (Kramer, 1996). 
740 
Chapter 13 
Aavanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils ana Rocks 
1.3.15.2 Measurement of Dynamic Soil Properties 
·. ,I)yna~ic soil 'properties can be ineasured~ith~~'in the labor~tory or in the field. Laboratory tests are 
. . c~nducted on undisturbed or reconstituted specimens and may be either low strain or high strain. Low 
strain laboratory tests inchide resonant column (ASTM D 4015), ultrasonic pulse, and bender element 
tests. High strain laboratory tests include cyclic triaxial (D 3999 and D 5311);cyclic direct simple shear, 
and cyclic torsional shear tests. 
· 
.... 
. In situ or field tests also can be classified as low strain or high strain. Low strain tests include sev-
eral geophysics~type tests such.as seismicn!flection, seismic refraction (ASTM D 5777), suspension 
.. logging, spectral analysis of surface waves (SASW), seismic cross-hole (ASTM D 4428), seismic down-
.. hole (ASTM D 7400), ~nd seismic cone (CPT) tests: High strain tests are basically conventional in situ 
tests (Chapter 11) .with correlations for dynamic properties. The SPT and its cousins the BPT, CPT, 
DMT, and PMT are in this category. 
· 
. Collection of Dynamic Data-The basic way in which dynamic data is collected is shown in Fig. 13.118 . 
. Illustrated is the time history 'during a cyclic direct simple shear 'test with shear stress and shear strain 
- under' a sinusoidal displacement (calibratedin terms of shear strain) at a freql.u!ncy of 1 Hz.For every 
' ·. '- 0.05 sec, the graph would be read and. the corresponding she~r stress and shearst~ain plotted in 
· 'Fig. 13.119 to form a hysteresis loop. The shear modulus would be found as the slope of the line CA, 
. shown dashed. The chord modulus (which is the Gsec) for this test is 2000 psf. The percent of critical 
· (hysteretic) damping is given by Eq. (13.69) expressed as a percentage. For Fig. 13.119, the resulting 
value of Ah is 8.8%. The subscript h denotes hysteretic damping .. 
· In addition to obtaining data from cyclic tests, the moduli and damping may also be obtained 
from free vibration tests. Basically, you "pluck the violin string" -i.e:, displace the soil sample (or other 
rr-r;-;-;-r;~-r-r-r;-r-r;~~-r-r.-~r-rT-r-r-r;-;-r;r.~-.-..-,-,-~,-,~'''. 
-·-·--·-·-----·-·--·--cl-H-f:OOFf-FFFFffFfFFR+H±EL-!'"·-·--~---· 
y~efr, s~rrs,s I I TJ11 I r I TiJ 11' I T I I T I r·l I J....rr ITT llSJ [ I 
--1-TTl111, fi II t ''m3 ft 1 
·-·-·--~-·--·-- __ -l-\- ... -- -+- --- -- ---1-"T-- --r::brt--r-.-t--t-t--t-··--·-·--~-·-·-· 
I I I I I I T 50 psf I I I I I I I I I I I I I rnTI I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 
I 
~-nii~:hffi~11tfH~~li H-H# 
-r-t-r~T~l~-f-l=Mti~t~~-L 
_,_Shea lsltrrr+Tt· - Tl--f-
-~ --
. 
]=c!*tfftlf~fz.-
TrTli 
---r··r--·1--.-,-~-:tl-l-[--1-Lf-t-J-LH-+-t--t--J- _J_:~.J-l--1-l--J-1.1 
--- -+-++-2%-11+- -~-1-t-1--t- -~- -U-~-
.,.,. 
~ 
.,.,_.. 
FIGURE 13.118 Typical cyclic simple shear test data on remolded soft clay, 
w = 88%. 
1, 
--, 13.15, Properties ofSoilsunder._Dynamic Loading 
741 
Cy~l~ 1 
I 
- 1 Hz 
-- -- -- --1- -- -- 8 - -- --+-+- --- ---+--+-+---+ 
-~-~-+-~+-t~+-t-H-+-1~+4~-+-t~+-t~ 
Gsec = 2000 psf -t--HH-HH---t-H--l--+---t-H-+-+---H 
-- 'Yavg 'i= 2.95 %_ 
-- ---- --· 7 -- •. 
Am= 8.8%' 
-- - -- - r - --- -- -~ -~ 
_c __ -- -- -- -- --~~- -- -- --f--
H-t--t-H--l--t-+--l-.c 
p ;/1,>--i -t-H--l----1 
-------- -- --- -- ---- -f · ----- -- -- -r-.ll. 1': '-l- -- --- -A--
- -- -- -- -:-· -- _ 
_:_ -· --j- ~ -4 
- - --}? 14-/---:1-- 1-- -- -- -
f-----1-+-+---+-----+--+----- ----+- -----
structure) and let go before the specimen 
can react. Figure 13.120 shows the'results of 
a free vibration test on an undisturbed 
block sample. At t1, the sam pie is loaded 
(pushed) horizontally and then' immedi-
a_tely let go and allowed to vibrate at its own 
·natural frequency. For' small values of 
damping, it can be shown that 
' 
1 
Xn 
AT = -In-
· · (13.67) 
27T 
Xn+l 
H-t---t--t--t---+1-+--!--+-2! 
fft I I 
ri 
________________ --t- -~ ___ . --J"~1~ ~- ~- -~ ____ _ 
where·~:: ~::c:;~i::::it~;l::~a~~~~~~~=: 
- -- -- -- .c ... ··----·---~------- ·- -- --- 20 -j
1 T~J----- -~- -~~-- ·- -- -·--· 
,- Xn+ 1 = the ordinate of the ( n + 1 )th 
li 
-
---_cycle, 
· 
-
-- - -- ·· -- -· - -- -+- -- ·-
· 1-1/--j-- -- -- -lj- ;- ~--- ~- . -
, • In the example shown .in Fig. 13.120, 
--·-- ---- __ ,:: 0 -- - -- =1
1~ / 
Jo.lshear.st~£n-{o;~)~-= --
~[b;;lt~~~~ ~~~~h:e~~(~:e t~:::~~~;;c:~ 
I/ i 
1 
conditions, 0.080 sec is the natural period of 
1- -:-+---,- :- --- - -:d-/-- · -- -~--- - -- ·c -~ 7 - --- ·-
vibration.) We used the subscript T 
to indi-
, -- ~-- --- . -~ -· ··dJ_{J -- -20- ;~ -;-
~-- ----- -~- __ :_ -·; ·-· :~ -- - • ~a!~e:~~ ~~!~ed~~~~~~~~l~~~:~; ~~~~~!:~ 
---- ---- --~{t4i~ -·- ----- -- -r-~"----~+-- -- --- -- : : -!~e;;~b~~~~~~;s~ ~~;:~s :~ea~~ (!~:a~~~~~: 
__ _ 1/_Lijf. __ __ __ _ _40 __________ -··-·r----- __ 
~::p:r~~~o~c~i~r:~e:~b;::~~n test is larger 
-t-+-+-t--H'f..V 1 
1 
-'- -r--+-+--t-+--+--+-+-+-
-+- - - -
~Jf:_ - r- ----- -· ---,_ ---r-+---r- --' --
c· 
1 
- ---- - ·- -- -- ·- ·- ------ ---,6p-
--~·-r- -- ---r- -- ----- --
1 
I 
I 
. 
FIGURE 13.119 Typical shear stress-shear strain hysteresis 
·_ curve from data in Fig. 13.118 (units: psf ~ lbflft2)._ 
~ ; 
where .'Y = unit weight of the soil (lbf/ft2), 
H = height of the soil layer (ft), 
g = gravitational constant (32.2 ft-sec-2), 
T = period of free vibration (s~c). 
In dynamic foundation and blast 
-design, the designer makes sure that the 
foundation being designed is never excited 
by a frequency at or near its natural period 
of vibration. See Richart et al. (1970) and 
, , Dowding (1996) for information on founda-
tion and blasting design. 
Also, for free vibrations, the shear 
modulus G may be found, for the first 
mode, by 
(13.68) 
We showed some results of static tests with bender elements in Sec. 13.8.1. How are they used 
for dynamic measurements? Recall that bender elements measure the shear wave velocity, thus they 
' 
' 
• 
' 
' 
> 
742 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
.• ~L .. LLJ=++l-+-i--l-!--i-:J .. -l--1--l-l 
l-1--l--l-l--l--l-l-l-~--l--l-l--l--l--1--l-1-+-1-i-·--· 
:;·r' 
-·-~;;~i~-~~~~;~~~-j·-+·1 t·jl-ll+"+=f=
1 1+8-t+J+HJ±Jjj±tti:Q::+++ftffi 
;,. 
I ~ i I I i I I I ' 
....................... 1 
....... 1~_1_1_}_ .... ! 
.. J .. ,_
1
J~J.=t[ ___ .c _____ TT!TliT!IIIIIII .. III:I 
j t j I"[ I lu 
;~;=~~~if;~==-==~~*~iiE=-~·==~== 
: 
-~~;~±~;;;r;~~~;;;·:t~ ttl~·~~---~·-·-~-••::.~~--: -
-~lt
1
1\
1
~~~~--~:~; 
-:;: 
, 
'I~ 
11 r:-1·1·1-rlh;:----------
FIGURE 13.120 · Typical free vibration test data from a simple shear specimen 
·.W=.110%. 
' 
.. 
.. 
.. 
' 
provide a quick and economical determination of the Gmax of soil speCimens (Dyvik and Madshus, 
. 1985). Because of the. very small strains, the shear wave velocity Vsis related to Gmax by Eq. (13.24). 
Figure 13.121 shows a time history of output voltage from the receiver in a bender element test on 
· Mai Liao sand (Huang et al., 2004). Point C in Fig. 13:121 is taken as the time of shear wave arrival 
·' according to Kawaguchi et al. (2001). Then the velocity of the shear wave is determined from this time 
: and the distance between transmitter and receiver. 
· 
.FIGURE 13.121 
Time history' 
:Q> 
Cl 
-0.037 ..------..,.-------------'-----, 
-0.038 
.s -0.039 
g 
D 
ofoutput voltage from the · '· 
-0.041 ~-'----':-::--'--..-..J'--..-..J-..:....J'--~-.....:J.---'-----l 
bender element receiver 
0 
0.0005 
0.001 
0.0015 
0.002 
0.0025 
(Huang et al., 2004). 
Time (s) 
• 
I • • 
13.15 Properties of Soils under Dynamic Loading 
743 
13.15.3 Empirical Estimates of G~~x, Modlilus'Reduction, and Damping 
In addition to direct measurements· of shear modulus and damping, empirical relationships are also 
commonly used. for preliminary design ·and for checking laboratory and field results. Hardin and 
Drnevich (1970a, b) proposed an equation for the maximum shear modulus Gmax as 
' 
}; ;,' • ' 
:·~ 
: f". 
'· .• :,: 
• 
.: .:,'' ·<·:: ·:·: ' 
·; 
;_ 
';:· '<.>.. ·• .: 
' 
·,·;.-
-(2.973-e)2 • 
,,, 
- •Gmax(psf) = 14,760. _ 1 +e 
(OCR) 0 (u;,.(psf))05 
(13.69) 
where u;,. =·mean principal efft!ctive stress (psf), and 
a = OCR exponent that depends on the PI (Fig.13.122). 
This equation was developed in British engineering units (psf is short for lbf/ft2), and it is applicable for 
all soilsat a very low shear strains. 
-. 
' 
.. 
. . 
- - ·-
.. 
.. 
-
--
Hardin and Drnevich (1970a, b) also gave a relationship for the damping ratio A at somt; strain 
level y by 
· 
-
-Amaxf, 
A=-1 
Y 
+-
y, 
(13.70) 
where· Amax ='the maximum damping ratio at very large shear strains, and 'Yr = a reference shear strai~. 
The maximum value of the damping ratio for sands is given by _ 
: ~ ' 
. 
,. ' 
' 
. 
· Amax = D - 1.5 log N 
(13.71) 
. where D = 33% for clean dry sarid~, , 
D = 28% for clean saturated sands, 
N. = the number of cycles. 
The maximutri clampi~g ratio for saturated clays.is more complkat~d and involves the frequency of 
oscillation, effective stress, and the number of cycles, or 
' ; 
-Amax = 31 -_ (3 - 0.03 n'( u;,.)0·5 + l.5 f 0·5 _:_ 1.5 log N 
: 
' 
. 
. 
.. 
' 
(13.72) 
where f = frequency in Hz·, 
, 
u;,. = the mean principal effective stress i~ kg/cm2, 
N. =·the number of cycles. 
Hardin (1978) updated Eq. (13.70) as 
0.5 
<ll 
~ 
~ 
. E 0.25 
~ 
<tS a. 
, Plasticity index 
';. 
FIGURE 13.122 
Parameter a versus PI (after Hardin 
and Drnevich, 1970b). 
~ 
':" 
.. -
2 (OCR)a _!!f 
G 
· 
625 
· · 
· (u' )0-5 
Pa · 
0.3 + 0.7e 
Pa 
' 
-
. 
(13.73) 
.. This equation has been normalized with respect 
·'-to the atmospheric pressure p0 .The OCRexpo~ 
nent a depends on the PI, as shown in Fig 13.122. 
Note that the expression containing the void 
ratio e in this equation is different than in 
Eq. (13.70), and it results in a smaller multiplier 
·- , for all values of e. ~: . 
Seed and ldriss (1970) took the equations 
developed by Hardin and Drnevich (1970a, b) 
744 
Ch,apter 13 .. 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
' ' ' 
. ~ 
~ 
' 
' 
and showed the results graphically using typical values of soil properties. Their equation for the shear 
modulus of sands ·is 
· 
· " 
· 
. 
· · 
G~ax = 1000K2( a;,)~·
5 
(13.74) 
. 
. 
where K2 = function of the voidrati~, relative density, a~dshe~~ stni.i~ amplitud~. 
Figure 13.123 shows the effects of the angle of internal friction, confining pressure, void ratio, 
and K 0 on the magnitude of K2 for a given shear strain. At any given shear strain (we'll use 10-2 per-
cent, for example), the value of K2 is higherfor a higher ¢', a higher confining pressure, and a higher 
K 0 • All four graphs in Fig.13.123 have the same initial conditions. 
70r-----.-----~----~----T-----. 
70~~~----~--,-~~----
60 1-
j -·-~~J~-C-~ ___ j ____ ~ ____ L_ ______ j 
. 60 I 
·~-·-+~ 
50 
0 
I 
10-5 
10-4 
10-3 
10-2 
Shear strain(%) 
(a) 
70.-----~----,------,--r--,r----. 
60 I e = o.sl 
:: l!~~~?~~jS;jf~" 
,;: 30 ~f~--'--+----1 
. 20 I-G = 1000 K2(u;,) 
112 ---~~--~..;~--+-----I 
a~= 1000 psf 
. 
10 1-Ko = 0.5 
r</J'.:= 30~: ,,, 
0 
.. ·· 
I 
10-5 ; . . 10-4 
\• 
I 
10-3 . 
10-2 
Shear strain (%) 
:::-(c) ,_ 
_::=~s::~~ 
"' 30 1--~t~ 
"'_2000"" -\r-
20r~:o'~o~~(u) -~-~ 
r\ 
10 1-- K0 = 0.5 
· 
· '· 
10 S5 ~~~----:!-_j~;;] 
</>' = 30° 
0 
Shear strain(%) 
(b) 
70.-----,-----,-----,-----,-----, 
Shear strain (%) · 
(d) 
FIGURE 13.123 
Influence 'of various factors for th'e shear moduli of sands, based on Hardin and Drnevich expressions 
(after Seed and ldriss, 1970): (a) effect of angle of friction, <f>': (b) effect of effective vertical strain, u~; (c) effect of 
void ratio e; (d) effect of K0 • ·. 
70 
60 
50 
~ 40 
30 
10 
OL-----~------~~--~L---L-~ 
10-4 
Shear strain (%) 
FIGURE 13.124 Shear modulus of sands at different 
relative densities, based on Hardin and Drnevich 
expressions (after Seed and ldriss, 1970). 
13.15 Properties of Soils under Dynamic Loading 
745 
SOr-------,--------,----L-~--------
70 
. 60 
50 
~ 40 
G = 1000 K2(a;,)0·5 psf 
K0 = 0.4 
;;;::1::------=,._--+-l/J =. 36° 
u~ = 3000 psf 
30 
20r-------,_-------r~~ 
10 
OL-----~~-------L------~~----~ 
10-4 
10-3 
10-2 
10-1 
Shear strain (%) . 
FIGURE 13.125 Shear moduli of sands at different void 
ratios, based on Hardin and Drnevich expressions (after 
Seed and ldriss, 1970). 
The values of K 2 depend on the relative density or densityindex, the void ratio, and the shear 
strain, as shown in Figs. 13.124 and 13.125 for sands and in Fig. 13.126 for gravelly soils. Recall that the 
void ratio and relative• density go together. 
20 
FIGURE 13:126 · Moduli determination for graveliy soils 
· · · , > '· · : (after Seed and ldriss, 1970). 
We discussed relative density and relative 
compaction of granular soils in Chapter 5. 
Silver and Seed (1971) showed that 
for a given cyclic shear strain and at a given 
vertical stress: the shear modulus of sands 
increases with increasing cycle number. For a 
given cycle number, they also showed that at 
a given shear strain, the modulus increased 
as the confining pressure increased. And, for 
a given confining pressure, the modulus 
increased at a given shear strain as the rela-
: tive density increased_:_all of the above as 
·expected.·· 
· 
Table: 13.10 gives a · summary of 
empirical 'relationships for Gmax as deter-
mined from-in situ test' parameters for the 
SPT, CPT, DMT, and PMT tests. Recall from 
our description of these tests in Sec. 11.6 
· that they are all large-strain tests, and thus 
their correlation with the small-strain Gmax 
is purely empirical and should be used for 
preliminary estimates only. :· ..• 
. The reduction in shear modulus and 
modulus ratio GIG;,~ with increasing shear 
746 
Chapter 13. 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
TABLE 13.10 Empirical Relationships between Gmax and In Situ Test Parameters 
In Situ 
Test 
Relationship 
Soil Type 
SPT 
Gmax ~· 20,000[(1\1)6o]0·333(u;,)05 
Sand 
G 
= 325(N )0·68 
max 
60·, 
·sand 
CPT 
Gmax = 1634(qc)0.250(u~)0.375 
Quartz 
sand 
Fig.13.129 
Silica 
,:· sand 
Gmax = 406(qc)0.695e-1.!30 
Clay 
DMT 
GmaxfEd =· 2.72 ± 0.59 
:Sand· 
Gmax/Ed = 2.2 ± 0.7 
Sand 
G 
-
530 
'Yd'Yw - 1 Jd.25 
u' 0.5 
Sand, silt, 
max - ( '/ . )0.25 2 7 -
if . D (pa v) .. 
· clay 
UvPa 
· 
'Y 
'Yw 
PMT 
3.6 :S GmaxfGur,c :S 4.8 
Sand 
'• 
Gmax = (1.68/ap)Gur 
sand 
. Reference(s) 
· Ohta and 
Goto (1976) 
Seed et al. (1986) 
Imai and 
Tonouchi 
(1982) 
: Rix and Stokoe 
(1991) 
. Baldi et al. 
(1986) 
Mayne and 
Rix (1993) 
Baldi et al. (1986) 
Bellotti et al. 
(1986) 
Hryciw (1990) 
Bellotti et al. 
(1986) 
. Byrne et al. 
(1991) . 
Comments 
Gmax and u;, in lb/ft2 
Gmax in kips/ft2 
Gmax• qc, and u~ in kPa; based 
on field tests in Italy and on 
calibration chamber tests 
Gmax• qc, and u~ in kPa; based 
on field tests in Italy 
Gmaxo qco and u~ in kPa; based 
on field tests at worldwide sites 
Based on calibration chamber 
tests 
Based on field tests 
Gmax•Pa• u~ in same units; 'YD is 
dilatometer-based unit weight 
. · of soil; based on field tests 
Gur,c is corrected unloading-
reloading modulus from cyclic 
PMT 
Gur is secant modulus of unload-
ing-reloading portion of PMT; 
aP is facto~ that depends on 
unloading-reloading stress 
conditions; based on theory 
and field test data 
After Kramer (1996). 
< ; 
~ 
strain [Fig. 13.117(b )] is shown for granular soils in Fig.13.126 and for normally and moderately over-
consolidated fine grained soils in Fig.13.127(a). Note that the curve for PI = 0 in Fig.13.127(a) is sim-
ilar'to that for granular materials. Also, the linear threshold shear strain 'Ytl• defined in Sec. 13.15.1, 
increases with increasing PI. Figure 13.128 shows the effect of confining stress on the modulus reduc-
tion of both granular and high-PI soils. 
Damping ratios are shown in Fig. 13.130 for granular soils and for fine grained soils in 
Figs. 13.127(b) and 13.131. At a given shear strain, the magnitude of damping dec~eases with the num-
ber of cycles. Seed et al. (1986) found that' the values for gravels and gravelly soils fit well inside the 
limits of the plot for sands, as shown in Fig.13.130. 
:Borden et al. (1996) performed resonant column a~d torsional ~hear tests on Piedmont residual 
soils classified as MH, ML, SM-ML, and SM. Their relationships between the normalized shear modu-
lus ( G/Gmax) and damping ratio A are related to the shear strain relationships so. they developed the 
relationships as shown in Fig. 13.132(a). Note that the Borden et al. (1996) relationships fit in between 
1.0 
0.8 
~ 0.6 
E 
(!) 
(!j 0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
0.0001 
OCR= 1-15 
0.001 
0.01 
PI= 200 
aoO\. 
015305 '\..~ 
~· 
0.1 
.. Cyclic shear strain, i'c (%) 
. 
\ 
\ ! '-· i , ' 
' 
"_. ; ~ 
• 
r 
(a) 
.OCR= 1-8. 
10 
0.001 
0.01 
:Cyclic shear strain, 'Yc (%) 
.: ; . (b) 
' i 
PJ = 0 
15 
30 
50 
200 
10 
FIGURE 13.127~. Variation of {a) normalized shear modulus and {b) damping ratio, both as a function of cyclic shear 
strain for normally and moderately overconsolidated fine grained soils {Vucetic and Dobry, 1991). 
0.80 
1.10.60 
cl' 
~ 0.40 
0.00 L...J....u..!.U.1.CL....!...J.J.LW!l--..l...J..U.lllll--L~-.I..-'--=-
10-6 
Cyclic shear strain amplitude, y 
(a)' ... 
0. 00 L-l--LL.LWJ.L-..J...J.J..LWJJL...l....LLLLWl--1.-l..ULLWl--1....LLUllll 
10-6 
Cyclic shearstrain amplitu~e. y 
(b) 
,;: 
FIGURE 13.128 Modulus reclucti6n as a 'function of confining stress fo; {a) a nonplastic soil and {b) a highly plastic 
soil {Ishibashi, 1992). 
· 
· 
500 
1000 
·-, 
' 
... , 
, qc(<T~)o.s 
.. 
FIGURE 13.129. Evaluation of the 
small strain shear m~dulus G~ax 
. from the CPT cone tip resistance 
q" for uncemented silica sands 
{Baldi et al:; 1989). 
747 
:',''-
748 
0 e 
.g 
·c.. 12 
E 
8 8 ~ 
4 ~ 
-1 
o L- •:r:j!:::"!V~ • 
I 
10 4 
. I 
.I 
10-1 
>L. '1 
. Shear strain (%) 
40.----,--~-,-----.-----,----, 
. v Taylor and Menzies (1963) .. 
35 ~ 
1!1 Taylor and Hughes (1965) 
• ldriss (1966) 
· 
3o - !~~~~~ =~~ ~~~n~~~9~:r> -l----------j-~ .. ~~-=~ 
. ;g 
& Kovacs (1968) 
; 
· · ~ 25 ...... A Donovan (1969) 
g 
~Taylor and Bacchus (1969) 
~ 
.+Taylor and Bacchus (1969) 
g 20 
·"'Hardin and Drnevich (1970c)' 
a 
• 
!ij 15 ----------- ·---------- -----41, 
0 
<t.~ 
10 
.. 
sl 
I _ ........ ~ 
A&," 
.. · I 
I 
. r, 
FIGURE 13.130 Damping ratios 
versus shear strain (%)for granular 
. materials (after Seed & ldriss,1970) . 
,, 
0~--~-----L----~----L---~ 
10-4 
10-3 
10-2 
10-1 
1 
10 
FIGURE 13.131 
Damping ratiosforsatu-
Shear strain (%) 
rated clays (after Seed apd ldriss, 1970)~ 
25.----------------------, 
+2<T 
t 
I 
I 
I 
I 1 I 
,_1_, 
I 
.~--
; 
0 
I 
• 
• 
0 
- -
G/Gmax 
(a), 
25 
-
. . . . 
,_ ___ _ 
~ 20 
~ 
g 15 
~ 
Cl 
-& 10 
E 
.ctl 
0 
5 
Borden et al. (1996) research 
00 
- . 
- -
G/Gmax 
(b)· 
FIGURE 13.132 (a) Damping ratio as a ·function of the normalized shear modulus for silty soils; and 
(b) comparison of NCSU data with other experimental results in the literature (after Borden et al., 1996). 
13.15 Properties of Soils under Dynamic Loading 
749 
those of sands and clays, as shown in Fig.13.132(b). Based on their. study, they formulated an equation 
of, the relationship as 
. ·A(%) .=2o.4(GG - i:)~ + 3.1 
, 
max 
' 
,._, ... 
'; 
(13.75) 
Since the early ~ork by Hardin and Drnevich (1970) and Seed and Id;is's: (1970), perhaps the 
· besfreference summarizing recent :research .is a state'.ofthe iut paper by Stokoe et al. (1999) that 
'· describes the results of both laboratory and field studies for dynamic 'soil properties. Laboratory exper-
iments used. combined resonant. column and torsion~l 'shear tests,. and the field 'studies used seismic 
· '··downhole, surface wave, and suspension-logging tests to measure the shear wave velocity profiles. This 
paper is a' good summary of Sec. 13.15.3. 
. ' 
.. 
. 
:·. I 
'.'. 
13.15:4 Strength of Dynamically Loaded Soils 
I_". • /• > •. 'O 
,·• 
Kramer (1996) presents an excellent discussion of the strength of cyclically loaded soils. The stability of 
slopes, foundations, and retaining structures during earthquakes, for example, is strongly influenced by 
their cyclic shear streng.th. We discussed some of the definitions of failure used.by geotechnical engi-
. • neers earlier in this chapter and in Chapter 12,' and just as with static loadirig, failure due to dynamic or 
' cyclic loading can be defined in different ways. ' 
• 
When we think about the dynamic behavior of granular materials, it is the deposits of loose 
sands below the' groundwater table that are subject to liquefaction, a phenomenon mentioned briefly 
·.in Chapter 7 that is very important in geotechnical earthquake engineering (see, e:g., Kmmer, 1996, 
Chapter 9, and Idriss and Boulanger, 2008). The behavior of fine grained soils is a bit different, and 
strength is usually discu'ssed in terms of their cyclic shear strength or their nionotonic shear strength. 
· Cyclic strength is usually based on a limiting value of cyclic ~train during cyclic loading, while monoto-
nic strength typically is the "ultimate; static strength that' can be' mobilized after cyclic loading has 
'ended" (Kramer, 1996; p 244). 
•· 
' 
· · ·' 
· 
· 
· 
· · 
----8,>5% 
: -------:. Bf,;, 3% ' . 
Cycles to failure, N 
FIGURE 13.133 Variation of cyclic strength ratio versus the number of cycles to 
obtain failure (determined as <3% failure strain and >5% failure strain) with · 
. number of cycles for various soil types (after Lee and Focht, 1976, as cited by 
. ,. 
Kramer, 1996).. 
· 
750 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
13.16, FAILURE THEORIES FOR ROCK 
In our brief discussion of failure criteria for rock in Sec.11.4.4, we mentioned three failure th~ories: the 
Griffith crack theory, Mohr-Coulomb, and the Hoek..:.Brown failure criterion. The Mohr-Coulomb 
failure criterion with the tension 'cut-off was shown in Fig.11.13. Because of our extensive discussion of 
the Mohr-Coulomb failure theory for soils in Chapter 11, you should be quite familiar with it. See 
. Goodman (1989) formore on the Mohr-Coulomb failure theory applied to rock, .. 
According to Lo and Hefny (2001), the Griffith (1924) theory of fracture ,was originally devel-
oped to explain why the measured tensile strength w"as less than the theoretical bond strength of brittle 
materials such as glass. Griffith postulated that this difference was due to microcracks or flaws in what 
, might otherwise appear to be intact and solid material. Figure 13.134 shows the Griffith .(1924) failure 
criterion hi (a) a 1-a3 space and (b) Tn-a space. In 'Tn7_a space, the Griffith criterion is 
· 
T2 +. 4a a' = 4a2 
t n 
t 
(13.76) 
where a 1 = tensile strength, and 
a,; = effective normal stress. 
,,< 
·'·• 
Note that at a 3 = 0, a 1 is the uniaxial compressive strength ac~:Thus the ratio of a 1 to a 1 is a con-
• stant equal to eight. In reality, this ratio ranges between 6 and 12, far off of field measurements (Lo and 
Hefny, 2001). This theory was not really developed as a failure criterion but was an attempt to predict 
, the state of stress required for the propagation of cracks in brittle materials under tensile stresses. How-
ever,in brittle materials, the stresses required to initiate cracks are very close the failure stresses, and the 
Griffith theory with some empirical modifications for compressive stresses was a useful starting point 
for other failure theories such as the Hoek and Brown criterion. 
· . 
. 
. 
, · 
Besides the Mohr-Coulomb theory, probably the most commonly used failure theory in rock engi-
. neering practice is the Hoek-Brown (1980) failure criterion. It was originally developed for the design of 
. underground excavations, such as tunnels and shafts, and it has been updated several times (e.g., Hoek and 
Brown, 1988; Hoek et al., 1995). For a history of the original development of the cnterion, see Hoek (1983). 
In terms of principal stresses, the Hoek-Brown criterion is 
aJ. = a3 + (maca3 + sa~)
1
/z 
where aJ. and a3 = major and minor principal effective stresses, respectively, 
m and s. = dimensionless empirical constants, and 
· 
a c = uniaxial compressive strength of the rock. 
FIGURE 13.134 Griffith 
failure criterion in 
{a) u 1-u3 space, and 
r • 
(b) r n-u space (after Lo 
and Hefny, 2001}. 
(-u 1, 3u1} 
(-u,.O} 
(a) 
(u, -
0"3)2 = su;(u, -
Q-3) 
.. • 
. 
. 
'T 
0"3 
. (-u 1, 0} 2u1 
(13.77) 
Tf = 4ur(un + u 1) 
Un 
(b) 
0. 
0.5 
Uniaxial compression 
[Eqn. (13.78)] 
Uniaxial tension 
[Eqn. (13.79)] 
1.5 
Minor principal stress, u3 
FIGURE 13.135 Strength of fracture rock accord-
ing to the Hoek-Brown criterion; equations are 
given for three different test configurations, triax-
ial compression, uniaxial compression, and uniaxial 
tension (after Hoek, 1983). 
13.16. Failure Theories for Rock 
751 
When the Hoek-Brown criterion is stated in 
terms of principal stresses, it is most useful for 
the design of tunnels and other underground 
excavations. Note that when u3 is zero, according 
to Eq. (13.77), the unconfined compressive 
strength of a rock mass is , 
(13.78) 
Substituting uJ. :: 0 in Eq. (13.77) results in a qua-
dratic equation, and when it is solved for u3, gives 
the uniaxial tensile strength of the rock u 1, or 
1 
. 
u3 :: fTt:: zuc(m - (m2 + 4s)'") 
(13.79) 
One way to understand the physical significance 
of Eqs. (13.77), (13.78) and (13.79) is to plot u! 
versus u3, as shown in Fig.l3.135. This figure 
shows the Hoek-Brown. criterion for the three 
different test configurations, ·triaxial compres-
sion, uniaxial compression, and uniaxial tension. 
For descriptions of these tests refer to Sec. 11.5.4. 
For slope stability calculations; we need 
the shear strength at a specific effective normal 
stress on a given failure surface. So let us put 
the Hoek-Brown criterion in terms of a shear 
stress-normal stress Mohr diagram, as shown in 
Fig. 13.136. 
. 
The equation for the curved Mohr failure 
envelope is 
muc 
r "" (cot ¢1 - cos¢;) - 8- . 
(13.80) 
where r "" the shear stress at failure, and 
¢1 "" the "instantaneous" friction angle. 
Note that the "instantaneous" friction angle is the 
slope of the tangent to the failure envelop at a 
specific value of u' and r, as shown in Fig.13.136. 
The instantaneous or tangent friction angle ¢1 at r 
and u' is 
{ 
[ 
. 
1 
J }-'lz 
¢1 ""arctan 4hcos2 30 + 3
a~~sin(h _,12) 
- 1 
(13.81) 
· 16(mu' + sue) 
where h "" 1 + 
· 
2 
, and 
3m CTc 
u' "" effective normal stress. 
752 
Chapter 13 , .. · . Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
l-
ui 
·Ul 
~ 
(ij 
.(ii 
Q) 
.s::: 
en 
0"3 
u 
Effective normal stress, u' 
· FIGURE 13.136 Mohr envelope according to the Hoek and Brown failure theory for rock masses (after 
Hoek, 1983). 
The "instantaneous" c-intercept is c;, and it is the intercept of the tangenfline extended to the shear 
stress axis; its value is 
· 
· 
c' = r -
a~ tan <Pi 
From the Mohr circle; as shown in Fig. 13.136, the slope of the failure plane is 
'at= 45° + T.. 2 
In terms of principal stresses, a! and cr3, 
_·1 
. 
Tm 
' 
· · 
' 
'h 
at.- -2 arcsm . 
. ,18 (1 + macf4r m) 
· 
· 
r,;. +mer, 
where Tm =!(a! - cr3). 
(11.10) 
(13.82) 
The Hoek-Brown dimensionless constants m arid s depend on the rock type and the discontinu-
ities or degree of fracturing of the rock mass, as defined in Table 13.11. The RMR and Q ratings systems 
were briefly mentioned in Sec. 4.13. There are six categories of rock mass quality ranging from intact to 
very poor, and the constants m and s are given for five different rock types described on the top of the 
table. Note that these values of m and s are for rock that has been disturbed by blasting and loosening 
that occurs during excavations. 
TABLE 13.11 
Estimated/approximate values of Hoek-B~()M,_ dimensionless const~nts mand s for diff~r~nt rock types 
and conditions of the rock mass (from Hoek and Brown, 1988, and Wyllie, 1999) 
Empirical failure criterion: 
u' 1 = u' 3 + V'm_u_u(-r)_u_' 3-+---'-s-!?."""u-(r) 
u' 1 = major principal effective stress 
u' 3 = minor principal effective stress 
u u(r) = uniaxial compressive strength 
ofintactrock,and 
m and s are empirical constants. 
INTACT ROCK SAMPLES 
Laboratory size specimens free 
from discontinuties 
' 
*CSIR rating: RMR = 100 
t ~GI rating: Q ·= 500 
VERY GOOD QUALITY ROCK MASS 
Tightly interlocking undisturbed rock 
with unweathered joints at 1-3m 
CSIR rating: RMR c= 85 
NGI rating: Q = 100 
GOOD QUALITY ROCK MASS 
Fresh to slightly weathered rock, slightly 
disturbed with joints at 1-3m 
CSIR rating: RMR = 65 
NGI rating: Q = 10 
FAIR QUALITY ROCK MASS 
Several sets of moderately weathered. 
joints spaced at 0.3-1 m 
CSIR rating: RMR = 44 
NGI rating: Q = 1 . , ' · '· · 
m 
7.00 
s 
1.00 
m 
2.40 
s 
0.082 
m 
0.575 
s 
0.00293 
m 
s 
0.128 
0.00009 
POOR QUALITY ROCK MASS 
m 
0.029 
0.000003 
Numerous weathered joints at 30-500 mm, 
· s 
.. :some gouge. Clean compacted waste rock . 
CSIR rating: RMR = 23 
NGI rating: Q = 0.1 · 
VERY POOR QUALITY ROCK MASS 
m 
Numerous heavily weathered joints spaced 
s 
, > 50 mm with gouge. Waste rock with fines 
CSIR rating: RMR = 3 
NGI r11ting: Q = 0.01 · 
0.007 
0.0000001 
*CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (Bieniawski, 1974). 
t NGI Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (Barton eta!., 1974). 
10.00 '. 
1.00 
3.43 ' ' 
0.082 
' 0.821 
0.00293 
0.183 
0.00009 ' 
0.041 
0.000003 
'i'l ,' 
0.010 
0.0000001' 
15.00 
1.00 
' 1.231 
0.00293 
0.275 
0.00009 
; j, 
0.061 
0.000003' 
0.015 
0.0000001 
17.00 
1.00 
1.395 
0.00293 
0.311 
0.00009 
0.069 
·o.ooooo3 
' 0.017 
0.0000001 
25.00 
1.00 
8.56 
0.082 
2.052 
0.00293 
0.458 
0.00009 
0.102 
0.000003 
0.025 
0.0000001 
754 
Chapter 1 r . Advanced Topics in Shear Strength ·of Soils and Rocks ·-
.:\ 
> ~ _·. ~ ~ 
~: :..,·. 
PROBLEMS 
13.1 Evaluate the K 0 and {3 for the conditions shown in Fig. 13.6. Are these values reasonable? Why? ' 
13.2 If the initial stress conditions in a soil s~m'ple are ir v = 10 MPa and uh = S MPa, draw the ~tress paths for u v 
being held constant while (a) uh increa~es to 10 MPaand (b) irh decreases to 0 MPa; 
13.3 
. 13.4 
. 13.5 
'13~6 
Show that stress pathsD, E, and Fin Fig.13.3 are 'correct. 
Show that stress paths i and C in Fig. 1~.4 are coriect. 
Prove that Eqs. (13.4) and (13.5) are valid . 
A soil sample is subjected to an initial equal-all-around hydrostatic state of stress of 50 kPa."Sketch the stress 
paths for the loading conditions wh~n (a) uh remains constant and O"v increases to 100 kPa; (b) O"v is held con-
stant while uh increases to 100 kPa; (c) both uh and uv are increased to 100 kPa; (d) uv remains constant while 
uh decreases to 10 kPa; and (e) u vis increased by 25 kPa at the same time that uh is decreased by 25 kPa. 
13.7 Given the same initial conditions as for Problerri 13.6, draw the stress paths for loading when (a) !:iuh = !:iuv/3 
and (b) !:iuh = !:iu~/4. 
~13.8 A tri~xial sample of io~se sand is tested in lateral extension (LE) (see Fig.13.7). The sample is first consolidated 
nonhydrostatically, with a'1 = 15 kPa and u 3 = .10 kPa. The sample is then failed in LE, and the angle of inter-
nal friction is 30°-(c = 0). (a) Dniw the Mohr circles for both initial and "at failure" conditions. (b) What will 
be the major and minor principal stresses at failure? 
· · 
· 
13.9 Another sample of the same sand tested in Problem 13.S is tested in lateral compression'(LC). Complete 
parts (a) and (b) requested in Problem 13.8 for this test. 
13.10 Repeat Problem 12.20, but for undrained shear. A sample of Sac~amento River s~nd ha~ 'a critic~! co~fl~ing 
pressure of 1000 kPa. If the sample is tested at an effective confining pressure or'1500 kPa, describe its 
behitvior in undrained she~r.-Show results in the form of unsealed Mohr circles. 
. ' 
. ' 
. 
. 
- . . 
~· 
' . " ' . 
13.11 For the sand of Problem 12.20, describe the behavior in undrained shear in a triaxial test if the effective con-
fining pressure is 750 kPa. 
13.12 If the test of Problem 12.22 had been conducted undrained, determine (u1 -
u 3)r, cj/,'rf>total; and the angle of 
the failure plane in the specimen. !:iu1 = 100 kPa. 
· 
· · · 
13.13 If the test cif Problem 13.12 were conducted at an initial confining pressure of 1000 kPa, estimate.the princi-
pal stress difference and the induced pore water pressure at failure. . . . . 
. 
. • 
. . . 
. 
. 
• 
• 
,· 
. 
''I 
. 
' 
13.14 A silty sand is tested consolidated-drained in a triaxial cell where both principal stresses at the start of the test were 
500 kPa. If the total axial stress at failure is 1.63 MPa while the horizontal pressure remai~s con~tant, compute the 
angle of shearing resistance and the theoretical orientation of the failure plane with respect to the horizontal. The 
silty sand of Problem 11.29 was inadvertently tested consolidated-undrained, but the laboratory .technician 
noticed that the pore pressure at failure was 290 kPa.What was the principal stress difference at failure? · 
· 
13.15 If the consolidation pressure in the CUtest of Problem 13.14 were 1000 kPa instead of 500 kPa, estimate the 
pore pressure at failure. 
·.-. · 
· 
: · · · 
13.16 If the sample of Problerri 13.15 were sheared undrained and the induced pore pressure ~t fail~~e were 200 kPa, 
estimate the principal stress difference at failure. What would be the angle of shearing resistan'ce' in terois of 
total stresses? . . . . .. 
. -
... . 
. . .. 
. 
. -
.. - . 
-
. -13.17 Explain the difference between liquefaction and cyclic mobility. 
13.18 The Peacock diagram (Fig.12.11) has been used to predict the pore pressure response of undrained tests on sands, 
based on the volume changes observed at failure in drained tests. At a given void ratio a sample consolidated at an 
effective confining pressure less than u3 crit would be expected to offer more resistance to liquefaction· (since it 
should have a dilative tendency and therefore develop negative pore water pressure) than a sample consolidated 
at a confming pressuni higher than u3 crit (as this one should tend to decrease iri volume during shear). This-is con-
' 1 
trary to what has been found in the laboratory in cyclic triaxial tests. Explain the apparent contradiction. · -· :: 
13.19 The data presented in Fig. 8.20(b) are for a black fissured organic silty clay or clay~y silt: At ~depth of 6 m, 
estimate the expected value or range of values of the undrained modulus. 
· . • 
'· 
· · . · · 
· 
13.ZO Themedium gray silty clay of Fig. 8.23(b) at a depth of20 m had anLL of38and a PL.of23. Estiinate the fol~ 
· · · .. lowing parameters-for this soil: (a) coefficie~t of earth pressure at rest; (b) effective angk of internal friction; 
:_/. 
Problems 
755 
. (c) ratio ofTj!U~o; (d) activity; (e) sensitivity; and (f) the undrained Young's modulus. Are there any incon-
sistencies in the values you· obtained? If so, discuss the possible reasons. 
13.21 During an undrained cyclic triaxial test on· a l~ose sand, at the tenth cycle, the change in pore water pressure is 
about 66 kPa just at the beginning of the application of the principal stress difference. Yet, a quarter of a cycle 
later (as well as slightly before) the pore water pressure is just about equal to the effective confining pressure. 
At this time the principal stress difference is zero! Explain this observation. (It will help if you understand the 
answer to Problem 13.18.) 
· 
· 
13.22 A large power plant is to b~ const~cted at a site immediately adj~cent to the Ohi~ River~ The soils at the site 
consist of 50 m of loose to medium dense granular materiali, and the groundwater table is near the ground sur-
face. Since there are several potential earthquake source areas that could influence the site, list some measures 
that could be taken to protect the foundation of this important structure from liquefaction and! or cyclic mobility. 
13.23 Suppose an identical specimen of the same clay as in Problem 12.38 was sheared undrain~d, and the induced 
pore· pressure at failure was 85 kPa: Determine the principal stress difference, total and effective principal 
stress ratio's, cp', 4>t~tal; A.1, and a1 for this test. 
. 
· 
13.24 A series of drained direct shear tests were performed on a saturated clay. The results, when plotted on a 
Mohr diagram, gave c' = 10 kPa and tan </>' = 0.5. Another specimen of this clay was consolidated to an 
effective pressure of 100 kPa.An undrained direct shear test was performed, and the measured value of TJJ 
was 60 kPa. What was the pore water pressure at' failure? Was the specimen normally consolidated? Why? 
13.25 The following information was obtained fr~m laboratory tests on specimens from a completely saturated 
sample of clay: 
· 
(a) The sample had in the past been precompressed to at least 200 kPa. 
(b) A specimen tested in direct shear under a normal stress of 600 kPa, with complete drainage allowed, 
. 
showed a shearing strength ~f 350 kPa. 
. 
. . 
, 
. 
. . . 
. . . 
(c) A specimen which was first consolidated to 600 kPa, and then subjected to a direct shear test in which no 
drainage occurred, showed ashearing strength of 17S kPa. ' · 
· 
· 
Compute'</>' and </>r for the undf~ined case. Sketch the Mohr envelope~ which you would expect to obtain 
from a series of undrained and drained tests on this clay. (After Taylor: 1948.) 
. : 13.26. Triaxial tests were performedo~ undisturbed samples from the same depth of ~~ganic clay .whose preconsol-
idation loacl,.de.termined from consolidation tests, was in the range,-90 to 160 kPa. The principal stresses at 
failure of two· CD test~ were . 
·. 
• . 
. , 
. 
. 
' 
' . 
, 
. 
. ·.. ' 
. 
Test No.1: 
Test No.2: 
u 3 = 200 kPa, 
u 3 = 278kPa, 
u1 = 704 kPa 
u 1 = 979 kPa 
Data from one CU test on the same clay are shown below. The effective consolidation pressure was 330 kPa 
and the specimen was loaded in axial compression. 
Stress Difference (kPa) 
Strain(%) 
Pore Pressure (kPa) 
0 
0 
0 
30 
0.06 
15 
60 
0.15 
32 
90 
0.30 
49 
120 
0.53' 
73 
150 
0.90 
105 
180 
1.68 
144 
210 
4.40 
187 
240 
(a) Plot the Mohr circles at failure ~nd determine c/J' from'the CD tests for the normally consolidated portion 
of the failure envelope. 
· 
· · '' 
(b) For the CU test, plot curves of principal stress difference and pore pressure, versus strain. · 
756 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
, (c) Assuming that the single CUtest for ~hich data are given is representative forCUtests run at pres-
sures well above the preconsolidation stress: (a) What is l/J. in terms of total stresses above the effects of 
preconsolidation? (b) What is l/J' determined by the CU test above the effects of preconsolidation? 
(AfterA. Casagrande.) ~ 
. 
· ' · . ' 
. . ' 
. 
. 
13.27 An undrained triaxial compression test was performed on a saturated sample of normally consolidated clay. 
· The consolidation pressure was 100 kPa. The specimen failed when the principal stress difference was 85 kPa 
and the induced pore water pressure was 67 kPa. A companion undrained test was performed on an identi-
cal sample of the same clay, but at a consolidatiOJ:?. pressure <:Jf 250 kPa. What maximum principal stress dif-
ference would you expect at failure for this second test specimen? What are l/J' and l/Jtotal? Predict the angle 
of the failure planes f~r the two undrained tests. 
· · 
13.28 Triaxial compression tests were run on specimens from a large undisturbed block sample of clay. Data are 
given below. Tests 1 through 4 were run so slowly that complete drainage may be assumed. In tests 5 through 
· 8, no drainage was permitted. Plot the Mohrfaih.ire envelopes for this soil. Determine the Mohr-Coulomb 
strength parameters in terms of both total and effective stresses. (After Taylor, 1948.) 
' 
'' ' 
' . ' 
'" 
Test No.:·· 
1 
2 
3 
.. 4 .. 5 
(u1 - u3)1,kPa 
447 
167 
95 .. 37 
331 
155· 133 
119 
' ., ' 
' 
u3t, kPa 
246 
89 
36 .. :, 6 
Uc, kPa 
481 
231 
131 " 
53 
What can you say about the probable in sitU: OCR and Ko of this ~lay? is it possible to estimate the Eu and T f 
of this soil? 
· 
· 
· · · 
· · 
13.29 A CUtriaidal t~st is perform:ect on a cohesive ~oil. Th~ effd~ti~~ ~on;olidation stress~as 7SO kPa. At failure, 
the principal stress differencewas 1250 kPa,and the 'major. effective principal stress was 1800 kPa. Compute 
Skempton's.pore pressure coefficientA'atfailure. 
:· .. ; ' 
· · · · 
13.30 Suppose another specimen of the soil in the preceding problem developed a major effective principal stress 
of 2200 kPa at failure. What would Skempton's pore pressure coefficient A at failure be; if u~ = 900 kPa? 
13.31. 1\Vo samples of a slightly overconsolidated clay were tested in triaxial compression; and the following data at 
failure were obtained. The preconsolidation stress for the clay' was estimated from oedometer tests to be 
about 400 kPa. 
Specimen 
X (kPa) 
Y(kPa) 
u' c 
75 
750 
(u1 - u3)f 
265 
620 
Au1 
. -5. 
.. +450 
(a) Determine. the Skempton pore pressure parameter A at failure for both tests. 
(b) Plot the Mohr circles at failure for both total and effective stresses. 
(c) Estimate l/J' in the normally consolidated range, and c' and l/J' for the overconsolidated range of stresses. 
13.32 Two identical specimens of soft saturated normally consolidated clay were consolidated to 150 kPa in a triaxial 
apparatus. One specimen was sheared drained, and the principal stress difference at failure was 300 kPa. The 
other specimen was sheared undrained, and the principal stress difference at failure was 200 kPa. Determine 
(a) l/J' and l/Jtotal; (b) u1 in the undrained specimen; (c) A1 in the undrained specimen; and (d) the theoretical 
angle of failure planes for both specimens. 
13.33 A clay sample is hydrostatically consolidated to 1.0 MPa and then sheared undrained. The ( u 1 -. u 3) at fail-
ure was also equal to 1 MPa. If drained tests onidentical samples gavel/J' = 22°, evalua~e the pore pressure 
at failure in the undrained test and compute Skempton's A paniineter. . . . . 
' 
. 
. 
13.34 .The following data were obtained from a CUtest with pore pressures measu~~d on an ~ndisturbed specimen 
·~f sandy silt. The consolidation pressur~ was 850 kPa and the specimen was sheared in axial compression. 
:. ' 
Problems 
757 
Principal Stress , 
Induced Pore 
Difference (kPa) 
Strain(%) 
Pressure (kPa) 
0 
. 0. 
O' 
226 
0.11 
81 
415 
0.25 
'187 
697 
0.54 
323 
968 
0.99 
400 
1470 
... 2.20 
360 
2060 
3.74 
219 
2820 
5.78 
-009 
3590 
8.41 
-281 
4160 
11.18 
-:-530 
4430 
13.93 
-703 
4310 
16.82 
-767 
4210 
19.71 
-789 
(a) Plot curves of principal stress difference and pore pressures versus strain. Plot on one sheet. 
(b) Plot the stress paths on a p-q diagram. 
. 
(c) What is the maximum effective principal stress ratio developed in this test? Is it the same as the maxi-
mum obliquity for this specimen? 
· · 
(d) Is there any difference in cf/ as determined when the principal stress difference or the principal effective 
stress ratio is a maximum? 
(After A. Casagrande.) 
13.35 JYpical consolidated-drained behavior of saturated normally consolidated samples of Ladd's (1964) simple 
clay are shown in Fig. P13.35. You are to conduct another axial compression CD triaxial test on the same clay 
with the effective consolidation stress equal to 100 kPa. For this test estimate (a) the water content and 
(b) the principal stress difference at an axial strain of 5%. (After C. W. Lovell.) 
1BL-~--~~--~--~_L--~~ 
10 
20 
50 
100 200 . 500 1000 
Log a~ 
~w(%) 
ok-~r-r-"~~~~-.-.~ 
-1 
-2 
B 
10 
,e(%) 
FIGURE P13.35 
13.36 · The c~n~olidation behavior of the si~pl~ clay of Problem 13.35 is shown i~ Fig. P13.35. Estimate the water 
content of a sample of this clay at an OCR of 10, if the maximum consolidation stress is 500 kPa instead of 
800 kPa. (After C. W. Lovell.) 
· 
. · 
13.37 Strength tests conducted on samples of a stiff overconsolidated clay gave lower strengths for CD tests than 
for CU tests. Is this reasonable? Why? (After Taylor, 1948.). 
758 
C~apter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
13.38 An undisturbed sample of clay has a preconsolidation load of 500 kPa. In which of the following triaxial tests 
would you expect the compressive strength to be larger? Why? 
· 
(a) A CD test performed at a chamber pressure of 10 kPa. 
(b) ACUtest performed at a chamber pressure of 10 kPa. 
(After A. Casagrande.) 
13.39 In each of the folloWing cases state which test, X or Y, should show the greater shearing strength. Except for 
the difference stated below, the two tests are the same type in each case (triaxial, direct shear, etc.) and for 
identical clay samples. 
' 
· 
(a) The tests are run with no drainage allowed, and test Y is run much faster than test X. 
(b) Sample Y is preconsolidated to a larger pressure than' sample X; the pressures during the tests are alike 
for the two cases: 
. 
(c) Neither sample is preconsolidated; test X is allowed to dn1in during shear and test Y is not allowed to drain. 
(d) Both samples are highly overconsolidated; test X is ~~t allowed to drain and test Y is allowed to drain. 
(e) Test Y is on a sample that is essentially in the undisturbed state, and test X is on a specimen with appre-
ciably disturbed structure but with the same void ratio as Y. 
(After Taylor, 1948.) 
13.40 List the advantages and disadvantages of each of the field tests listed in Tables 11.1 and 12.5 for determining 
the undrained shear strength of coh·esive soils. 
· · 
· · 
13.41 Which of the tests in Tables 11.1 and 12.5 are appropriate to measure the undrained shear strength for 
(a) a building foundation and (b) a cut slope for a highway in each of thefollowing five cases: 
(i) · Sensitive Scandinavian clay. 
• · · • 
(ii) Organic marine clay from the U.S. Gulf Coast. 
(iii) Stiff fissured clay till from the midwest United States. 
(iv) Canadian fibrous peat. 
(v). Heavily overconsolidated swelling clay from New. Mexico. 
13.42 Estimate the maximum expected value of the pore pressure parameterB for the following soils: 
(a) Compacted glacial till at S = 90%. 
(b) ~oft saturated normally consolidated Boston blue clay. 
(c) Soil (a) at S = 100% 
(d) Stiff overconsolidated clay at S = 99%. 
(e) Loose Ottawa sand at S = 95% and 100%. 
(t) Compacted clayey silt at S = 90% and subjected to high confining pressures. 
(g) Dense Ottawa sand at S = 99% and 100%. 
13.43 A 2-m-thick fill is constructed at the surface of the soil profile of Example 6.8. If the clay is slightly overcon-
solidated, estimate the change in pore pressure at point A of Fig. Ex. 6.8. 
13.44 A soil sample is taken from the midpoirit of the clay layer of Example 6.8-that is, from a depth of 6 m. If the 
pore pressure parameter Au for unloading is 0.90, estimate the effective vertical and horizontal stresses acting on 
the sample just before testing in the laboratory. Assume 4>' for the clay is 25°. (Hint: Draw elements with stresses 
similar to Fig. 12.36, and use the definition of stress increments in Appendix B.3.) (After G. A. Leonards.) 
13.45 Wh~t would your answer to Problem 13.44 be if you used Eq. (13.15) inste~d of (12.17)? 
13.46 A sample of normally consolidated clay is removed from -10m below the ground surface. The effective ver-
tical overburden stress is 250 kPa; and K 0 is 0.8. If the pore pressure parameter due to sampling is 0.7, estimate 
the change in pore pressure in the sample when it is removed from the clay layer. What effective stresses act 
on the specimen after extrusion from the sample tube? Assume the groundwater table is at the surface. 
13.47 Show that flu in Example 13.4 is about 32 kPa, as predicted by Eqs. (13.15) and (13.18). 
13.48 A normally consolidated clay has a 4>' of 30° .1\vo identical specimens of this clay are consolidated to 200 kPa 
in a triaxial cell. Predict the maximum and minimum possible axial stresses in the specimens for a constant 
cell pressure. (Hint: The first test is an axial compression test, the second test is an llxiaLextension test.) What 
assumptions are necessary to solve this problem? 
· · .. 
· · · · · · .>. 
·' 
' 
· 
' 
.• ' 
13.49 The effectivestresses at failure for three identical triaxialspecimens of im oveiconsolidated clay are shown 
in Fig. P13.49. Plot the Mohr circles at failure and determine</>' and c'. Determine the theoretical angle of 
inclination of the failure planes in each test specimen, and show these ori a smallsketch. Also sketch the 
effective stress paths for the three tests. (After C. W. Lovell.) 
Problems 
759 
&OOkP• 
r£230·~~ 
a;:;~kP; 
~ 
0 . 
450 kPa 
(LE) 
(AC) 
(LC) 
FIGURE P13.49 
13.50 Three identical specimens (same e, w) of a clay are normally consolidated and sheared consolidated-drained 
(CD) in both compression and extension. The stresses at failure for the three specimens are as shown in 
Fig. P13.50. 
(a) Plot the Mohr circles at failure, and determine cf>' and cf>total· 
(b) Determine the inclination ofthe predicted failure planes (from the Mohr failure hypothesis). Sketch the 
failed specimens, showing their failure planes. 
(c) Sketch the three stress paths. 
(After C. W. Lovell.) 
.6.6} . 
d1'' 
~"' lli 
7 
3 
',, 
: 
7 
3 
6 
iQa 
'-y--J 
18.4 
· A(AC)' 
B(LC) ·· 
C(AE) 
. FIGURE P13.50 
13.51 A series of conventional triaxial compression tests were conducted on three identical specimens of a satu-
rated clay soil. Test results are tabulated below. 
· 
·Specimen 
Uc (kPa) 
·· (u1 -
u 3)1 (kPa) 
. 11ut (kPa) 
A 
100 
170 
40 
B 
200 
260 
95 
c 
300 
360 
135 
(a) Sketch the total and effective stress paths for each test, and determine the Mohr-Coulomb strength para-
meters in terms of both total and effective stresses. (b) Estimate the theoretical angle of the failure planes for 
each specimen. (c) Do you believe this clay is normally or overconsolidated? Why? 
13.52 Assume that the induced pore pressures at failure for Problem 13.51 were: specimen A, -15 kPa; specimen 
B, -40 kPa; and specimen C, -80 kPa;.and.that everything else was the same. Now do parts (a) and (b) 
above, and then answer part (c). 
. 
13.53 :An a~ial compression CU test has bee~ performed on an undisturbed specimen of 100o/o saturated organic 
clay. The ·data for the test is given in Problem 13.26; A lateral extension test is tobep.erformed on an identi-
cal specimen at the same consolidation pressure 'and with the same time of consolidation and time of loading 
as in the axial compression test. 
. 
. 
• ' 
... ; . 
. 
. 
. 
' 
(a) Plot th~ t6t~l and effective stress path;. Determine the curve of pore pressure versus (1) principal stress 
. difference and (2) axial strairi that you would predict theoretically for the. lateral extension test. 
. (b) On the p-q diagram, draw the line correspou'ding to zero induced pore pressure and the line along which 
the magnitude of the induced negative pore pressure is equal io the principal stress difference. 
(c) What is At for both the AC and LE test? 
· 
· 
· · · 
(After A. Casagrande and R. C. Hirschfeld.) 
13.54 The following data were obtained from acon~~~tiorial triaxial compression test on asaturated (B = 1), 
normally consolidated simple clay (Ladd, 1964). The ceil pressure was heid constant ~t 10 kPa, while the 
axial stress was increased to failure (axial compression test). 
760 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
Baxial (%) 
0 
\ .,.., 
1 
3.5 
.. 2 
4.5 
4 
·5.2 
6· 
5.4 . 
., 8. 
. •5.6. 
10 
5.7 
(a) Plot the Au and Au versus axiafstrain curves. Determine Ar. 
(b) Plot the total and effective stress paths for the AC test. ' 
(c) What is cf>'? (Assume c' = 0 for normally consolidated clay.) 
Au (kPa), 
0 
1.9 
2.8 
3.5 
3.9 
4.1 
4.3 
4.4 
A lateral extension (LE) test was conducted on an identical sample of the same clay (same e, w). In this test, 
the axial or vertical stress was held constant at 10 kPa, while the cell pressure was decreased to 4.2 kPa, at 
which time the specimen failed. 
(d) Plot both the total and effective stress paths for the LE test. 
(e) Determine u1, u11, u31, and A1 for this tests. 
(f) · Find cf>iotal for both the AC and the LE tests. 
. : · 
, , 
. . 
. 
. 
(g) Find the theoretical inclinations (from the Mohr failure hypothesis) of th~ failure planes in each test. 
Sketch the specimen at failure, indicating the effective stresses at failure and the failure plane inclination. 
13.55 ·A conventional triaxial compression (AC) test was conducted on a saturated sample of overconsolidated 
clay, and the following data, normalized with respect to the effective confining pressure, were obtained . 
. Baxial (%) 
Aulu~ 
0-
0 
0.5 
0.57 
+0.07 
1 
0.92 
+0.05 
2 
1.36 
-0,03 
4 
1.77 
-0.22 
6 
1.97 
-0.35 
8 
2.10 
.;_0.46 
10 
2.17 
-0.52 
12 
2.23 
-0.58 
14 
2.28 
-0.62 
16 
2.33 failure 
-0.67 
A lateral extension (LE) test was conducted on an identical specimen ~f the same clay. While the vertical stress 
. was maintained constant, the cell pressure was decreased until failure occurred at the same principal stress dif-
ference as the AC specimen ( Au!u~ = 2.33}. From your knowledge' of stress paths and soil behavior, determine 
(a) the effective and total stress paths for both tests and (b) the pore pressure versus strain response of the LE 
test. (c) Can the Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters be determined? Why?, (After C. W. Lovell.) 
.13.56 AK0 consolidated-undrained triaxi~l compression ( u ceu =:: .. constant) test was· co~ducted on an undisturbed 
. specimen of sensitive Swedish clay. The initial conditions were as shown in Fig. P13.56a. The stress-strain and 
pore pressure responses of the specimen are shown in Fig. P13.56b.. 
" 
. . . 
(a) Find the stress conditions at failure and symbolica:tly show the total, neutral, and effective stresses (like 
· 
the "initial conditions" shown above). 
· 
(b) Sketch the total and effective stress paths. 
,(c) Plot A versus e:What is A1? What are~· and cf>r?. 
t:' 
Problems 
761 
total 
neutral 
+ 
effective 
~OOkPa .. ·r;:l 
lfookPa lJ 
(a) 
Strain, e (%) 
i, 
l 
' 
' 
:· 
(b) 
FIGUREP13.56 
13.57 If an LE test were conducted on a sample of Swedish clay identical to that tested in Problem 13.56, predict 
the pore pressure versus strain response of the clay. What are u1 and A1? What is cf>r? 
13.58 The data shown in Fig. P13.58 are obtained from several CU tests on a saturated clay which has an OCR of 
10 and a preconsolidation stress of 800 kPa. It is assumed that these results are valid for all compression 
stress paths on this clay. You are going to run a special stress path test on this clay. After consolidation at u~0 , 
the cell pressure will be increased in such a way that.iuj = 0.2 Su1 until failure occurs~ For this special 
stress path test, fill in the table below and plot the total and effective stress paths. (After C.W. Lovell.) 
• 
' 
1' 
'·' 
FIGURE P13.58 
8 (%) 
0 
0.5 
2.5 
5.0 
7.5 
Su1 (kPa) . 
u 1 (kPa) 
A= au- Su3 . 
. ' 
Su1 - u3 
.+0.2 
-0.2 
u 3 (kPa) 
Su (kPa) 
A 
762 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
~ 
13.59 A series of CU compression tests on a simple chiy (Ladd,l964) provided the following test results: 
13.60 
'-•''. 
Saxial (%) 
2T11a~ 
A 
0. 
0 
1;·; 
'~-· 
0.35 
•.o.53 
2 
0.45 
0.64 
3 
0.50 
0.72 
4 
0.52 
0.76 
6 
0.54 
0.88 
8 
0.56 
0.92 
10 
0.57 
0.93 
'•·I' 
12 failure 
0.58. 
0.945 
(a) In an axial compression test, if a~,; 200 kPa: determine qf, Pt• and Pt· (b) Find cf/ ·and c': A special 
lateral extension stress path test was conducted on this clay in which the decrease in lateral stress was 
exactly equal to the increase in axial stress; that is,-aa3 = a·a1• For this case, if a~ = 400 kPa, determine 
aa1, q, p, p', and au (c) when the axial strain is4% and (d) at failure. (After C. W. Lovell.) 
Figure P13.60 shows normall~ed data from an axial compression (AC) triaxial test and a lateral compression 
(LC) triaxial test on saturated simple clay (Ladd, 1964). Make the appropriate calculations, and plot the com-
plete total and effective stress paths for both. tests. What are the Mohr-Coulomb strength parameters? 
·Determine At for each test.·. 
· 
'; 
a1- a3 
·au 
a~ 
-y:r-
0 
2 
FIGURE P13.60 
4 
6 
8 
, 
a1 
--, 
a3 
0 
10 
12 
Saxial (%) 
0 
8axial (%) 
_,, .. ~,I 
. (2.29) 
2 
':4'. 
6 
8 · 
10 
12 
Saxi~l (%) 
13.61 Two specimens of a soft clay from the Ska-Edeby test field in Sweden were reconsolidated to th~ir initial in 
situ effective stress conditions and then sheared to failure. One specimen was loaded in axial compression 
(AC),,while the other was failed by axial extension (AE).The normalized stress-strain and pore pressure 
strain data for both tests is shown in Fig. P13.61 (after Zimmie, 1973). Pertinent specimen data is given in the 
accompanying table .. (a) On a 'p-q diagram, sketch the total, total-,- u0 , and effective· stress paths for both 
tests. (b) Determine <f>' arid <f>totat in both compression and extension:(c) ailcuhite the Skemptori pore pres-
sure parameter A at failure for both tests. (d) Show in a 
sk~tch the predicted theoretical angles of the failure 
planes for the two specimens. 
-
·· 
.. 
'.:;) :·· 
:. Problems 
Test 
LC 
PL 
K" 
,-, . 
0 
3A1 
93 
0.65 
3A2 
.31.0 
. 84.2 
'0.65 . 
aAssumed. 
r, 
Note: Tests were condu~ted with a back pressure of 20 kP~. In situ pore water pressu~e is approxtm~tely 40 kP~.· 
' 
' 
I: 
1 I 
' 
Both tests 
starthere~ 
t::.ula~c 
. \ 
-3 I .. 
.\ 
@ 3A1 
,] Jt, 
-0.2 
763 
OCR 
1.07 
1.07 
FIGURE P13.61 
13.62 Are the values given and calculated for K 0 , r1!a~0, </>',and so on fo~ the Ska-Edeby clay of Problem 13.61 
reasonable in terms of the simple correlations with PI, LI, etc., given in this chapter? 
13.63 For the oil tank problem in Chapter 10 (Problem 10.16), plot the complete total, total- u0 ; and effective 
stress paths due to construction and filling of the tank for an element under. the centerline of the tank and at 
the midpoint of the clay layer.Assume that K 0 at the site is 0.7 and that the average value of theA parameter 
before failure is 0.4; assume A1 = 0.5. Make reasonable estimates of the strength parame~ers, and estimate 
the factor of safety against failure. 
' 
13.64 What is the maximum safe height of the embankm~nt for Examples 13.4 arid 13.8? Plot a graph of factor of 
safety versus height of the embankment. 
13.65 How would you recommend the she~r strength be determined for the followi'ug design situations? Your 
answer can include both laboratory and field tests or, in some cases, no ·tests but some other design approach 
that may be appropriate. Be as specific as you can. 
· 
·· 
' 
(a) Long-term stability of a compacted chiy earth dam.' 
(b) Stability of a hydraulic fill sand dam under seismic loading. 
(c) End of construction of a compacted clay earthfill dam. 
(d) Foundation on a soft saturated normally consolidated clay. 
(e) Shallow foundation on a loose dry sand. 
· 
(t) End of construction of an excavation iri soft normally consolidated clay. 
(g), Cut slope in an overconsolidated stiff fissured clay. 
(h) Highway embankment on a stiff fissured clay. 
764 
Chapter 13 
Advanced Topics in Shear Strength of Soils and Rocks 
"' 
·-13.66 1\vo tests are conducted on specimens of a stiff, overconsolidated clay, one a CD test and one aCUtest, both 
. :of which are sheared in axial compression. The drained test· resulted in a lower strength than the undrained 
· test. Explain how this could occur, including a sketch of the stress paths for the 2 tests. . -' 
·,·, 
13.67 . A CU extension test was performed on a normally consolidated specimen using axial extension. The strength 
ratio was ..:.o.280,and the effective failure imgle;a; = 26:56: FindAr .. ·--
. 
13.68 -The following data was obtained from CD direct shear tests on NC and OC specimens of a low plasticity clay. 
The ·oc speCimens were originaily consolidated to 600 kPa, then rebounded to obtain the OCRs shown below. 
Normally Consolidated 
Overconsolidated 
. Consolidation 
Shear Stress at 
Void Ratio at 
Shear Stress at 
Void Ratio at 
Stress, u~ (kPa) 
Failure, Tt (kPa) . ' 
Failure,e1 
OCR 
Failure, Tr (kPa) 
Failure, er 
200 
/ •... 100 
\ 
1.07 •, 
3 
165. 
0.923 
400 
..,,.,. 
200 
0.935 
6 
115. 
0.965 
300 
0.855: 
2 
200 
0.900 
Determine the Hvorslev shear strength parameters cf>~, c., a~d the Hvorslev coefficient ic. (After Perloff and 
Baron,1976.) 
. 
·. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
_ 
· · 
13.69 Derive an expression similar to Eq. (13.49) for overconsolidated clays with Ka > 1 and c' ¢ 0. (Hint: First 
assume that ao-3 = 0, then do the more general,case' of au3 * 0.) 
13.70 Undisturbed piston samples of grey silty Chicago clay were obtained from a depth of -9 m, as shown in the 
soil profile in Fig. P13.70a, for laboratory testing. Different types of strength tests as well as a consolidation 
test were conducted, and the results of the consolidation test are shown in Fig. P13.70b. Unconfined com-
pression' (UCC) tests on adjacent specimens from that depth had an average unconfined compressive 
strength of about 100 kPa. 
· · 
. 
(a) An additional specimen was trimmed and consolidated hydrostatically in a triaxial cell to 300 kPa; then 
it was sheared undrained (CUtest). Estimate the compressive strength of this specimen. 
(b) A companion specimen of the same day was also consolidated to 300 kPa, but then it was sheared 
, drained (CD test). Estimate the compressive strength of this specimen. 
(c) Estimate the water content at failure for both the CD and CU triaxial specimens. 
(d) Estimate cf>' and cf>r for the two-specimens . 
. ' 
-
. 
. 
Soil Description 
Brown silty clay (CL) 
w~ = 22%; Ym = 19.7 kN/m3 · 
. -'- -~ -·-------·-:--
~....-GW! 
Brown silty sand (SM) 
-
, Wn = 30%, Ysat ,= 1~.9 kN/m3 
Grey silty clay (CL) 
Wn ;= 34%, Ysat ;= 18.6 kN/m3 
LL = 36, PL ,; 22 .. e =wGs 
= 0.34 (2.70) 
= 0.92 
:~~EJ1ELL.u1 1111~-~~~r 
0.90 
. 
~-~~-_:____ '_._ 
\II 
0.85 
•, 
--·-··-··l··-··-.. ··--.. 
~- .· ~:~~ -~~-;- --- --l- _Jl 
o.7o 
··. : 
Ill:. I I I ~W+W 
. ~·: -:c ~-- t 
t>'=f~.: '~~ 
' 
1: 
10 ' 
100 
r:::'" 
1000 
u:X,(kPa) 
FIGURE P13.70a 
FIGUREP13.70b 
,_., 
13.71 Assuming that the Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis is correct, show that Trlu~c·7':' constant 
A P P· E N D 
X 
A 
Application of the Sl System 
of··Units to Geotechnical· 
Engineering1 
'j 
A.1 
INTRODUCTION 
Within the scientifjc and engineering community, there has always been some confusion about the 
proper system of units for physical measurements and quantities. Many systems have been advanced, 
and some, including the Imperial or British: engineering system; the so-called "metric system," and a 
few hybrids, have achieved popular usage. With the growth of international cooperation and trade, it 
has become increasingly apparent that a single; commonly accepted systein of units would be not only 
convenient but also of tremendous practical value. 
· 
· · · 
Although the field of geotechnical engineering may not claim the greatest confusion in the use of 
units, it undoubtedly ranks near the top of all fields in the number of different systems in common usage. 
Laboratory engineers, following their counterparts in the physical sciences, have attempted to use some 
sort of metric system, usually the cgs ( centimetre~gram-second) system, for simple laboratory tests. With 
ease, they apply the mks (metre-kilogram-second) system to measurements of pressure and stress in con-
solidation and triaxial tests, and; with some impunity, they use British engineering units for compaction 
tests. As any teacher of soil mechanics can testify, the confusion to the uninitiated is tremendous. At least 
practicing geotechnical engineers in North America have been somewhat consistent in the use of the 
British engineering system for laboratory and field densities, stress measurements, etc., although they 
commonly alternate between pounds per square foot, kips per square foot, tons per square foot, and 
pounds per square inch, depending on how they or their clients feel about. the subject. Fortunately, 
1 ton-fo~ce/ft
2 is within 3% of 1 kg-force/cm2, a common laboratory unit for stress and pressure, and the 
foundation engineer utilizing consolidation test data can c~nvert directly with small error. Strictly speak-
ing, using force as a basic unit is incorrect; mass should be the basic unit, with force derived according to 
1This appendix has been adapted from an unpublished paper byRD. Holtz at Northwestern University, November 
1969. See also Holtz (1980). 
· 
765 
766 
Appendix A 
Application of the 51 System of Unitsto Geotechnical Engineering 
Newton's second law of motion. Use of the kilogram as a unit of force is one of the difficulties with the so-· 
called "metric system," a modified version ofthe mks system, which was common among continental 
European engineers. At least they tried to keep the distinction between mass and force by calling the 
kilogram~force a kilopond (kp). 
A modernized version of the metric system known as SI, which stands for "Le Systeme Inter-
national d'Unites" ("The International System of Units"), was formally adopted by the General Con-
ference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) about 1960. It is described in detail in IEEE/ASTM 
(2002), and an SI Quick Reference Guide given in the back of every current Annual Book of ASTM 
Standards. The United States is just about the only country in the world still using the Imperial or 
British engineering system. Even Great Britain itself converted completely to SI in 1972, and Australia, 
New Zealand and Canada followed shortly thereafter. 
A.2 
THE 51 METRIC SYSTEM 
,. 
The SI metric system is fully coherent and rational. Ii is founded on seven basic units for length (metre 
or meter), mass (kilogram), time (second), electric current (ampere), thermodynamic temperature 
(kelvin), luminous intensity (candela), and amount of substance (mole ).All these basic units have precise 
definitions, names, and symbols, and in terms of these units, we can derive units for all other physical 
quantities. Sometimes the derived quantities are given specific names, such as the newton for force and 
the wattfor power. The derived unit of force replaces the kilogram-force (kgf) of the mks system, so that 
the name of the unit indicates it is a unit of force, not mass. A great advantage is that one and only one 
unit exists of each physical quantity, and all other mechanical quantities such as velocity, force, and work 
can be derived from the basic units. In addition, the SI units for force, energy, and power are independent 
of the nature of the physical process, whether mechanical, electrical, or chemical. 
As previously mentioned, a major advantage of SI is that it is a fully coherent system, which 
means that a product or quotient of any two unit quantities is a unit of the resulting quantity. For 
example, unit length squared shmildbe unit area, and unit force should be unit mass times unit accel-
eration. Obviously, many of the engineering unitsin common use (for example, acre, lb-force, kg-force) 
, are not coherent units. Also, units that might be related to basic units by powers of 10 are not consistent 
·. ~ithin the. SI system. A good example is the.litre, or liter, which is a cubic.decimetre. The equivalent 
~olume of the litre has been defined as exactly, 10-:3 m3 (1000 cm3). Additional advantages of SI include 
. .the use of unique and well-defined symbols and abbreviations and the. convenient decimal relation 
~etween nmitiples and s~bmuitipl(.!sof the basic units. 
·.· .. · 
. 
. . . 
. · •. 
, 
In the next two sections of this appendi)( 'i'{e describe in detail the SI units of particular interest 
in geotechnical engineering and present appropriate conversion factors for some of the C()mmon mks 
and British engineering units. Since you are likely to encouriterjust about anything in your engineering 
practice, it is important that you know how to convert between these systems and SI, and that you have 
., , ... some. feel for physical quantities in both sets of units. 
A.3 
., 
BASIC AND DERIVED 51 METRIC UNITS 
. 
. 
The three base units of interest to geotechnical engineers are length; mass, and time. The SI units for 
these quantities are the metre, m, the kilogram, kg, and the second, s. Temperature, which might also be 
of interest, is expressed in kelvins (K); although the system does allow for use of the degree Celsius 
(
0C), which has the same interval. Electric current is expressed ·in amperes (A); amount of a substance 
in moles (mol), and luminous intensity in candelas ( cd). 
As mentioned, these basic SI units have precise physical definitions. For example, contrary to a 
popular misconception, the metre is not the distance between two bars in Paris, but rather it has been 
~·· 
A.3 · Basic and Derived 51 Metric Units 
767 
defined as exactly equal to·a ceitairi nunihei ofwiiveJengths of radiation corresponding to a specific 
transition level of krypton 86. The standard kilogram is· equal to the mass of the international proto-
type kilogram, a cylinder of platinum-iridiumalloy preserved in a vault at Le Bureau International des 
Poids et Mesures at Sevn!s, France. Simjlar standard kilograms can also be found at.the National 
Bureau of Standards near Washington, D.C. )be second has been defined as the duration of a certain 
number of periods of the radiation corresponding to a specific transition state of cesium 133. 
Derived units geotechnical engineers use include those listed in Table A.L 
Prefixes are used to indicate multiples and submultiples of the basic and derived units. SI prefixes · 
are listed in Table A.2. Although units larger or smaller than 10+3 or 10-3 are in multiples of three, this 
custom is not universal. In India, for example, it is common to use multiples of two for larger numbers. 
Thus a lakh is equivalent to 10+S, a crore equals 10+7, an arab is 10+9, a kharab is 10+11, and so on. 
The prefixes should be applied to indicate orders of magnitude of the basic or derived units and 
to reduce redundant zeros so that numerical values lie between 0.1. and 1000. They should not be 
applied to the denominator of compound units (kilogram is an exception, since kg is a basic unit in the 
SI system). Note that spaces, not commas, should be used to separate groups of zeros (a concession to 
the Europeans to persuade them to stop using a comma as a decimal point!), 
To maintain the coherence of the system, it is recommended that only basic units be used to form 
derived units. For example, the unit of force; the newton, is derived according to Newton's second law, 
F = M a, where the mass M is in kilograms and the acceleration a is in rn/s2, all basic units. For derived 
combinational units such as pressure or stress (pascals or newtons per square metre), multiples and 
submultiples of the basic metric units (in this case metres) should be avoided, For example, N/cm2 and 
N/mm2 are wrong; the appropriate prefix should be used with the numerator to indicate larger or 
smaller quantities-for example, kN/m2 or MN/m2 (for kilonewtons per square metre or meganewtons 
per square metre). 
· 
. 
TABLE A.1 
Quantity 
Unit 
SI Symbol 
Formula'·· 
acceleration 
metre per secondsquared 
m/s2 , 
a~gl~,pl~ne ~ ..•. 
radian 
. ' 
rad 
area 
square metre 
mz 
area 
hectare 
ha 
hm2 =104 m2 
density 
kilogram per cubic metre .. 
kglm3 
force 
newton 
N 
kg·m/s2 
frequency 
hertz 
Hz 
1/s 
moment or torque 
newton metre 
N·m 
kg· m2/s2 
power ... 
watt 
w 
J/s 
pressure 
pascal 
Pa 
N/m2 
stress 
pascal 
Pa 
N/m2 
surface tension · 
newton per metre 
N/m 
kg· s2 
unit weight 
newton per cubic metre 
, N/m3 
kg· m-2/s2 
·velocity 
. me,ireper second 
m/s 
.··voltage 
volt 
::: 
v 
Wlk 
volume 
cubic metre 
m3 
volume: 
litre 
L.;, 
dn;_3 = w-3 m3 
';i 
work (energy)' 
joule 
J 
N·m 
768 
Appendix A .·.. 
Application of the 51 System of Units to Geotechnical Engineering 
\'"'" 
1024,,. 
yotta 
y 
. 1021 
zetta 
z 
1018 
exa 
E 
1015 
peta' 
p 
;'I 
10
1~. 
tera · 
T 
'109 .. 
gig a 
G 
106 
mega 
M 
103 
kilo , 
k 
: 1 ~ ' 
102. 
'hecto 
h 
101 : 
.deka 
da 
10-1 .. 
deci 
d 
10-2 
centi 
c 
. 10-3 
milli· 
:m 
. 10-6 
micro 
!! 
10-9 
nano 
n 
10-12 
pi co 
p 
10-15 . 
femto 
f 
10-18 
atto 
a 
10-21 
. zepto 
·z· 
10-24 
yocto 
y 
A.4 
Sl UNITS OF INTEREST TO GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERS 
AND THEIR CONVERSION FACTORS 
Length You should already be familiar withthe SI unit for length{the metre, m). Useful SI length 
multiples and submultiples are the kilometre (km), millimetre (mm), micrometre (11m), and nanome-
tre (nm). Conversion factors for the common British engineering and mks systems are: 
1 inch, in. = 25.4 mm = ~.0254 m 
1 foot, ft = 0.3048 m 
1 yard, yd = 0.9144 m . 
1 mile (U.S. statute) = 1.609 X 103 m = 1.609 km 
1 mile (nautical) = 1.852 X 103m = 1.852 km 
1 angstrom, A= 1 X w-lO m = 0.1 nm 
1 mil = 2.54 x w-s m := 0.0254 mm = 25.4 11m 
Good SI practice suggests that multiple and subm~ltiple metric units be· used in increments of 
1000-for example, mm, m, km. The centimetre, especially for lengths under 300 mm, should be avoided. 
Mass You may recall from physics that the inertia.or mass (SI unit: kilogram, kg) of a physical object 
is a measure of the property that controls the response of that object to an applied force. It is conve-
nient to measure the mass in terms of the acceleration of an object produced by a unit force, as related 
.'•A.4 • 51 Units of Interest to Geotechnical Engineers and their Conversion Factors 
769 
by Newton'~ second law of motion. Thus a unit force ~a uses l kg mass -to accelerate 1 ~s2
• The mas~, 
then, is an appropriate meas~re of the amount of matter an object contains. The mass remains the same 
even if the object's tempei~tur~, shape, or other physi~ai attributes change: Unlike weight, which is dis-
c~ssed later, the mass of an object does nqt depend mi' the local gravitatiohai' attra~tion, and thus it is 
... also independent of the object's location in the universe. , , . . 
. 
. 
. ,, 
'' , 
' : Ainong' all'tlie SI units, th~ kilogram' is the only ~ne'whose na'me, for historical reasons, contains 
.• 'a prefiX. The mimes ~of multiples mid submultipl~s of the' kiiogr~in are formed by atta~hhi.g prefixes to 
. the. word "gram· r~the( th.an io, kitogr{l~: 'In other· wor,d~1
. 1g~~ ,kg)s' ii<;(li' ~i.c~o-~Vogr~m, but a 
J:llilligram ';"; w;-3.g. Similarly, 1000 kg is~ot 1 kilo~ kilogram but is equivalent to 1 megagram (Mg), the 
'only large mass u~it permitted b)/Si. TheBritisli'long ton (2240 lb ); short t~n (2000 lb ), mid the metric 
) .· . •'ton (1000 kg) and 'sometimesspelled tonne) are bestleft io commercia!' usage and avoid~d in engi-
. iieering practice. Practical units of mass' in-engin-eering practice are the megagrain (Mg), the:kilogram 
(kg), and the gram (g), the lattertwo unitsbeing primarily used inlaboratocy work._ . 
,, 
. . Some useful reh:ltionships and 'con~ersion factors are:, 
. . 
. - . 
· .. . -' . 
, 
. , 
, 
I • 
• 
• • 1 ' 
< 
l 
' 
, 
' 
i 
, ' 
" 
' 
" 
' 
• · I ' . · 
' , ; ~ 
1-pohnC!mass, lb~'fa~6i~dupois).;,;, o:4s36'kg' ., • 
•· 
o, 
; 
•' 
..•. •' 
' 
' 
.• ', 
<\ .-. 
j 
':, "' 
1 British(short) ton= 2000 Ibm=. 907.2kg. 
; ' ' 
,il gram, g = 10-3 kg 
1 metric ton, t = '103 kg'= 106 g =·1 Mg · 
1 slug(l'lb-force/ft/s2) # 14.59kg 
· ·: 
) ) 
I,-
Time .. Although the second (s) is tli~'basicSI time unit, minutes (min), hours (h),days (d),~tc.,may be 
used when! C:onvenh:!nt, ~~en though they are not d~Cimally related. (Maybe some day we will even 
have a deciinaltime system; see Carrigan, 1978.) 
· ' · 
· 
· ' · 
· 
' ' · 
Force As mentioned, the SI unit of force is derived from F_ _= Ma, and it is termed _the newton (N), 
which is equal to 1 kg· m/s2• Conversion factors for common engineering force units are: . 
-
~ .. " ' . : 
~ \ : 
lib-force = 4.448 N 
1 British short ton-force= 8.896 X 103 N = 8.896 kN 
1 kg-force := 1 kp = 9.807 N 
· '· 
1 kip = 1000 lb~force = 4.448 X 103 N = 4.448 kN 
1 metric ton-force = 1000 kg-force = 9.807 X 103 N = 9.807 kN 
1 dyne (g • crn!s2) = 10-5 N = 10 1-1N 
' : . 
It is obvious that the numbers in newtons for such items as column loads would be very large 
indeed and consequently somewhat awkward. Therefore, consistent with the rules for application of 
prefixes, it is simple to adjust these rather large numbers to more manageable quantities for engineer-
ing work. The common prefixes would be kilo (loJ), mega (106), and giga (109), so that engineering 
forces would be kilonewtons, kN, meganewtons; MN, and giganewtons, GN. (The symbol for mega isM, 
to avoid confusion with the symbol for milli, m.) Thus, since 1 ton-force is 8.9 kN, 1000 tons would be 
8.9MN. 
Some useful relationships of these prefixes an!: 
1 kilonewton, kN = loJ newton = 1000 N 
1 meganewton, MN = 106 newton = 103 kN = 1000 kN 
1 figanewton, FN = 108 newton= 105 kN .= 102 MN = 100 MN 
770 
Appendix A.> Application ofthe 51 System of Units to Geotechnical Engineering 
'!I,; 
j 
~ 
'1 giganewton, GN = 109 newton= 106 kN ='l03 MN = 1000 MN 
. '· 3 'giganewtons = 30 figanewtons ·,;, 1 1 boxafig~newtons2 · 
''. J 4.4 !gig~newtons ~· 1 g;oss~figa~ewtons 
: ' 
.. ·: . c 
•''; 
The correct unit to express the weight of an obj~c't' is .the ne~ton, since the weight is the gravi-
: . .~ tational force that causes a downward acceleration of the'object Or, weight W equals Mg, where M 
. is the mass.of the obj~ct and g is the·a~celeration due to'gravity. You will recall.that the acceleration 
due to gravity varies with latitude and elevation and; in fact, SI rebomrnerids that weight be avoided 
' . and that ma'ss be used instead:. If weight must be' used, if is suggested that th~ location' and gravita-
tional accelerationals6 be stated. Howevdr, for most ordinary engineering purposes, the'difference 
.. in'accelwition (about OSYo) can be 'neglected,and as long as we express the weight in newtons, the 
units will be consistent. .' 
' 
.. : 
" 
.. : 
' .· . ' 
. 
' 
' 
' 
Another'p.robleni ~iih weight isih:ai'it is comn1only'use'dwh~n 'we really ~e~ii the ~ass of an 
object. For example, in the laboratory when we "weigh" an object on a laboratory balance, we really 
are comparing two masses, the mass of the unknown object with objects of known mass. Even scales or 
balances that displace linear springs are calibrated by using objects of known mass.' : . 
Further ambiguity occurs,: of course; because common units of·mass such as the pound or kilo-
. gram are often used in engineering practice as units offorce.' If pound is used as a unit of force, then 
depending on the resulting accelerations, different mass units are defined. For example, if a 1 lb-force 
causes an acceleration of 1 ft/s2, then the mass is lib-force· s2/ft, which is called a slug. In other words, 
lib-force = 1 slug X 1 ft/s2. Using slugs as units of mass avoids th~ confusion with pounds-mass, and 
this unit has been commonly used in aerodynamics and fluid mechanics. . .. 
. 
. 
. . 
. · 
. If we wantedto useinstead a pound~mass system,we could define a.imit of.force cailed the 
powi.dal, where 1 poundal ·= llhm x ,l.ft/s2.·P()undals are apparently used only i!lP.hysi~s books. 
Given: 
A force of llb acts on an object weighing llb. 
1. 
Required: 
Find the resulting acceleration . 
. Solution: From Newton's second law, 
F = 
Ma =(;)a· 
.... 
or· 
a = Fg ~ (llbf)(32.17 ft/s2) 
. 
. 
W 
1 Jbf 
= 32.17 ft/s2 
·. 
1bis unit is a constant only prior to opening the box: ' 
· A.4 
51 Units of Interest to Geotechnical Engineers and their, conversion Factors 
771 
Example A.2 
Given: 
. 
. 
The object in Example A.1, which weights 1lbf., 
'~ . .-' 
-
.. Required: .. 
Find its mass when a 1lbf causes an acceleration of 1 ft/s2• 
'i , 
/: \,'. ; : ; 
< 
Solution: 
F 
~Ma=(W)a. 
g· ·• 
or 
. " 
, 
W :. 
' llbL' : ' 
: . lbf • s2 
· · 
-· 
. 
M = g = 32;17 ft/s2 = 0.031-ft- = 0.031 slug . 
. ,,. 
ExampleA.3 
Given: 
The Mars rover vehicle weighs 400 lbs on earth. · . 
' . ~ \ ' 
. ' ) 
. : 
' ! 
Required: 
How much does it weigh on the surface of Mars? 
Solutimi: First, we have to'calculate the i:o'ver's'~ass on earth. Uniess it lost equipment en.route, its 
. · mass will be the same. on Mars. • : 
· ' ' : 
. '.. 
· · 
; · W' : ' 400 lbf · · 
· lbf · s2 • 
· 
' 
M, =--:- = 
2 = 12.43 -f-, or, 12.43 slugs 
·g; ·-32.17ft/s 
. 
t 
;1·· 
Since 1 slug ~ 1459 kg, its mass is 181,·1~ kg: Another way to calcuilite itsniass is io convert its weight 
. to newtons; then: divide by g.. . • i. 
. 
: • 
• 
• 
. 
• 
. 
• . 
• 
. • 
. •. 
. 
. 
. 
• . 
. . 
' ' 
; 
~ 
' ' 
" 
.. ·,-;' 
' 
Next, we have to either ask an astronomer or look up in the Handbook of Chemistry and Physics 
(2008) or some other reference the gravitational acceleration on the surface of Mars. We find that 
gMars = 3.728m/s2: o. 
·: 
Thus, 
WMars = MgMars = 181.41 kg (3.728 m/s2) = 676.30 N .. 
772 
Appendix A · Application of the 51 System of Units to Geotechnical Engineering 
Or, since 4.448 N ~ llbf, 
( llbf ) 
W Mars = 676.30 N = 4.448 N = 150.05 lbf 
(
3.728) 
: 
. 
; 
Check: On earth, 1779 N 9.81 
= 676.30 Non Mars. 
See how confusing the old British engineering system can be? However, if you think this is bad, 
wait until you try to convert densities and unit weights! 
Stress and Pressure The SI unit for stress an.d pressure is the pascal (Pa), which is exactly equal to 
1 newton per square metre (N/m2). :. , 
• 
There has been some objection, especially in Europe, to the use of the pascal as the basic unit of 
stress and pressure because it is so small. The Germans and French, for example, often use the bar, which 
is exactly 105 Pa. However, the pascal is more logical, since it is a coherent unit; that is, equations involv-
ing the pascal with other SI units can: be written without coefficients of proportionality being required. 
Conversion factors for some common engineering units are: . 
1 psi (lb-force/in.2) = 6.895 X 103 Pa or 6.895 kPa 
1 atm at STP3 = 1.013 X 105 P~ or 101.3 kPa 
1 kg-force/cm2 = 9.807X 104 Pa or 98.07 kPa 
1 metric ton-force/m2 = 9.807 X 103 Pa or 9.807 kPa 
1 bar = 1 X 105 Pa or 100 kPa 
1 ksi (kip/in.Z) = 6.895 X 106 Pa or 6.895 MPa 
1 British ton-force/ft2 = 95.76 X 103 Pa or 95.76 kPa 
1lb-force/ft2 = 47.88 Pa 
. . 
It is obvious that the pascal is a small unit, but as with SI force units, it is easy to add prefixes to 
'make the large numbers more manageable. Thus, i psi in the above table is more conveniently 
expressed as 6.9 kPa (kN/m2) than as 6.9 X 103 Pa. For ordinary triaxial testing of soils, for example, 
hydrostatic cell pressures rarely exceed 200 or 300 psi (1379 or 2068 kPa). Or, if all the pressures in a 
test series are in this range, it might be convenient to.use 1.4 or 2.1 MPa. And, as with other systems of 
units, a rounded or even interval may be more convenient-for example, in this case, 1.5 and 2.0 MPa. 
Similar examples could be given for engineering stresses. Either kilopascals or megapascals, kPa 
or MPa, or kilo- or meganewtons per square metre, kN/m2 or MN/m2, will become commonly used for 
foundation stresses, lateral earth pressures, allowable bearing values~ etc. In the lab.oratory, force is 
measured by a proving ring or load cell and then converted to stress (for example, in the unconfined 
compression or direct shear tests), so the'computational process will be no more complicated than it is 
now. Similarly, with electrical pressure transducers, a calibration factor must be used to convert milli-
volts (mV) output to pressure in whatever units are used. 
A convenient approximation, part of which is already in use in geotechnical engineering prac-
tice, is the following: 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
1 British (short) ton-force/ft2 = 
1 kg-force/cm2 = 
1 atmosphere 
= 10 metric ton-force/~
2 = 100 kPa = 100 kN/m2 
3Standard temperature and pressure,' not a motor oil additive or Soil Test Probe. 
A.4 
Sl Units of Interest to Geotechnical Engineers and their Conversion Factors 
773 
The .error involved is between. 2% and 4%, which is certainly less than ordinary engineering 
accuracy requirements.. 
, . . :. · 
· 
Given: 
The pressure or stress is 100 kPa. 
Required: 
Convert this pressure or stress to (a). psi (lb-force/in.2), (b) ksi (kips/in.2), (c) tsf 
(British ton-force/ft.2), (d) kg-force/cm2, (e) bar, (f) metric ton-force/m2, (g) mm of mercury, (h) ft of 
water, and (i) m of water. 
Solution: A simple way to convertfrom one set of units to
1 another is to set up an equation with the 
equivalents in either the numerator -~r denominator of the equation so that the appropriate 
cancellations occur. 
· 
p = 100 kPa = 100 kN2 (____!J!i_) ( 1000 N) (0.02~4 m)
2
. . 
a. 
m 
4.448N 
kN 
_ 
ltn. 
•·· = 14.5 psi 
;<",' 
~ 
' 
. ' ; 
Note: The exact conversion value. is 14.503 773 77 kN/m2, which comes about if you use the 
exact value for 1lbf = 4.448 221615 260 5 N. 1 in. is exactly equal to 0.0254 m;• 
b. p = 100kPa 
= 100 kN(~)(10oo'N)('' 1 kip )(0~0254 m)
2 
m2 4.448 N 
· kN · 
1000 lbf 
··: 1 in. 
= 0.0145 ksi 
Again, as in part a, the exact con.v~rsi~n value is ~lightly different.. ; • 
I 
' 
' 
' ' ' 
~· 
' 
' ' 
'•' 
' ' ' 
' 
,_. ~ ' 
' 
-, 
,, 
' 
' 
' ~ ~ 
' 
' 
• 
' 
f 
' ' 
c. p = 100 kPa : 
· · .. · 
.. 
= .. lO~kN(. llbf )·.(1000 N 
.. )( 1 tonf )(0.'3048 m)·2· '• 
m2 4.448 N 
. kN ' 
2000 lbf . • 1 ft' .. 
~l.04to~fjft2.~ ··, 
•. ·.:· · 
··. 
•··· · .• • .. 
d. p=lookl'a~ 10o~G.~~~fN)C0:N)Coon1c~r. 
i: 
' 
• · 1 = 1.02 kgf/cm2 
' Note: The ~x~ciconversionfor kgf toN is 9.806 65 .. · 
I 
i , ' 
• ; 
) . • 
• • ' ' 
• 
' ' • : 
.' ' 
.. ' ~ 1 
: , ' 
~ • • 
e.: p',;,)OOkPa =·100kPa(·'1 ~ar:)(
1
1
°k
3
PPa);;;, ll;ar,: 
··. · · ·· ·· · · ·· 
· 
10 Pa 
a 
· 
.t .p ·~ 100 ~p~ ~ I~~~( 9.~N)('O:~)( ~~i~) · 
..• 
= 10.2 metric tonf/m2 
~ ' 
. 
: ' : ) 
'• ·, : . 
)· 
,.' 
774 
Appendix A 
'Application of the 51 System of Units to Geotechnical Engineering 
g. For p in mm of mercury, we need to remember or look up the density of Hg.lt is 13.6 g/cm3• 
Also recall from hydrostatics that p = yz = pgz, where z is the depth of the fluid. Thus for 
pressure in em of mercury, z = pip g. So 
z = 100 kN(lOOON)(~)(1000g)(~)
3
( 
s
2 
)(1000mm) 
m2 
kN 
13.6 g 
kg 
100 em 
9.807 m 
m 
= 750mmHg 
h. Again, use z = p/pg 
·· 
_ 1 
kN ( 1000 N) ( 
m
3 
) ( 
s
2 
) ( 
1 ft 
) 
z - . 00 mz · kN 
. 1000 kg 
9.807 m 
0.3048 m . 
= 33.5 ft of water 
,,,,c, 
. 
kN(1000N)( 
m
3 
)( 
sz 
) 
1' · z = 100 m2 ·~ 1000 kg 
9.807m . 
= 10.2 m of water 
Density and. Unit Weight Density is defined as mass per unit volume. Its units in the SI metric 
system are kilograms per cubic metre, kg/m3• In many cases, it may be. more convenient to express 
· density in megagrams per cubic metre, Mg/m3 .. Conversions from the common laboratory and field 
densities are: 
· 
1lb-mass/ft3 = 16.018 kg!m3 . 
1 g/cm3 = 103 kg/in3 = 1 Mg/m3 = 1 t/m3 
You will recall that the density of water, Pw• is exactly 1.000 :ifcm3 ~t 4°C, and the variation is 
relatively small over the range of temperatures encountered in ordinary engineering practice. There-
fore it is usually sufficiently accurate to take Pw = 103 kg/m3 = 1 Mg/m3, which simplifies phase 
computations considerably. It is also. useful to know that 1000 kg/m3 is equal to 62.4lb-mass/ft3• 
TYpical densities that might be encountered in geotechniCal pnictice are 1.2 Mg/m3(74.8lb/ft3), 
1.6 Mglm\100 lb/ft3), and 2.0 Mglm\125 lb/ft3). Ranges ofdifferentdensities are also listed in Table 2.1. 
The commonly used density for concrete, 150 lb/ft3, is almost exactly 2.4 Mg/m3• 
You should note that not all mass and volume ratios common in geotechnical engineering prac-
tice are affected by the use 'of SI units. For example, void ratio or water content of any given soil still 
has the same numerical value. 
· 
· . 
Unit weight or weight per unit volume is still the common measurement in geotechnical engi-
neering practice. However, since weight should be avoided in technical work for all the reasons dis-
cussed earlier, then unit weight also should be avoided. ASTM recommends tiuii density be used in 
place of unit weight. If you must convertfrom density to unit weight, then simply use y = pg, which 
means you will have to consider the appropriate' value for the'·abceleration 'due to gravity. The "stan-
dard" value of g is 9.807 m!s2 (32.17 ft/s2), which,'as m~ntioned previously, can be used with sufficient 
accuracy for ordinary engineering work for most places on this earth. If you ever have a job on the 
moon or some other planet, then you must use th'e local value for g. Ke'ep in mind,' also, to be very care-
ful which "pounds" you are working with, lbf or lbm, in these conversions., ... 
' 
A.4 
51 Units of Interest to Geotechnical Engineers and their Conversion Factors 
775 
Example A.S 
Given: 
The density of water is 1000 kg/m3. 
Required: 
The density of water in (a) g/cm3 and (b) lb/ft3. 
Solution: Set up an equation as follows: 
kg 
kg(1000 g)( 1m ·)3 
g 
a. 
1000 m3 = 1000 m3 !kg 100 em 
= 1 cm3 
b.. 1000 kg = 1000 kg ( 
1lbm )(0.3048 Il1) . ~- 62.43 Ibm 
" 
m3 
m3 0.4536 kg 
1 ft 
ft3 
Another way to do part b is to recall that 11bm/ft3 = 16.018 kglm3, so 
1000 kg = 1000 kg ( 
1lbm/ft3 ) = 62.43lbm 
m3 . . 
m3 16.018 kg/m3 
ft3 
ExampleA.6 
Given: 
Density of water, Pw = 1000 kg/m3. 
Required: 
Convert this density to unit ~eight in (a) SI and (b) British engineering units. 
Solution: 
a. SI units: We know thai y ~ pg, so 
" . 
. 
: ... ;' ·.'"kg.( , 
~) 
kg·m 
'Y = 1000 m3 9.807~ , ~ 9807m3 • s2 ;:, 
· 
< 
·. 
· :kg· m. ;' ' • 
Recall that 1 N = 1-. -2 ,-:; · 
·'" 
s , .. 
, . . 
N 
kN 
· 'Y = 9807 m3 = 9.807 m3 
b. , British engineeiing units: Frofil Exa~;~~ A.:s, we kn~~ ~h~t 
'': 
776 
Appendix A . Application of the 51 System of Units to Geotechnical Engineering 
If lbf are used, from part a,· 
= 98 kN(lOOON)( llbf )(0.3048m)3 
'Y 
• m3 . 1 kN 
4.448 N 
1 ft 
= 62.4lbf 
ft3 
This is the commonly used value for the unit weight of fresh water. 
ExampleA.7 
. .· 
Given: 
A soil has a dry density of 1.7 Mg/m3. 
Required: 
Convert this density into unit weights, in terms of both (a) SI and (b) British engineering units. 
·Solution: 
a. SI units: 
Pd = 1.7 Mg/m3 = 1700 kg/m3 
'Y = pg 
kg ( 
m)· 
· 
N 
kN 
'Y = 1700- 9.81-
= 16677- = 16.7-
m3 
sz 
m3 
m3 
b. British engineering units, in terms of Ibm: 
= 1700 kg ( 
1lbm/ft3 ) = 106.13lbm 
P · · 
m3 16.018 kg/m3 
ft3 
'Y = pg 
= 106.13lbm.(32.17.!!.) = 3414lbm • ft · 
'Y 
ft3 
s2 
s2 • ft3 
In terms of lbf: From part a, 
= 167 kN(1000N)(~)(0.3048m)
3 
'Y 
• m3 
1 kN 
4.448 N 
1 ft 
= 106.3 lbf/ft3 
The latter value in terms of lbf is, of course, the more familiar figure. 
GeostaticStress For computations of geostatic stresses, the unit weights of the various soil layers can 
be easily replaced by the pg of the layers. The usual formula 
n 
Uv = L'YiZi 
i=l 
'; 
A.4 Sl Units of Interest to Geotechnical Engineers and their Conversion Factors 
777 
then becomes 
n 
CTv = 2_p;gZ; 
i=l 
where a v = total vertical stress at some depth, 
p; = density of each layer, 
Z; = thickness of each layer, and 
g = acceleration of gravity. 
If pg is a constant throughout the depth h, then 
CTv = pgh 
(6.14c) 
(6.14b) 
By analogy, computation of the static pore water pressure u0 at some depth hw below the groundwater 
table is 
· 
· 
(6.15) 
where Pw = the density of water (1 Mg/m3). 
Similarly, to obtain the effective vertical overburden stress, the effective or buoyant density p' 
for each layer below the groundwater table can be used or, perhaps more simply, a~0 = avo - u0 • 
Dimensional analysis of these equations for stress shows that if the densities are expressed in 
Mg/m3, then stresses automatically res'ult in kPa, or 
. 
. 
. 
/ ,:< 
( Mg)(m) 
kg· m 
N 
-. -
-
m = 1000-- = 1000- = 1 kPa 
: m3 
sz 
·. , ... s2,-m2 .. 
.. mz 
" 
:·: . 
. , 
Several examples of geostatic stress computations using Slunits can be found in Chapter 6. 
Systems of units are constantly evolving. For example,' Snedegar (1983) proposed a new system 
where length =.1 far, mass = llump, and .force =. 1 shove. Because linear acceleration = 1 far/s2, 
1 shove = 1lump far/s2. Pressure or stress is called 1 gasp defined as 1 shove/far. Modulus of elasticity 
for most engineering materials would thus be expressed in gigagasps .. 
778 
A P P E N D 
X 
B 
1 
Derivation of Laplace's 
Equation 
'9 ,j 
. As mentioned' in Sec. 7.7, a flow net is actually a graphical solution of Laplace's equation,Eq. (7.18). 
The assumptions necessary for the derivation of this equation are: 
· 
S=WO%, 
. 
. 
. 
e = constant'[i.e., no consolidation (Chapter 8) or compression of the medium occurs], 
k is isotropic, 
. 
Darcy'slaw [Eq. (7.5)] isvalid. 
,-1 
Consider.the;flow of water into an element with dimensions dx and dy,(Fig. B.l.l). Two-
'·. dimensional flow is assumed here for simplicity; you could do the exact same, thing in three dimensions, 
but it would just be more complicated. The term ( avxlax) dx indicates the rate of change in velocity Vx 
in the x-direction; similarly, (avylay) dy is the rate of change in vy in they-direction. From continuity, 
we know that q = constant = VAin = V Aout· So 
VAin= VxdY + Vydx 
( 
a~ ) 
( 
a~ ) 
V Aout = 
Vx + -a;dx dy + Vy + aydy dx 
If we set these two equations equal, we get 
or 
since dx and dy cannot be zero. 
av 
avy 
_!_dx dy + -dx dy = 0 
ax 
ay 
avx 
·avy -·a· 
-+--
ax 
ay 
(B.l.l) 
l
y 
Vy 
dx 
dy 
--~x 
8.1 
Derivation of Laplace's Equation 
779 
FIGURE B.1.1 ·.Flow into and out'? 
of an element dx by dy. 
From Darcy's law [Eqs. (7.2) and (7.5)],v= k( = k tlh/L. Thus ~e;caniTritefoi o~r element: 
,. 
' .. 
" 
· 
· . ah 
Vx = kxax' 
· 
ah 
·v·=k-
Y 
Yay 
Substituting these terms into Eq. (B.l.l) we obtain 
a2h 
· a2h 
kx-2 + ky-2 = 0 
ax 
ay 
Since k was assumed to be isotropic, kx = ky. So we have 
;, 
} 
,_,,,; 
~.~:;·":~·;" 
.·~, 
~ 
''·'''-
,,":"'','\ 
which is Laplace's equation in two dimensions. For the equation in three .·dimensions, simply add the 
term a2h/az2 to Eq. (7.18). 
· 
· 
· · 
. , ··. ~.:; · · 
· 
' ~.- . 
,:' 
;., ' 
A P P E N D 
X 
B 
2 
Derivation"and Solution .of 
.TE!~za.gj~i'~ One-Dim~~si()nal 
Consolida~ion Theory 
i,' 
8.2.1 
ASSUMPTIONS 
To develop the Terzaghi one-dimensional consolidation theory, we need to assume the following: 
. '· . ; 1. The clay is homogeneous an~ 100% saturated. 
2. Drainage is provided at both the top and bottom of the compressible layer. 
3. Darcy's law [Eq. (7.5)] is valid. 
' ' · ' 
· ' 
· . ' 
4. The soil grains and water are incompressible. 
5. Compression and flow are one-dimensional. 
6. The small load increment applied produces essentially no change in thickness (that is, small 
strains), and k and av remain constant. 
7. There is a unique linear relationship between the volume change de and the effective stress du'. 
In other words, de = -av du' and av is assumed constant over the increment of applied stress. 
This important assumption also implies that there is no secondary compression. 
8.2.2 
DERIVATION 
780 
Now let us borrow a little element from Fig. 9.1(f) and enlarge it in Fig. B.2.1. Our element exists at a 
depth z below the top of the compressible layer, has thickness dz, and has an area dx times dy. The vol-
ume change of the element is the difference between the amount of flow in and out of the element. 
Since consolidation under these conditions is directly dependent on the escape of pore water from the 
soil voids, we may develop the consolidation equation by considering the continuity of flow in our 
element. The hydraulic gradient iz at the top of our element is given by 
. 
head loss 
a ( u ) 
1 au 
lz = distance = az Pwg · = Pwg az 
(B.2.1) 
8.2.2 Derivation 
781 
Oaut 
'2H 
' 1 
. 
:,, 
:· 
···odx 
dy 
''FiGURE B.2.1 
soill~yer undergoing compre~sion, similar to Fig; 9.1 (f). 
The corresponding hydraulic gradient at the bottom of our element dz is given by 
1 au 
1 a2u 
i 
=--+--dz 
z+dz 
Pwg az 
·: Pwg az2 
(B.2.2) 
From Darcy's law, dQ = kia dt, we may compute the quantity of flow dQ in time dt out of the top of 
our element by 
' 
1 au 
dQout = k-. -dz dx dy dt 
· 
·· 
p.wg az · 
· 
· 
(B.2.3) 
Likewise we may compute the quantity of flow in time dt at the bottom into the element by 
dQin == k~(au + az~) dz dx dydt 
Pwg az 
az 
(B.2.4) 
We can now compute the volume change :from the difference in· rates of flow, Q()u1 ..::. Qi~. Also we 
assume the area dx dy to be a unit ar~a: Therefore 
: 
', 
k a2u 
volume change = dQout - dQin = --- 2 1 dz dt 
(B.2.5) 
Pwg az 
:. The volume changd ~~y also be d~termin~d fro~ the lab,or~t~ry ~onsolidation test: Remember, 
from Chapter 8, that we would obtain a laboratory curVe similar to Fig. 8.4, which we again show as 
Fig. B.2.2. From Eqs. (8.5a) and (b), the coefficient of compressibility avis 
de 
e1 - ez 
a=--= 
v 
., dCI' 
G'z- G'i ... 
. 
\ 
~ . 
(B.2.6) 
To be correct, we should write these equations in terms· of effective stresses. From Fig. B.2.2, you can 
see that the slope of the e-CI' curve is negative, and you know that e1 is numerically larger than e2. 
· 
From Eq. (8.4), s = lleHJ(1·+ e0 ),orin terms of our element in Fig. B.2.1and thee-CI' rela-
: , tionship in Fig. B.2.2, we obtain : 
· · ' 
' 
· 
' 
'' 
-de 
·' 
s = lldz = --dz '. 
1 + e1 
(B.2.7) 
782 
Appendix 8.2 
·. Derivation and Solution of Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
e 
{
e1 
!le 
e2 
1 
~ la=-M=e1.,-e2 
~ · v 
!lu' 
u2- u1 
!lu' = !lu = ui 
u' 
where e1 corresponds to the initial void ratio 
e0 • From Eq. (B.2.6), -de = av du'. Therefore 
av du' dz 
!:J.dz = 1 + e
1 
(B.2.8) 
FIGURE 8.2.2 
Laboratory compression curve (same as 
·Now, from our discussion in Chapter 9, we 
know that as the excess pore water pressure 
dissipates, 'the effective stress in the soil 
skeleton increases. This is 
1 shown schemati-
cally in Figs. 9.1(c) and (f). Thus we can write 
that !:J.u' = - !:J.u, because any change in 
effective stress is numerically equal to the 
negative of the change in excess pore water 
pressure. This relationship is true, of course, 
as long as the total stress does not change. 
N" ow, Eq. (B.2.8) can be wl:itten as · · 
Fig. 9.2). 
' I 
. 
/ 
and since du = (au/at) dt, Eq. (B.2.9) becomes . 
. 
-av au 
' 
l:!.dz = ---dt dz 
1 + el at 
'·•· 
, 
. , av du dz 
!:J.dz = -1 + e1 
(B.2.9) 
(B.2.10) 
By equating the volume change obtained in Eq. (B.2.5) and the volume change in Eq. (B.2.10), 
~hoe 
· · 
k a2u 
av 
au . 
----dzdt = ----dtdz 
Pwg az2 
· 
l + e1 at 
(B.2.11) 
We can collect the soil properties terms as in Eq. (9.3), 
k 1-t e1 
c =---
v 
Pwg 
av 
(9.3) 
where cv is called the coefficient of consolidation, since it governs the consolidation process. Note that 
it has units of L 2T-1• We thus obtain.· 
· · 
· 
: 
· ' 
· 
;i' 
a2u 
au .. 
c-=-
v az2 
at 
(9.2) 
Equation· (9.2) is the Terzaghi one-dimensional consolidation equation. If we assume Cv is a constant 
with respect to time and position; then Eq. (9.2) is a second-order partial differential equation with 
constant coefficients. There are a variety of ways to solve such equations; some are· mathematically 
·exact, others are only approximate. For example; Harr (1966) presents an approximate solution using 
the method of finite differences. Taylor (1948), following Terzaghi (1925a), provides a mathematically 
rigorous solution in terms of a Fourier series expansion. The development that follows is adapted from 
Taylor (1948) and Leonards (1962). 
· 
8.2.3 ; Mathematical Solution 
783 
8.2.3 
MATHEMATICAL SOLUTION 
The boundary and initial conditions for the case of one-dimensional consolidation are as follows: 
1. 'fP.ere is complete drainage at the top and bottom of the compressible layer. 
2. The initial excess hydrostatic pressure !lu = u; is e,qual to the applied increment of stress at the 
boundary, !lu. These boundar)' and initial conditions can be written ' . . . 
' 
' 
< 
• 
, 
~ " 
' 
• 
, 
• 
• 
' 
! 
• 
' , • , , 
' 
' c 
• 
' ' 
• 
whenz =Oandwhenz=: 2H, ., u = 0 
when t = 0, 
U = U; = /:iu = ( Uz - ul) 
· · The general solution of Eq. (9.2), when the initial excess pore pressure u; is a function of the depth z, is 
• 
~, c 
' 
(B.2.12) 
When u; is a constan( or varies linearly with depth, the solution becomes 
_ ( I : ' I) ; 
. · 4 
; (2n + 1 
Z ) 
u -. u 2 :- u 1 ..:::.. (2 
1) sm -. - 2-, 7T··H· 
· 
'·n=O 
n + "'· 
· 
._,.... z 
'· [ (2n + 1? 2 k(1 + e1) t J 
X exp-
7T 
2 
.· 
· 
4 
. 
avpwg 
H 
" 
, 
. 
Cv 
~--:.:T-~ 
(B.2.13) 
Where. Ut =.initial effective StreSS, Uz ~ Ul + !:i'u, and n = 0, {, 2; 3, , . '. ~ The Solution provides the 
instantaneous value of the pore water pressure u at any specified' time and point in the soil mass. The 
only part of Eq. (B.2.13) that is a function of the soil properties is'cv. 
. 
· · · 
You .can see that the solution is in terms of two dimensionless quantities, Z and T-or, as we 
wrote in Eq. (9.4), 
00 
u = (u2- ul) 2:ft(Z)fz(T) 
(9.4) 
n=O 
You will recall that the dimensionless quantity Tis called the time factor, and it is related to cv [Eqs. 
(9.5) and (9.6)] by 
· 
(' 
k(1 + e0 ) 
t 
T = cv-2 = 
. 
-2 
H dr 
avpwg 
H dr 
(B.2.14) 
In this equation H dr is the longest drainage path a drop of water has to follow in a compressible soil 
deposit to get to a free draining boundary. In Fig. B.2.1 you can see that the height of a doubly drained 
layer is 2H. Therefore the drainage path H dr is equal to H. If we had only a singly drained layer, we 
, would consider only the top half of Fig. B.2.1; and again the drainage path would be the height of H. 
The consolidation ratio U z relates the change in volume at depth z and time t to the ultimate 
volume change at depth z, or 
volume change at depth z and time t 
u = ____ 
:=:--_,.---:-____ 
_ 
z 
ultimate volume change at depth z 
(B.2.15) 
784 
Appendix B.2 
Derivation and Solution of Terzaghi's One-Dimensional Consolidation Theory 
The change in volume, of course, ineans a change in void ratio, or, as we wrote in Eq. (9.7), 
U _ e1- e · 
z-
--
' .. , . , el - ez 
'· 
(9.7) 
'"i 
The changes'inv~id' ratio can be related to the stress incre~ent through the coefficient~f consolida-
tion av. These relationships are shown in Fig: :8.2.2: Because; in one-dimensional consolidation, the 
initial excess hydrostatic (pore) pressure is equal to the increment of applied stiess,Eq. (9.7) becomes 
u'- u]. 
Uz ,= ui- u]. 
u' -
u]. 
u; - u 
. 
u 
__ .:.:.=--=1--· 
·-Au' · 
u; 
· 
u; 
(9.8) 
Now we can write our solution-to' the consolidation ~quation [ECJ.. (9.4)] as in Eq. (9.9), or 
. 
. . 
' 
' 
. 
00 
- Uz =, 1-. 2-ft(Z)fz(T) . 
., · · 
n=O 
·-
· 
· · 
, (9.9) 
This equation is shown graphically in Fig. 9.3, and we explain in Chapter 9 how to use this figure to obtain 
the amount of consolidation at any depth and time in the consolidating layer (see Examples 9.1 and 9.2). 
Generally in engineering practice we are interested in the volume change of the entire soil layer. 
So we want the average degree or percent consolidation U, which is defined as 
'> 
< 
; 
· 
total volume change at time t 
U(%) = 
. 
. 
X 100(%) 
, 
ultimate total volume change 
(B.2.16) 
For one~dimensional compression, the change in volume is, of course, equal to the change in height of 
' , the hlyer. To obtain the average degree' of consolidation over the entire layer we have to find the area 
under the' curve corresponding to a given time factor in Fig. 9.3; this is shown in Fig: 9.S. Mathematically, 
U(%) = averagevalueofUz,or 
. 
·-
' - . ' 
· ... · 
· . 
,. 
. 
' 
. 
'. 
' 
. 
' 
or from Fig. B.2.1, 
,, 
Rewriting~ 
or 
2H 
'LV z dz __ 1_ { 
U z dz 
U(%) = 2if- 2H}o 
rzii 
U(?o),= Jo 
xy 
{2H 
Jo 
xz 
•): 
.[
2H[(;2 ~ ;D ·_ u] dz . ,, ' 
(ui- u1)2H 
X 100 
·. 
'' 
: ·.· 
· 
· 
2H 
· · 
·. 
· 
~(%) =2H(:io~_ul)i [~ui ~- u~)- u] dz __ 
. 
: . 
. :· 100 
[l2H . 
.[2H J 
U(%) = 2H( , 
·,) 
. 
(ui- ul) dz 
u dz 
· 
uz - u1 
· o · · 
o 
(B.2.17) 
(B.2.18) 
(B.2.19) 
(B.2.20) 
· .. , 8.2.3 . Mathematical Solution 
785 
Substituting the value of u from Eq. (B.2.13) into Eq. (B.2.20) and integrating, we obtain: 
( o/ ) 
_ 
100 
[ ( 
1 
. 
1 ) 2H 
( 
1 
1 ) ; 
4 
U 
1o 
-
2H( 
1 
1 ) 
cr2-ul 
-
cr2-cr1 £./(2 
1) 
cr2 ~ Ut 
n=O n + 
'lT 
(2n + 1)71" ( 
2H 
) 
X (-1) cos 
2H 
z (2n + 1)71" 
(
(2n + 1)271"2 )/2HJ 
X exp-
4 
T 
0 
(B.2.21) 
Putting in the limits, we obtain . 
{ 
oo 
4 
[(2n + 1)271"2 ]} 
U(%) = 100 1- L;( 
)2 2(-1)(-1- 1) X exp-
4 
. T 
n=O 2n + 1 71' 
· 
(B.2.22) 
or 
(B.2.23) 
This solution is for the special case of constant or linear initial hydrostatic excess pressure and is 
. valid for all values of U. Solutions for other initial pore pressure distributions; are provided by 
Taylor (1948) and Leonards (1962), but the differences are negligible for practical purposes. The 
.. summation indicated by Eq. (B.2.23) can be carried out once and for all and tabulated (Table 9.1) or 
shown graphically (Fig. 9.5). Casagrande (1938) and Taylor (1948) give the following approximations 
for Eq. (B.2.23), which are useful to know: 
ForU < 60%, 
· 
(9.10) 
ForU < 60%, 
, T = 1.781 - 0.933log (100 - U%) 
(9.11) 
For values of U > 60%, the series in Eq. (B .. ~.23) converges extremely rapidly, so that only the first 
term is significant. Therefore, letting n = 0, Eq. (B.2.23) becomes 
(B.2.24) 
Rearranging, Eq. (B.2.24) gives Eq. (9.11). 
.~: 
~· ) 
A P P E' N · D \(x. 
B 
3 
\ 
Pore Pressure Parameters 
;· L • 
~ . ' ' 
; ; 
~ 
f' : 
l 
'l 
8.3.1 
DERIVATION OF SKEMPTON'S PORE PRESSURE EQUA"("ION •. 
', : 
' 
' 
I 
• • ( ~ ; 
/ 
The pore. pressure parameters (Sees. 12.17 and 13.3), first· defined by Skempton (1954), relate the 
change in pore water pressure to the change in total stress during undrained loading. 
' : · 
First, let's derive Eq.' (12.15). This can be done in several ways. One simple way is to assume for 
786 
a start that we have a triaxial specimen in equilibrium with the cell pressure a~ acting on it. Assume 
· for the moment that the soil skeleton is elastic and isotropiC, and that there are both air and water in 
'the voids (thatis, S < 100%). Now, when we apply a sriui!rchange in the cell pressure ·Aac to the 
sample,· by Terzaghi's principle of effective stress [Eq; (6.8)], the change in effective stress is 
i 
·-, 
' 
Aa~ = Aac- Au 
The volume change A V caused by this change in stress is 
,, 
·'-
' 
AV- CskVa(Au~) = C~kVa(Aac- Au) 
where Csk is the compressibility of the soil skeleton and V 0 is the original volume of the sample. 
As mentioned in Chapter 8; the mineral grains themselves are relatively incompressible, so any 
decrease in the volume of the soil skeleton results in a decrease in volume of the voids, or 
AV = -VvCv.Au = -nV0CvAu : :'; 
(B.3.1) 
where n is the porosity, and Cv is the compressibility of the pore fluid (air + water). If S = 100%, 
then Cv = Cw, the compressibility of water. If we allow no drainage to occur, then these two changes in 
volume must be equal, or 
-nV0CvAu = -CskVa(Aac- Au) 
Solving for the ratio Au!Aac, we obtain Eq. (12.15): 
Au 
Aac 
1 
1 
· nC = B 
+ __ 
v 
Csk 
(12.15) 
8.3.1 
Derivation of Skempton's Pore Pressure Equation 
787 
where Au c = Au3. We discussed in Sec.12.17 the values of B for different soils and test conditions (see 
Table 12.8).A more general way to obtain Eq. (12.15) is shown later in this appendix. 
· 
• ' We can follow a similar development for the change in pore pressure due to the change in the 
principal stress difference or shear stress in our triaxial test specimen in order to derive Eqs. (12.17 
through 12.19). Assume that the soil skeleton still behaves ·elastically; then the volume change caused 
by the change in effective stresses is 
AV = ~CskVa~(Aui + Au2 + Aaj) 
' . 
,. 
,',,. 
' 
; 
' 
' 
'. 
' 
The symbols were previously defined. For the common triaxial compression test, Au2 = Au3, so 
The coefficient 1/3 comes about because for elastic isotropic materials the volume change is due to the 
average of the changes in the three principal stresses. Now add and subtract 3 Au3 to the right-hand 
side of the equation, and invoke Terzaghi's principle of effective stress. We then obtain 
·., l 
As before, the decrease in voids is • 
.r 
!" 
(B.3.1) 
For undrained conditions, the two volumes must be equal. Solving for Au and noting that 
(12.15) 
we obtain 
','r 
t' 
A·u~ B[ Au3, ;:~(A~t•~ A~3)] 
.·,, 
.'·: ·' :. 
,,. \ 
--;' 
', 
·, 
' 
(B.3.2) 
Note that the coefficient 1/3 for the' stress differ~rice term is fo~ bla~ti~ iriat~dals arid t~iiixi~l compres-
sion conditions. If.we make a similar derivation fortria:dal extension conditions (!::..~2 ,:= Au1), we get 
• 
'·. 
' 
! 
' 
• ':• 
' 
' 
,' 
',, 
'' 
• 
' 
' 
(B.3.3) 
(Note that you have to add and subtract 2 Au3 in this case.) Thus for elastic soil skeletons, the pore 
pressure parameter in extension is twice that in compression.. . . 
. . . . 
Since soils in· general are inehistic materiills, Skempton (1954) replaced the two constants in 
Eqs. (B.3.2) and (B.3.3) by the coefficient A, so that 
' 
· · 
• · 
Au= B[A:~ ~: A(.iul- Au3,)J . , 
(12.17) 
788 
Appendix 8.3 <'Pore PressureParameters, ·;· 
. Often it is convenientto write Eq. (12.17)as .· 
l,; 
i 
llu:: B llu3 + A(ll;1 :_ llu3) 
(12.19) 
;'.j 
\!c', 
where A =:' BA: For saturated soils, we usually write Eq.' (12.17) as • 
" ~' ~ 
llu = ll?"3 + A( llu1 - llu3) 
(12.18) 
Other convenient ways to w;ite the pore pressur~ equation (12.17) are given by Skempton 
(1954). For tr.iaxial compression conditions, 
[
1 
. 
·· 
3A- 1 
] 
llu.= B 3(llu1 + 21lu3) + , ,, 3 
(llu1- llu3) 
(B.3.4) 
·: and for triaxial extension conditions, · 
·: -
'; i ~ ' .• 
~u.;, ~[~ (2~'u1 + ll~~) ~ 3A 3- 2 ( ~u1 _: ~;3)] ;; 
(B.3.5) 
These equations show that if soils behavedas perfectly elastic materials (that is, A = 113 in compres-
sion and A = 2/3 in extension), then the pore pressure would depend only on the average change in 
principal stress, which is the first part of Eqs. (B.3.4) and (B.3.5). 
· 
•j 
' 
' 
. 
. 
.:~· 
8.3.2 
DEFINITION OF Au1 AND Au3 FOR ROTATION OF PRINCIPAL STRESSES 
,. ;Law and Holtz {1978) showed that contradictory definitions of the pore pressure parameter A exist in 
the literature because of the lack of a consistent definition of principal stress increment for cases where 
the principal stresses rotate. They proposed the following system, to take care of any possible ambigu-
ities when the principal stresses rotate 90°. 
In this system, llu1 and Su3 are called the major andminor principal stress increments, respec-
tively. A principal stress increment is defined as the maximum or minimum normal stress increment 
.. T1 
imposed on a given stress' system. The sign convention is positive for compression and negative for ten-
sion. llu1 is the algebraically largest normal component of a given system of stress increments, and llu3 
is the algebraically snwllest normal component of that system. . . · ... · . . . . . . · 
. 
. 
. ; : . 'The 'advantage' ofthis sy~tem'is that the 'sire~s increment is ~ot ~~h~~cted iothe ~riginal stress . 
. '' .: Thusth~ direction''of Aui is independe!zt of the direction of the origimil or fi~al ~1 ,and so isllu3. This 
pointis illustrated in TableB.3.1, which shows some combinations of llu1 and llu3 being applied to 
· ' typical existing Stress systems rep.resented by U1 and U3. 
. 
8.3.3 
FORMULAS FOR PORE PRESSURE PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT 
STRESS PATH TESTS 
. ~ .. '. 
. : 
. 
. ... : <: 
,::. 
:-, . 
i; 
j 
~ • 
.. ·: 
To aid in calculating the correct value of the parameter A, Law and Holtz (1978) derived the appropriate 
. ,· expressions for A for the four,types ~ftriaxial stress path tests,AC,AE, LC,and LE (Secs.13.2 and 13.4). 
These are shown in Table B.3.2. The derivation of these expressions is shown in the following example. 
8.3.3 
Formulas for Pore Pressure Parameters for Different Stress Path Tests 
789 
TABLE B.3.1 
Examples Using the Proposed New Definition of Principal Stress Increments (units of stress are arbitrary, 
and axisymmetry in stress system is assumed) 
AUt 
Au3 
Stress 
Final Stress 
Initial Stress 
System 
Increment 
State 
Magnitude 
Direction 
Magnitude 
+ 
+ 
+ 
•v = Vertical: H = Horizontal. 
After Law and Holtz (1978). 
) 
i!: 
4 
0 
-1 ' 
' " 
: 
~ 
v• 
0 
H 
-2 
'H 
'-4 
TABLE B.3.2 Definition of Principal Stress Increments and Formulas for Pore Pressure Parameters 
for Various 'JYpes of Triaxial Tests 
Direction 
H" 
v 
v 
Test'JYpe 
AUt 
Au2 
Au3 
Formula for A 
Equation 
Compression test: 
Axial compression, AC 
Auv 
0 
0 
A.c = Au/Auv 
13.9 
Lateral extension, LE' 
0 
Auh 
Auh 
Ale = 1 - Au!Auh 
13.10 
Extension test: 
Axial extension, AE 
0 
0 
Aae = 1 - Au!Auv 
13.11 
Lateral compression, LC 
Auh 
Auh 
A1c = Au!Auh 
13.12 
After Law and Holtz (1978). 
790 
Appendix 8.3: : Pore Pressure Parameters 
· . , 
':.".Example 8.3.1 
. <~ 
Given: 
-·:),,l. 
An axial extension (AE) triaxial test is conducted on a saturated clay. 
~ ·,' 
· ·· · Required: 
. 
Determine the correct formula for the pore .. pressure parameter A. 
Solution: In the AE test, the lateral (cell) pressur~ remains constant while the axial stress is decr~ased. 
Therefore 
· 
' · 
: 
. 
· 
· 
.. 
\ 
~d-1= az= 0,. 
~a3 =~a-~ 
:.1 
According to the definition of principal stress increments proposed by Law and Holtz (1978);·~av is 
negative, since it decreases. Thus it is algebraically the smallest component of the stress increment. Sub-
stituting these definitions for ~a1 and ~a3 into Eql (12.17) (assume B.~:.~), we obtain 
; 
. ~u: 
_.:_ 1-'· -
Aae -! 
~av 
8.3.4 
PROOF THAT Aac = Ate AND Aae = A1c 
. 
(13.11). 
It was shown by example in Sec. 13.4 that the pore p~essure parameter A was the same in axial com~ 
pression (A C) as in lateral extension (LE). It was inferred that A in axial extension (AE) was identiCal 
to A in lateral compression (LC). The statements are true even though these sets of tests have different 
total stress paths. The proof of this contention was given by Law and Holtz (1978) .. 
. 
We first define p' .":" ( ai + a))/2 as the av~rage of the major and minor effective stresses, and 
q = (a1 -
a 3)ti as half the principal stress difference (Sec. 13.2). We can express the slope at any 
point on the effective stress path ina p'-qdiagram as 
· 
( 
dq.) 
d(a1 - a3) 
. dp' . =d(a1 +,(T3 -;:-2u) 
For the axial compression case da1 = dav and da3 = 0. Hence 
(:;,)ac =.--
1 
' 
,. 
. 
-
For the lateral extension case da1 = 0 and da3 = da1. Hence 
(:;,\_ 
-1 
1 
1 - 2(1 ;-Ale) 
1- 2A/e. 
8.3.5 
Derivation of the Henkel Pore Pressure Equation and .Coefficients 
791 
Since both tests have the same effective stress paths (see, for example, Example 13.6) then 
Hence 
(13.13) 
Similarly, we can show that 
·Aae =''Ate 
,. 
,; 
;: '-
(13.14) 
s.3.s 
oERIVATioN·a'F THE HENKEi PORE PREssuRE EQUATION AND coEFFICIENTs1 
Assume an element of soil in equilibrium with stresses a 1, a 2 , and a 3 on it. When we apply stress incre~ 
, · 
ments Aa1, Aa2; and Aa3 to the element, an excess pore pressure Au and a resulting change in effec-
tive stresses occur. So, 
Aai = Ad1: :..._ Au, 
'A~2 = .Aa2 -
Au, Lla3 ,;, Aa3 .:.. Au · 
1 J1 .-;. 
;!' 
1 •• 
Assume ·for. now i that . the 'soil· skeleton. is· elastic and· isotropic. Thus it. has a bulk modulus 
Ksk = E/3(1 - 2v ). Since the definition. of bulk modulus is the volumetric effective stress 
~ (ai + az + a)) dividedby the volumetric, strain~ V/V 0 , 
1 
. 
' 
' 
- (a' + a' + a' ) 
3 
1 . 
2. 
. 3 
Ksk ~ 
AVIV 
.. 0 
E 
3(1-:2v), 
Rearranging, the volumetric strain of the soil skeleton is 
/ 
AV . : 
'• 
. . 
(ai + a2 + a3) 
; ' .v:- = el + ez + e3 = Csk 
3 
where Csk = 11 Ksk is called the compressibility of soil skeleton, and e1, e2 , and e3 are principal strains. 
Since E and v are difficult to determine for a real soil, the general coefficient Csk is more practical 
(Scott, 1963). Now, if we state this equation in terms of total stress changes and pore pressure, we have 
AV _ 
· (A~1 + Aaz + Aa3 
)· 
V- Csk 
.. 
3 
-Au 
0 
. 
. 
This equation states that the volumetric strain is a function only of the change in mean effective 
stress for a linearly elastic material( or, in fact, for any riondiiative, no:voluine-change-during-shear 
. material). However,'soils do change volume due to.the change in shear stress,' iu}d this is accounted for 
by an empirical correction factor, Dl AT oct I, where IAT oct I is the absolute value of the increment in T oct· 
Thus we have 
.,. 
(B.3.6) 
'•,. 
i. 
1 After Scott (1963) and Perloff and Baron (1976). 
792 
Appendix 8.3 ' . Pore Pressure Parameters 
· : 
- ~ ' 
~ : . ; ' . 
because, by definition from continuum mechanics,•: · 
_.;j •• .:·· 
j ;1 
. 
ul + u2 + u3 
,Uoct:=' 
3 
(13.16) 
and 
1v . . . · 2 
2 
·· 
2 
Tact== 3 (ul- u2) + (u2- u3) + ((T3.- u1) .. 
(13.17) 
As Perloff and Baron (1976) point out, since T oct is a nonlinear function of the principal stress differences, 
we cannot in general calculate it directly from the stress increments. Instead; we must determine ~Tact 
from the difference ( T octh - ( T octh · 
... · Now, as we did in Sec. B.3.1, let us look at what happens to the voids. The volumetric strain in the 
voids is · · ' · ' · · · · 
· . : 
· 
· 
· · · 
· · .. ; 
· · ·· · ·' .. ' ' : ' ' · '· ' 
· · .. ' · · · ·. 
'·· · • 
~Vv'~ -Cv~it 
. Vv 
(B.3.1) 
where Cv is the compressibility of the ~oids: andVv, the voh.l~~ of voids, is ~V0 • If S = 100%, then 
Cv = Cw, the compressibility of water.And if no change in volume is permitted (that is, undrained con-
ditions prevail), then setting Eq. (B.3.1) equal to Eq. (B.3.6) and solving for ~u. we have 
Au~. · •· (c,j [(~;ro) + ,!'~tAT,.ll 
1+ n -c . . 
sk 
· 
(B.3.7) 
Since soils are not linearly elastic materials, as before we use empirical coefficients which are to 
be determined by experiment, 
1 
B = 
nCv 
(12.15) 
and 
.,; 
So, Eq. (B.3.5) becomes 
1 + ·-
Csk 
D 
•a = Csk 
(B.3.8) 
~U = B(~~oct + ~T~ct) 
(13.15) 
The co'efficient 'a is the Henkel pore'pressure pa~a~eter.' 
.• . . . '. .. 
. . . . . .. · . . . ' ' 
. 
. . 
Althougli this derivation forEq: (13.l5) is nither elegant mathematically;it m~y be easier to sim-
piy' write the equation as< 
. . ' . . . 
. . . 
. 
. . . 
' 
. . ' 
' 
.. 
. 
-
:-·.·., :·.' .. ·,\. ':· 
;;;;l 
. 
! 
·l 
. 
~U1 + ~U2 + ~U3 av 
2. 
2 
. 
. . '2' 
~u = B 
3 
+ 3 
(~u1- ~u2). + (~u2- ~u3) + (~u3- ~u1) 
(B.3.9) 
This latter formulation is more consistent with the definition of principal stress increments presented 
in Sec. B.3.2. With this definition, a systematic separation of the stress increments from the initial and 
final stress states is possible. 
· 
· 
· 
8.3.5 Derivation of the HenkeL Pore Pressure Equation and Coefficients 
793 
Equations (12.17) and (B.3.9) are useful, since.they allow. the separation of pore pressure effects 
observed in soils into two components-those due to (1) the change in mean or average stress, and 
(2) the change in shear stress. 
The Henkel parameter a is, like the. Skemptori parameter A, nonlinear and must be determined 
for each stress path. It is also very dependent on strain, on the magnitude of a 2 , on the overconsolida-
tion ratio, and on material properties such as anisotropy. The parameters a and ,B. are, for general 
changes iri total stress. They enable the engineer to predict the pore pressure if the clia'nges' in the total 
stresses are known or can be estimated; therefore, they can be very useful in engineering practice. 
Sometimes in the geotechriicalliterature the Henkel parameters are denoted by the symbol a, 
where a = a/3. In this case, Eq. (B.3.9) would be 
~a1 + ~a2 + ~a3 
~ I 
. . 2 
· 
2 
2 
~u = B 
3 
+a v (~a1 -
~a2). + (~a2- ~a3) + (~a3- ~al) 
(B.3.10) 
This is the way Henkel (1960) originally wrote his equation, but with the symbol a for a. Thus Henkel's 
original a or a was one-third our a. Later Henkel and Wade (1966) suggested the notation used herein, 
along with Eq:{13.15).; 
· 
· 
' 
It is often useful to be able to convert between the Henkel parameter a and the Skempton para-
meter A. For the special case of triaxial compression(AC), a 2 = a 3 and S = 100%(B = 1), we have 
• 
• 
j 
i 
' 
' 
' 
,' 
. 
• 
' 
l 
and 
so [Eq. (13.15)] 
but since ~a2 = ~a3 = 0 (constant cell pressure) and ~a1 = ~av, 
'; 
V2 
~u = (.!. + a~)~a 
3 
3 
v 
; :; 
' 
' 
' 
' 
From Eq. (12.17) and for triaxial compression conditions in Table B.3.2, we know that Aac = ~u!~av. 
Therefore, 
(13.18a) 
For the lateral extension (LE) test, a 2 = a 3 , and Eq. (13.15) becomes 
But since ~a1 = 0 and ~a2 = ~a3 = ~ah, 
~u =?:._~ah-a Vz ~ah =(?:..'-a Vz)~ah 
3 
3 
3 
3 
794 
Appendix 8.3 · · 'Pore Pressure Parameters 
; ; 
;'l; 
·.·From Eq. (12.17) imd Table B.3.2iwe knowthat A1,;·=1·- l!!.u!ISa/,: Therefore, 
::; '"' 
' . ;-: 
.. , ,, 
2 
Vz 
1 
Vz 
· ·A ·- 1 - -+ a-- - + a-
-
: •. 
le-e:-
3 
, 3 - 3 
-3 " 
-
; . 
; • ~.. 
', • 
r 
(13.18b) 
'which is the same as E({ (13.18~):This result sho~ld notlJe'uiiexpected;·since we havealready shown 
' thatAac = Aze [Eq. (13.13)]. . . 
. • ' 
' 
·. 
:, : ' . · ' · ·, 
· . 
i · · ·· 
' 
. 
. 
For the case of axial extension (AE), ai = al; and Eq. (13:15) .becomes 
'' I 
~-
' 
' 
' 
f 
' 
-' C; •, : 
~ 
0 
\ , 
• 
-
, • ; ; ' 
•; 
0 ' ~ •• 
, 
: \ 
:',J , 
I : 
; c 
·1 
_· . . 
:,. '.' -vz': .·· .-,::.' ,, ; ' ..... 
l!!.u = 3(21!!.a1 + l!!.a3) + a3(1!!.a1-;- ~a3). 
But since l!!.a1 = l!!.az = 0 and l!!.a3 = l!!.av, 
' 
' ~ 
. 
. 
i ·. 
' : { ' : ' Vz 
. ' '(1 
V2) ' 
,l!!.u = 31!!.av ~a71!!.~v ~' ~~aT. Sav 
; . . -
.' 
. 
' 
' ' 
. 
~. 
' 
' 
./ 
Fiom Eq. (12.17) and Table B.3.2, we kriowth~t Aae,...; 1 ·::..'t!..utl!!.'av. Therefore, 
' 
:_ ': 1 
\12 
2 
Vz 
A 
= 1 - - + a- = - + a-
ae 
3 
3 
3 
3 
(13.19a) 
. For the lateral compression (LC) test, a 2 = a 1, so Eq. (13.15) becomes 
1 
Vz 
l!!.u = 3(21!!.a1 + l!!.a3) + a3(1!!.a1- l!!.a3) 
Since l!!.a1 = l!!.a2 = l!!.ah and aa3 == o,·we have 
- ' ~u ~ (j +-~ ~)l!!.ah 
• 
• 
' 
J 
From Eq. (12.17) and Table B.3.2, we know that Azc = l!!.u!l!!.ah. Therefore 
',,'; 
Azc = ~ + \12 
3 
a~ 
' 
3 
·:·.I, 
(13.19b) 
As expected [Eq. (13.14)], Aae = Azc· 
Note that for elastic materials, Aac = Aze = 1/3 and Aae =;= Azc- = 2/3, and a = 0. In general, since 
Aac4 A 1c, then the a param~ters are not necessarily the same for the two ~ases, primarily because the 
compressibility of the soil skeleton Csk is not the same in compression as in extension. 
,(,, 
. 
•;( 
·,' 
'',.;• 
A P P E N D 
X 
c 
·rhe Method of Fragments 
' 
1.: 
' 
' 
The method offragm(mts (Sec. 7.7.3) presents a useful and r~pid, although approximate, analytical 
design method for the solution of confined flow problems~ After you learn the procedure, many cases 
may be investigated in little more than the time it usually takes to assemble paper, pencils, and erasers 
for drawing flow nets. The method originated with P~tvlovsky (1956) and was brought to the attention 
of the western world by Harr (1962). Its basic assumptionis that the equipotentiallinesatselected crit-
ical points in a flow net are vertical and that they divide the flow net into fragments. Table C.1 summa-
rizes fragment types and form factors. 
Perhaps the best way to illustrate the procedure is by an example. If you are interested in the 
theory behind the method, consult Harr (1962 and 1977). 
· 
Example C.1 
Given: 
The dam with the same data as in Example 7.15 (shown in Fig. Ex. C.1a). 
FIGURE Ex. C.1a 
30m 
T l 
I 
I 
:I 
. I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
® 
T=28m 
., 
00 
L = 40m 
·.! 
I 
I' 
® 
I 
·' 
I 
T= 30m 
'' 
I, 
I 
I 
I , I 
0?>'2 
795 
796 
Appendix C 
.The Method of Fragments 
TABLE C. 1 Summary of Fragment 'JYpes and Form Factors 
Fragment 'JYpe 
Illustration 
Form Factor, <I> (his head loss through fragment) 
I 
r-----L--1 
<I>=!: 
a 
~~~~t~r~*i;l~[I 
II 
. 
hm7T 
I£= 2KTm 
See also Fig. C.1 and Table C.2 
III 
. <I>= .!.(kh)· 
' ' :. 2. Q• ·, 
·.• See also Fig. C.2 and Table C.2 
~ ; 
·,· 
'> 
·~b~ 
·II1 
s 2:0 b: 
' . <1>:·= ~~(~: ~)-· 
b;;:;,: s: 
.<I>-~ I~ ( i + ~) + b ; s 
~ 
~'+---- b 
·' >j 
·I 
... .! ........... : 
v 
·L s 2s: 
. <I> = 2ln (1 + .!::...) ·· 
\ 
2a 
: L 2: 2S: · (. s) (L.- 2s) 
<1>=2ln 1+;-
+ -T-
Fragment JYpe 
Illustration 
VI 
VII 
VIII 
IX 
'After Harr (1962, 1977). 
,,, 
Required: 
: '\ 
t-
.• C. The Method of Fragments 
797 
Form Factor; <ll (his head loss through fragment) 
:L>s'.+s":" 
'.·.· 
· ·• _ :;,. ·'[( 
... s')(' '. !:...)] 
L- (s' + s") 
, .<1>- In . 
1 +a' 
l+·a" 
+ 
T 
' 
,' 
' 
' 
' 
•, 
L = s' ·.t s": 
<ll .=In J(l +::)( 1
1+ ::) J 
L < s' + s" 
where 
• .. • 
· 
·L+'(s''-·s")·'· 
: b' = --'-------'-
' 
·. 
' .2 
' 
L -'-· (s' ·_ s") · 
b" = --'------'-
'2 
<ll ~ _2:_!:_ 
hl + h2 
ht- h~ 
Q = k---z£ 
a2 
( 
a2 + h2) 
Q = k. - -
1 + In-
... -. -
· cot f3 · · · 
: 
· a2 
By means of the method of fragments, compute: 
a. The quantity of seepage loss under the dam when k = 20 X 10-4 cm/s, per metre of dam. 
b. The exit gradient (at point E). 
c. The pressure distribution on the base of the dam. . 
d. Compare these values with those obtained from the flow net in Example 7.15 .. 
798 
Appen~ix.C · , Jhe Method of Fragments 
Solution:· 
-
-
' 
; 
a. Divide the flow system into fragments. The critical points chosen are ~the bottoms of the 
sheet piles. Refer to Table C.1 and review the fragments. The heavy lines represent impervi-
. ous boundaries, which can be in vertical or horizontal directions. You choose the fragments 
· to match the particular boundary conditions of your problem. Notice how the definitions of 
s imd Tare used. Their values are shown in Fig. Ex. C.1a. Tile yertical, dashed (equipotential) 
lines separate the flow regime into three fragments, as shown circled in the figure. Clearly, 
, the flow; q through each fragment must be the same and is stated by Eq. (7 .19e ). However, in 
·. the method of fragments this equation is changed slightly to 
· Nr .
.. khm 
= khL-.·=-
q · 
· :N d 
. <I>m 
·' 
(C.1) 
where hm is the head loss in the nith: fragfilent, where in = 1, 2, 3, ... , n, and <I>m is the 
dimensionless form factor for the mth fragment. The form factor is equal to Na!Nr. 
In this example hL = 12m = 2:h;,, that is,the sum of the head loss in each fragment. 
Also, since the flow is equal in each fragment and is equal to the total flow, we have 
or 
and, fi~ally, the fl~~ i's 
',\-. 
q 
. 
Nr 
... 
Nr 
- Nr 
k = h1 N a = hz N a = h3 N a 
q 
h1 
hz 
h3 
h 
k = <l>1 = <I>z ."':' <l>3 = 2: <I> 
kh 
q=-n-
.. 2: <I> 
m=l 
(C.2) 
(C.3) 
(C.4) 
•· The next step is t~ d;fine the types of fragments for our problem and to determine the 
value of the form factors <I> for each fragment. Nine general types of fragments are shown in 
Table C.1, where the heavy lines represent impervious boundaries. Other fragments are also 
available in the literature. Also given are 'the values of <I> in terms of the geometry of each 
problem. If you study Fig. Ex. C.1a, you can see that fragments 1 and 3 are type II but frag-
····· ..... -
. 
_ment 2 is a type V fragment. Had the sheet piles been of different lengths, then fragment 2 
would be a type VI instead of a type V fragment. 
', , • 
Next, we have to determine the form factors for our two types of fragments. For type II 
fragments, we see from Table C.1 that <I> = KIK'. Both K and K' are functions of m, which 
is defined as 
·· · · · · 
· 
.•' 
!>' 
; ; .< •' 
where. s = depth of the sheet pile, and 
T = thickness of the soil layer. · 
(C.S) 
· ~ '; C: The Method of Fragments 
799 
Substituting the values for s andTof our example into Eq. (C.5), we find that 
• 
'IT ,• s ... . 'IT 12 . 0 588 
m =sm--.= stn-- = . 
· 
2T' 
· 
2 30. 
' 
: 
i' 
: ' 
The value of KIK' can be found from Table C.2. Form= 0.588, m2 ~0.345, so KIK' is 
equal toabout 0.865 (by interpolation), which equals .ci>1• By inspection, ci>1 is also equal to 
cl>3 • These values are tabulated in Table Ex. C.l. 
. 
. 
. 
TABLE Ex. C.1 
Fragment 
Type 
<I> 
/1 
II 
K!K' = 0.865 
2 
:v .. 
1.598 
3 
II 
. K!K' = 0.865 
For fragment 2, which isatype V, we need to compare Land 2s to obtain cl>. For our 
example, L' = 40 m and 2s =' 20m. Since L > 2s, ci> is given by 
· ci> = 2 ln(c+ ~) + L - 2s 
·· 2 .·· 
·· 
a 
T 
21 ( 1 . 10) 
40 - 2 X 10 
= 
n 
+ -
+ ----,----
. 
18 
28 
= 0.884 +0.714 = 1.598 
•.,· 
' 
.,; 'l' r 
Note that the distance ~ = 18 m is the distance fro in the bottom imp~rvious' b~i.mdary to the 
bottom end of the sheet pile. 
~ 
. The quantity of flow is found from Eq. (C.4), 
; • . 
kh 
2~ .. x:10~~(~)ci2m):: 
q =, ± 
ci> = 
0.865 + 1.598 + 0.865 
per metre 
m=l 
;=) :21' x 10~5 m2/spei metre of dam . "·: · . 
-
.·' 
• : 
<.; ~' 
'. ; £ 
; ; ,·. 
= 8.65 X l0-3.m3/s for a dam 120 mlong 
'' 
~ 
i' ' 
. I 
·.; 
This compares satisfactorily with the vahte of 8.31 X 10-3 m3/s obtained in Example 7.15. 
An alternative 'way to determine the form factor is to use Fig. C.l. Since siT = 
12/28 = 0.4, find 1/(2cl>) equal to 0.575 forb!'f = 0. Solving for cl>, we obtain 0.87, which is 
close to our previously determined value of 0.865. 
800 
Appendix C - · The Method of Fragments 
FIGURE C.1 
Relationship 
1 
between form factor <P and srr 
ratio for type II and type Ill 
· .. ' fragments (after Harr, 1977). '· 
1 
2cf> 
b 
b 
H 
H 
~rr·• 
' 
:-..:: 
.\.--·-·-·--··•·-·--·-·-·-·r·-·--··--·--··-·--·--·-·•··-·-------·--·-
0.91 
. I · 
0.4~-
.· 
VooV I' ~~~-~ I 
I 
I 
·o.3~ 
1.50 
0.2 
\j• 
0.1 1-·--·---,c ... ) .. :._:; ______ , _____________ , _________ , ___________ <----··--·-·•·--·--·•·-·-·-·--·~----·--·•--~ ---· 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
s 
·:r 
b. Computation of the exit gradient iE at pointE is easy. From Table C.l, fragment type II, we 
find the formula for the exit gradient is· 
. 
' 
' 
hTI 
iE ~ 2KTm 
(C.6) 
where the value of in is from Eq.(C.5) and eq~als 0.588; the value of his the headloss in the 
third (exit) fragment. The value o(K is found in Table C.2 for m2 = 0.345; interpolating, 
K = 1.741. The value of h to use in Eq; (C.6) isthehead loss in the third fragment, where the 
·water exits, and it is from Eq. (C.3). 
ci>jh 
: O.S65X lim= 3.12~ 
h3 = n- =. , 
3.328 : 
. : ~cl> ., :· 
(C.7) 
•, ,: m=l • 
'(,The Method of Fragments 
801 
TABLE C.2 
Values of Parameters Used for 'fYpes II and III Fragments Described in Table C.l 
0.000 
0.001 
0.002 
0.003 
0.004 
0.005 
0.006 
0.007 
0.008 
0.009 
0.01 
0.02 
0.03 
0.04 
0.05 
0.06 
0.07 
0.08 
0.09 
0.10 
0.11 
0.12 
0.13 
0.14 
0.15 
0.16 
0.17 
0.18 
0.19 
0.20 
K 
1.571 
1.571 
1.572 
1.572 
1.572 
1.573 
1.573 
1.574 
1.574 
1.574 
1.575 
1.579 
1.583 
1.587 
1.591 
00 
.. 4 .. 841 
4.495 
4.293 
4.150 
4.039 
• -3.949 
:. 3.872 
3.806 
3.748 
3.696 
3.354 
; 3.156' 
3.016 
2.908 
1.595 ' ':; 2.821 . 
1.599 
2.747 ' 
1.604 
2.684 
1.608 
2.628 
2.578 
2.533 
2.493 
2.455 
2.421 
2.389 
2.359 
2.331 
' 
12 
m ·. 
0.000. 
00 
1.000 
0.325 
. 3.08 
0.999 
0.349 . ,.· 
' 2.86 
. ' 0.998 
~ '0.366 
2.73 
0.997 
' 0.379 . 
2.64 
0.996 
0.389 
. 2.57 
0.995 
0.398 
2.51 
0.994 
0.406 
2.46 
0.993 
0.413 
2.42 
0.992 . 
0.420 
2.38 
0.991 
0.426 
2.35' 
0.99 
0.471. 
2.12 
0.98 . 
0.502 
1.99 
0.97 
0.526 
. 1.90 
0.96 
0.547 
1.83 
0.95 
0.27 
0.28 
0.29 
0.30 
0.31 
0.32 
0.33 
0.34 
0.35 
0.565 
0.582 
0.598 
0.612 
0.625 
0.638 
1.77 . 
1.72 
1.67 
1.63 
1.60 ' 
0.94. . 
0.36 
0.93 
. 0.37 
0.92 
0.38 
0.91 
0.39 
0.90 ' 
•' 0.40 ' 
1.57 
0.89 
' 0.41 
0.650 . 
1.54 
0.88 
0.42 
0.662 
1.51 ·. 
0.87 
' 0.43 
0.674 
'1.48 
. 0.86 
0.44 
0.684 
1.46 
'0.85 
0.45 
0.695 
1.44 '. 
0.84 • 
0.46 
0.706 
' 1.42 
0.83 
0.47 
K 
1.665 
1.670 
1.675' 
1.680 
1.686 
1.697 
1.702 
1.708 
1.714 
1.720 
1.726 . 
1.732, 
1.738 
1.744 
K' 
2.235 
2.214 
2.194 
2.175 
2.157 
2.139 
2.122 
2.106 
2.090 
2.075 
2.061 
•2.047 . 
,2.033 
2.020 
2.088 
) 1.751. ' '; 1.995 
1.757 
... '1.983 
K!K' 
0.745 
0.754 
0.763 
0.773 
0.782 
0.791 
0.800 
0.808 
0.817 
0.826 
0.834 
0.843' 
. 0.852 
0.860 
0.869 
, .. 0.877 
0.886 
. 1.764 ,; . 1.972 .. 
o:895 
. i.77i :' '"i.96i ' 
0.903 
1.778 
1.785 
1.950 
1.939 
0.911 
0.920 
1.792 
1.929 
0.929 
. 1.799 : 
1.918 
0.938 
1.806 
1.909 
0.946 
1.814 
1.899 
0.955 
1.822 
1.890 
0.964 
1.829 
1.880 
0.973 
1.612 
1.617 
1.621 
1.626 
1.631 
1.635 
1.640 
1.645 
1.650 
1.655 
1.660 
2.305 
'0.716 
1.40 . 0.82 
0.48 
1.837 
1.871 
1.863 
1.854 
0.982 
0.991 
1.000 
2.281 
0.726 
1:38' 
0.81 
0.49 
1.846 
2.257 
0.735. 
1.36 .. , 0.80· 
0.50 
'1.854 
.,m'? 
K'IK 
Substituting these values and m3 = 0.588 into Eq. (C.6);weobtain 
3.12 m(7r) 
..•. ·.· 
iE = 2 X 1.741 X 30m X 0.588.= 0 ·16 
K'/K 
1.34 
1.33 
1.31 
1.29 
1.28. 
1.26 
1.25 
1.24 
1.22 
1.21 
1.20 
1.19 
1.17 
1.16 
1.15 
1.14 
1.13 
1.12 
1.11 
1.10 
1.09 
1.08 
1.07 
1.06 
1.05 
1.04 
1.03 
1.02 
1.01 
1.00 
KIK' 
0.79 
0.78 
0,77 
0.76 
0.75 
0.74 
0.73 
0.72 
0.71 
0.70 
0.69 
0.68 
0.67 . 
0.66 
0.65 
0.64 
0.63 
0.62 
0.61 
0.60 
0.59 
0.58 
0.57 
0.56 
0.55 
0.54 
0.53 
0.52 
0.51 
0.50 
This result comparesweil with the value of 0.1ifou~d in Example 7.15. 
An alternative procedure to find the exit gradi~nt at point E is to use Fig. C.2. For this 
example, siT = 12/30 = 0.40; enter the graph and find (i E • s )I hm = 0.6. Solving for i E, we 
findthat 
· 
· 
· · · 
····~ 
· 
· 
. :. 
802 
Appendix C ... The Method of Fragments 
'' 
!) 
1.0 .----r----r---r-......,-----------, 
I---~~~~~~H~I 
. 
:-..: 
~ 
o,abf 
.. --~-~-
. ' 
0.6 
iEs 
~ 
11; 
0.4 
I' ·--~-----1-----L ___ [S 
-+--i-· crrrccrs~ 
,,. 
0.2 
FIGURE C.2 
Graph to evaluate 
the' exit gradient iE at pointE for 
a type II fragment for a given siT 
ratio (after Harr, 1977). 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
s 
"'f 
'' 
c. To compute the pressure distribution· under the dam, we assume that the head loss varies 
linearly from fragment 1 to fragment 3. 
· 
'· 
Compute the head loss per fragment: 
' 
' 
; 
! 
i•' 
~ 
<P =, <l>1 + <Pz + <l>3 
,1; '= 0.865 '+ 1.598 + 0.865 = 3.328 ' 
The head loss per fragment is given by Eq. (C.7),. · 
,. 
J, h 
' 
' 
' 
h
1 = _1_ = 0.865 X 12m = 3:12 m 
~<P 
.' 
3.328 
,; 
h.·= <l>zh ·= 1.598 X 12m = 5'76 
2 
' ~ 
<P 
3.328 
. 
m 
h3 = h1 due to symmetry 
-· 
·--· 
. 
Redraw the dam to scale and place the values of head at selected points (Fig. Ex. C.1b): 
At equipotential ·line A', the head loss is. h1 ·= 3.12 nii the head loss is therefore 
{. 
. 
:···,·'A' 
8.88m~ 
CD 
: 
~-; . I 
I 
I 
7.92m. 
'·V: · <> •• 
V. 
. 
F 
4.08m 
F' 
3.12m~ 
® 
I 
. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
® 
FIGURE Ex. C.1b 
>):: 
· .. C .The Method of Fragments 
803 
'h - h1 =: 12m - 3.12 m = 8.88 m .. Similarly, at equipotential line F', h2 = 5.76 m. There-
• fore the head at F' is 
h - h1 - h2 = 12 - 3.12 - 5.76 = 3.12 m 
Assuming that the head loss varies linearly from points A' - A - F - F', which is 
: equal to the total distance of 10 m + 40 m + 10 m ,...; 60 m, then the head loss per metre is 
! h2/60 m, .or 5.76 m/60 m · = 0.096 mlm. Thus the head at point A = the head at A' - 10m X 
0.096 m per metre, or 8.88 - 10 X 0.096 = 
7.92 m. Likewise, the head at F is 4.08 m. 
, 
. To this head we add the tail water head of 2m. The vertical uplift pressures may now be 
. computed; as-shown in Fig. Ex~ C.h::These values c·ompare almost exactly with those shown 
in Fig. Ex. 7.15. 
FIGURE Ex. C.1 c 
7.92 + 2 = 9.92 m 
d. Comparison of values of flow, exit gradient, a~d 'uplift pressures as determined by the two dif-
ferent procedures are summarized in Table EX. C.1b. If you look closely and round off, you will 
see that the two methods give about the same results. Analyzing with the MOP takes much less 
.. time than drawing a flow net or setting up and running a computational software solution! 
Example C.2 
.Given: 
TABLE Ex. C.1 b 
Parameter. 
q 
i£ 
Uplift press~res at A" 
Uplift pressui~s at Fa 
"In metres of water. 
Several cases of confined flow. 
Required: 
From Flow Net 
8.31 X 10-3 m3/s 
0.14 
9.96m 
6.04m 
Identify the fragm~nt types sh~wn in Fig.' Ex. C.2. ' 
From Method of Fragments 
8.65 X 10-3 m3/s 
0.16 
9.92 ni 
.. 6.08m 
804 
AppendixC , ···The Method'of Fragments 
1;,. 
Solution: 
. , ,. 
.I;' 
·! \. 
>f• 
FIGURE Ex. C.2a, b, c 
Example C.3 
Given: 
' )}.!.i:~~~; 
' ·~~?~~~:·:~;:.' 
l,' 
' 
' ~ ~ 
(a) 
~ 
(b) 
., ,, 
:·: i':·:;· 
··,:·:t.;·::.~ 
. Type II 
-~··· 
Ill 
~ 
=~ 
;:.:.: ... :·,~.~···''2 
lmper\ri~us 7 · ;;=:.:;::.:;; · . . . . 
I ; 
blanket 
~ 
·· .,. ·'<".··:. ·. 
· · · ., ,. ·. ·· : · 
···· .. · ... 
j··:~i~·=· .. ;·_~ 
Ill 
Ill 
II 
·~· 
(c) 
;_;;:.:.·{~~~: 
Type II 
VI 
II 
;~~;~{:;:~:~ 
,;i/{~:i:t 
An impervious(relative to the foundation) earth dam with the dimensions shown in Fig Ex. C.3 . 
. The dam is underlain by a sand and gravel foundation soil with a permeability of 25,,000 ft/yr. 
Required: 
· · Compute the length of an upstream impervious blanket to reduce the amount of seepage below 
the dam by one-half. 
· 
· · · ' ' 
_·· 
· 
· 
··· ' 
·_,.' 
· C The Method of Fragments 
805 
Elev.100 m 
/· 
a= 21m 
j 
f 
Aquiclude__} 
. Elev.135 m 
/, ,":· 
FIGURE Ex. C.3 
(Modified after U.S. Dept. of lnterior,:1987.) 
,, ,_; 
Solution: First, change the k from ft/yr to m/sec 
;··,_ 
. 
.: 
,·, ··: 
_ .. , 
ConsultingTableC.l, we find that the problem is a Type I fragment, with 
From Eq. (C.4), 
L · 75m 
·. ·. · . 
cp =. - = -- = 3.57 ... 
·. 
· 
a 
21m 
: 
Sand-gravel 
Avg. K- 25000 tvyr . 
To reduce the flow by one-hal(cl> would have to be doubled. Because the distance a (the thickness of 
the pervious layer) remains the same, the length L would have to double. Obviously we don't want to 
: make the dam larger, so the easiest way is to install an upstream impervious blanket with a length equal 
to 75 m, making the total length the water has to pass under the dam 150m. Now, can you imagine how 
long it would have taken you to do this problem using flow nets? . 
. 
. 
It should be obvio~s now that the method of fragmentsisapowerful imalytical and d~sign tech-
niq~e. Solutions to many complex problems can be found quickly, whereas to solve a series of complex 
problems by means of flow nets would require a large amount of time. Take, for example, the problem 
ilhistnited by Example C.2c. A practical design question is: How long should thedrainage blanket be to 
reduce the quantity of flow by one-third or to reduce the uplift pressures by one~hatf? Many trial and 
error flow net solutions would be required to solve the problem, whereas with the method of fragments 
the solution could be obtained directly! 
806 
References 
' 
" 
·' Abbreviations 
AASHTO -American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials 
AEG- Association of Engineering Geologists . 
ASCE -American Society ofCivil Engineers · 
ASTM -American Society for Testing a'nd Materials' 
BS -British Standard 
BSCE - Boston Society of Civil Engineers 
CFEM - Canadian Foundation Engineering Manual 
CGS - Canadian Geotechnical Society 
ESOPT- European Symposium on Penetration Testing 
FHWA- Federal Highway Administration 
· · 
IEEE - Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
ISRM- International Society for Rock Mechanics 
NCHRP- National Cooperative Highway Research Program· 
NGI- Norwegian Geotechnical Institute 
TRB- Transportation Research Board· . · 
USA WES - U.S. Army Waterways Experiment Station 
A 
AASHTO (2010). Standard Specifications for Transportation Materials and Methods of Sampling 
and Testing, 30th ed., American Association for State Highway and Transportation Officials, 
Washington, D.C. Part I, Specifications, 828 p.; Part II, Tests, 998 p. 
' 
ABDELHAMID, M.S. AND KRIZEK, R.J. (1976). "At Rest Lateral Earth Pressure of a Consolidating Clay," 
.. · 
.Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division,ASCE, Vol.l02, No. GT7, pp. 721-738. 
ABELEV, Y.M; (1957). ~'The Stabilization of Foundations of Structures on Loess Soils,'~ Proceedings of 
the Fourth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, London, 
, 
.. Vol.l, pp. 259-263. 
. . 
, , .. , , , . . .. 
. 
. . 
. 
, 
.. . . 
ADAMs; J. (1965). "The Engineering Behaviour of a Canadian Muskeg," Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Conference on Soil Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Montreal, Canada, Vol. 1, 
~~ 
. 
AL-HUSSAINI, M.M. (1977). "Contribution to the Engineering Soil Classifications of Cohesionless 
Soils," Final Report, Miscellaneous Paper S-77.:..21, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment 
· · Station, Vicksburg, MS, 61 p: 
· 
· · 
· 
AL-HussArNr; M,M;AND TowNSEND, F.C.(1975). "Investigation of K 0 Testing in Cohesionless Soils,'' 
···; Technical R~port S-75:...n; U.S. Army'Engineer Waterways Experiment 'station, Vicksburg, 
MS, 70 p. . : . , 
, . 
' , . . 
. . . , .. 
References 
807 
ALPAN, I. (1967). "The Empirical Evaluation of the Coefficient Ko and Ko~." Sofls.and Foundations, 
Vol.VII,No.1,pp.31-40. 
. 
.. ' 
'. 
AMERICAN SociETY FOR TESTING ANDMA'TERIALS [ASTM] (2010).Annual Book of Standards, Section 4, 
:Construction, Vol. 4.08, Soil and Rock (I): D 420-D 4914; NoL 4.09, Soil and Rock (II): 
D 4943-latest; Geosynthetics; West ·conshohocken,PA. · · 
. 
. 
AMERICAN· SociETY oF PHOTOGRAMMETRY (1960). Manual 'of Photographic· Interpretation, George 
Banta ·co., Inc.'; Menahsa,·WI, 868 p:·o 
· , ', -,, ·: · 
· 
ANAGNOSTOPOLOUS, A., SCHLOSSER, F., KALTEZOITIS, N., AND FRANK, R. (Eds.) (1993). "Geotechnical 
· 
Engineering of Hard Soils-Soft Rocks," Proceedings of mi International Symposium, Athens, 
Balkema, 2 Vols., 1697 p. 
· 
· 
· 
ANDERSLAND, O.B. AND LADANYI; B. (1994). An 'Introdu.ction to Frozen Ground Engineering, Chap-
man&Hall,NewYork,352p. 
. 
' 
. 
ANDERSLAND, O.B. AND LADANYr, B. (2004). Frozen Ground Engineering, 2nd ed.; Wiley; New York, 363 p. 
ARAVIN, V.I. AND NuMEiwv, s. (1955). ~·seepage Computations for Hydraulic.Structures," Stpoitef stvu 
iArkhitekture, Moscow (referenced in Harr, 1962). 
· 
· · • · · 
ARTHUR, J.R.F., BEKENSTEIN, S., GERMAINE, J.T., 'AND LADD, C. C. (1980). "St~ess Path Tests with Con-
trolled Rotation of PrinCipal Stress Directions," Labordtory Shear Strength of S~il, ASTM Special 
Technical Publication 740, R.N. Yong and F. C. Townsend (Eds.),American Society for Testing and 
Materials; pp. 516-540. 
' · 
ATKiNSON, J.H. (2007)~ The Mechanics of Soils and Foundations, 2nd ed., E & FN Spoil, London, 480 p. 
ATKINSoN; J.R' AND BRANSBY, P.L. (1978): The Mechanics of Soils (An Introduction to Critical State 
· • i I Soil Mech{mics), McGraw-Hill, 375 p. 
·· 
. 
· · 
· · . 
: 
· 
· 'A'ITERBERG,A. (1905). "Die Rationelle Klassifikation der Sande und Kiese," Chemiker-Zeitung, Vol. 29, 
pp. 195-198. 
. 
. 
·A'rrERBERG, A. (1911). "Lerornas Forhallande till Vatten; deras Plasticitetsgranser och' Plasticitets-
. · grader," ("The Behavior of Clays with Water, their Limits of Plasticity and their Degrees of Plas-
ticity"), Kungliga Lantbruksakademiens Handlingar och Tidskrift, Vol. 50, No. 2,pp. 132-158; 
also in Internationale Mitteilungen fiir Bodenkunde, Vol: 1, pp: 10.:.43 ("Uber die Physikalische 
· Bodenuntersuchung und tiber die Plastizitatder Tone"). 
· · · · · 
ATTERBERG, A. (1916). "Konsistenslaran-En Ny Fysikalisk Lara" ("Consistency Science-A New 
Physical Science"); The Swedish Journal of Chemistry, Vol. 28, pp. 29-37.' 
Aziz, F. (2000). Applied Alwlysis in Geotechnics, E& FN Spon, London, 753 p. 
Azzouz, A.S., KRIZEK, R.J., AND CoROTIS, R.B. (1976). "Regression Analysis of Soil Compressibility," 
Soils and Foundations, Vol.16, No.2, pp. 19-29. . 
. 
- .\ 
B 
BAGUELIN, F., JEZEQUEL, J.P., AND SHIELDS, D.H. (1978). [he Pressuremeter and Foundation Engineer-
. 
·. ing, Trans Tech Publications, Clausthal, Germany and Ae'dermarinsdorf, Switzerland, 617 p. 
BAILEY, T.D.,HARNEY,,M.D., A~DHOLTZ, R.D. (2005) .. "Rapid Assessment of Geotextile Clogging 
Potential Using the Flexible Wall Gradient Ratio Test," Proceedings of the GRI-18 Conference, 
ASCE;Austin,TX (CD~ROM). . .. ' 
·· _.. 
<, , 
. 
·· 
:. 
BALDI, G., BELLOrri;R., GHIC)NNA, V.N., JAMIOLKOWSKI, M.,LoPRESTI, D.C. (1989): "Modulus of 
' ·Sands from· CPT's ·and CMT's," ·Proceedings of the· Twelfth Internaiional· Conference on Soil 
·Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Rio de Janeiro, Vol.l,pp: 165-170. 
· · 
BALDI, G., BELLOTTI, R., GiiioNNA; v.;JAMioLKowsKI, M., MARcHETTI; s., AND PA.sotJELINI, E. (1986). 
"Flat Dilatometer Tests in Calibration Chambers," Proceedings of the In' Situ '86, Geotechnical 
Special Publication 6, ASCE, New York, pp.' 431-:446. . 
. 
. .. 
808 
References 
·. 
BALIGH, M.M. (1976). ~'Cavity Expansion in Sands with Curved Envelopes,~· Journal of Geotechnical 
Engineering Division, Vol.111, No. GT9, pp. 1108-1136 .. · 
.. 
. 
. 
. , . 
BARA, J.P. (1978). "Collapsible Soils and Their Stabilization," in Soil Improvement, History, Capabilities, 
and Outlook; Rep.ort by Committee on Placement and Improvement of Soils, Geotechnical Engi-
neering Division,ASCE, pp. 141-152. ' 
, , 
BARDEN, L. AND McGowN, A. (1973). "Microstructural Disturbance in Soft Clays Resulting from Site 
Investigation Sampling," Proceedings of the International Symposium on Soil Structure, Gothen-
burg, Sweden, 213 p. 
. 
· ... ·. 
BARDET, J.P. (1986). '~Bounding Surface Plasticity Model for Sands," Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 
ASCE, Vol.112, No.11, pp.1198..:.1217 . 
. BARDET, J.P. (1997). Experimental Soil Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, 583 p. 
BARTON, N., LIEN, R., AND LUNDE, J. (1974). "Engineering Classification of Rock Masses for the Design 
of Thnnel Support," Rock Mechanics, Vol: 6, No.4, pp.189-236. 
BECKER, D.E. (2001)~ "Site Characterization," Chapter 4inGeotechnical and Geoenvironmental Hand-
book, R.K. Rowe (Ed.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 69-105 . 
. . , BECKER, DE, CROOKS, J.H., BEEN, K., AND JEFFERIES, M.G .. (1987). "Work as a Criterion for Deter-
mining. In Situ and Yield Stresses in Clays,". Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 24, No. 4, 
pp. 549--:564. 
' 
. 
. .. : 
' 
' 
. BEGEMANN, H.K.S.PH. (1953). "Improved Methods of Determining Resistance to Adhesion by Sound-
. ing through a Loose Sleeve Placed Behind the Cone,': Proceedings of the Third International 
Confer;ence on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Zurich, Vol. I; pp. 2137217. 
BELLOTTI, R., GHIONNA, V., ]AMI OLKOWSKI, M., LANCELLOTTA, R., AND MANFREDINI, G. (1986). "Defor-
mation Characteristics of Cohesionless Soil in In Situ Tests,'' Proceedings of the In Situ '86, Geot-
echnical Special Publication No. 6,ASCE, New York, pp. 47-73. 
BENSON, C.H. AND BOSSCHER, P.J.. (1999). "Time-Domain Reflectometry (TDR) in Geotechnics; 
A Review," in W.A. Marr and C.E. Fairhurst (Eds.),Nondestructive and Automated Testing for Soil 
. and Rock Properties,ASTM Special Technical Publication 1350,ASTM; West Conshohocken, PA. 
BERRE, T. (1972). "Sammenheng Mellon Tid, Deformasjoner og Spenninger f~r Normalkonsolidarde 
Marine Leirer," Foredrager av den Sjiitte Nordiska Geoteknikerm¢tet, Trondheim, Norway; 
Nonyegian Geotechnical Institute. 
BESKOW, G. (1935). "Soil Freezing and Frost Heaving with Special Application to. Roads and Rail-
roads,'' The Swedish Geological Society, Series C, No. 375, 26th Yearbook No.3; translated by J.O. 
. 
, Osterberg, Northwestern University, 1947,145 p. 
·.. 
. 
· . 
.· 
. 
. 
BIENIAWSKI, Z.T. (1974). "Geomechanics Classification of Rock Masses and its Application in TUnnel-
ing," Proceedings of the Third International Congress on Rock Mechanics, International Society 
of Rock Mechanics, Denver, 11A, pp. 27-32. 
BIENIAWSKI, Z.T.(1976). "Rock Mass Classifications in Rock Engineering,'~ Proceedings of the Sympo-
sium on Exploration for Rock Engineering, Cape Town, Balkema, pp. 76-106. 
BIENIAWSKI, Z.T. (1988). "The Rock Mass Rating (RMR) System (Geomechanics Classification) in 
· ·· Engineering Practice," Rock Classification Systemsfor Engineering Purp~ses, ASTM Special 
. Technical Publication 984, L. Kirkaldale (Ed.), ASTM, Philadelphia, pp.17-:J4. · 
BISHOP, A.W. (1954). "Correspondence,'' Geotechnique, Vol. IV,No.l, pp . .43-:45.,. . 
· 
BISHOP, A.W. (1958). "Test Requirements of Measuring the Coefficient 'of Earth Pressure at Rest," 
, 
Proceedings of the Conference on Earth Pressure Problems, Brussels, Vol. I, pp. 2.:_14. 
BISHOP, A.W., ALPAN, 1., BLIGHT, G.E., AND DoNALD, LB. (1960). "Factors Controlling the Shear 
Strength. of Partly Saturated Cohesive Soils," Proceedings of the ASCE Research Conference on 
Shear Strength of CohesiveSoils, Boulder, pp. 503-532. 
. . 
BISHOP, A.W. Ai-m HENKEL, D.J. (1962). The Measurement of Soil Properties in the Triaxial Test, 2nd ed., 
Edward Arnold Ltd., London, 228 p. 
· 
· 
(.-
References 
809 
· BISHOP, A.W. AND WESLEY; L.D. (1975). "Triaxial 'Apparatus for Controlled Stress Path Testing," 
Geotechnique, Vol. XXV, No.4, pp. 657-670. 
· · · 
· 
· 
· BJERRUM, L: (1954a). · "Theoretical• and Experimimtallnvestigations on' the Shear Strength of Soils," 
Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, No.5; 118 p. · 
• '' 
· 
BJERRUM, L. (1954b). "Geotechnical Properties of Norwegian Marine Clays," Geotechnique, Vol. IV, 
No.2,pp.49-69. 
· 
· 
'.: 
BJilRRUM, L.J(1967). "Engineering Geology of Norwegian Norinally'Consolidated Marine Clays as 
Related to Settlements of Buildings," Geotechnique,Vol. XVII, No: 2, pp. 81-118. 
· · .: BJERRUM, L. (1972). "Embankments on Soft Ground," Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference 
on. Performance of Earth and Earth-Supported Structures, Purdue University, Vol. II, pp. 1-54. 
· BJERRUM, L. (1973). "Problems of Soil Mechanics and Construction ori Soft Clays," Proceedings of the 
. ·Eighth International Conference on Soil Mechanics' and Foundation Engineering, Moscow, Vol. 3, 
pp.111..:.159.' 
',: 
'• . ' 
·· 
BJERRUM; L. AND SIMONS, N.E. {1960). "Comparison' of Shear Strength Characteristics of Normally 
.,., 
· Consolidated Clays,'' Proce'edings ofthe ASCE Research 'Conference on tHe Shear Strength of 
Cohesive Soils, Boulder,pp. 711..:.726. 
· 
· 
BLACK, D.K; AND LEE, K.L. (1973); "Saturating Laboratory Samples by Back' Pressure,'~ Journal of the 
Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division,ASCE; Vol: 99;· No. SMl, pp. 75..:.93. ' • 
BLACK, P.B. AND HARDENBERG; M.J. (Eds.) • (1991 ). "Historical Perspectives· ill • Frost Heave Research," 
Special Report 91-23, U.S. Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Laboratory, Hanover, 174 p . 
. BLIGHT, G.E.•(l980). ~'The Mechanics of·UnsaturatedSoils," Notes prepared for a·series of lectures 
. : : delivered as part of Course 270C at the University of Califoniia, Berkeley. ' 
BLIGHT, G.E. (Ed.) (1997). Mechanics of Residual Soils, Rotterdam, Balkema, 237p>·. 
BOLTON, M.D. (1979). A Guide to Soil Mechanics, Macmillan, London, 456 p: . ( · · 
BOLTON, M.D. (1986). "The Strength and Dilatancy of Sands,'~ Geotechnique; VoL XXXVI, No.1, pp. 65-78. 
BoNILLA; M.G. (1991). "Faulting and SeismiC Activity/' in G.'A: Kiersch (Ed.); The' Heritage of Engi-
neering Geology: The FirstHimdred Years, Boulder, CO, Geological SoCiety' of America, Centen-
nial Special Vol. 3, pp. 251-264:· " : ' 
' 
'· 
· 
· BoRCHERS, J.W. (Ed.) (1998). "Land Subsidence: Case Histories arid Current Research," Proceedings 
of the Dr. Joseph R Poland Symposium on Land Subsidence, Association of Engineering Geolo-
, gists, Special Publication No.8, 576 p: · 
· 
· 
< · · 
BoRDEN, R.H., SHAO, L., AND GuPTA, A. (1996). "Dynamic Properties of Piedmont Residual Soils," 
·• • · 
'Journal of GeotechnicalEngineering,Vol.l22. No. 10, pp. 813-821. 
BOUSSINESQ, J. (1885). Application des Potentiels a l' Etude de l' Equilibre et due Mouvement des Solides 
· · ... Elastiques, Gauthier~ Villars, Paris. 
' 
· · · 
. : · · 
BowDEN, F.P. AND TABOR, D. (1950). The Frictioii and Lubrication of Solids, Part I, Oxford University 
: ~ ·, > Pre_ss; London, 337 p. 
-
~- 1, 
· 
) 
· 
·, 
' 
'. )' 
BOWDEN, F.P. AND TABOR, D. (1964). The Friction and Lubrication of Solids, Part II, Oxford University 
· Press, London, 544 p. : 
. · ·: : i , · ' 
' 
.. . 
,_ •· • 
" · 
. BoYLE, S.R. (1995). ~'Deformation Prediction of Geosynthetic Reinforced Soil Retaining Walls," Ph.D. 
<' ·:dissertation, University'ofWashington,'391<p: . · 
\ ' 
· 
·" 
BozozuK, M. (1962). "Soil Shrinkage Damages Shallow Foundations at Ottawa;Canada," The Engi-
neering Journal, Vol. 45, No. 7,'pp. 33-:-37; also in Research Paper No. 163, Division of Building 
Research, National Research Council, Ottawa, Ontario, 7 p. 
BozozuK, M. (1963). '~The Modulus of Elasticityof Leda Clay from Field Measurements," Canadian 
GeotechnicalJournal,Vol.I,No.l,pp.43.C:5l. 
'·: 
:,; :: 
BozozuK, M. AND LEONARDS, G.A. (1972). "The Gloucester Test Fill,'' Proceedings of the ASCE Spe-
cialty Conference on Performance of Earth andEarth-Supporied StruCtures," Purdue University, 
.- ·' 
'Vol. I, Part l,pp. 299-317.' 
' , 
-· 
810 
References 
. BREITENBACH, A.J. (1993). '.'Rockfill, Placement and Compaction. Guidelines,". Geotechnical Testing 
Journal, ASTM, Vol. 16, No.1, pp. 76--84. 
. 
BREITENBACH, A.J. (2006). "Summary of Rockfill Placement and Compaction Guidelines for Mine 
Structures,". on www.geoengineer.org/rockfilll.htm, accessed Sept. 2006. 
BREWER, R (1976). Fabric and Mineral Analysis of Soils, Krieger, 482 p. · . ' 
BRIAUD, J.L. (1992). The Pressuremeter, Balkema, Rotterdam, 322 p., . 
. . . . 
. 
. ; BRIAUD, J.L. (2001). "Introduction to Soil Moduli," Geotechnical News, June 2001, BiTech Publishers 
Ltd., Richmond, British Columbia (geotechnicalnews@bitech.ca )-', · ... , 
·, , . 
BRIAUD, J.L. AND MIRAN, J. (1992). "The Flat DilatometerTest," U.S. Federal Highway Administration, 
: .ReportNo.FHWA-SA-91-044,102p. 1 
• 
\, •··· 
BRINK, R. (1967). "Effective Angle of Friction for a Normally Consolidated Clay,"_ Proceedings of the 
Geotechnical Conference Oslo on the Shear Strength Properties of Natural Soils and Rocks, 
Vol. I, Published by the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, Olso, pp.13-17 . 
. . , BROMS, B.B. AND FORSSBLAD, L. (1969). "Vibratory Compaction of Cohesionless Soils/' Proceedings of 
., •··. 
theSpecialty Session No.2 on Soil Dynamics, Seventh International,Conference on Soil Mechan-
ics and Foundation Engineering, Mexico City, pp.lOl-118 .. 
· . BROO~ER, E.W. ·AND IRELAND, ·H.O. (1965). "Earth Pressures at Rest Related .to . Stress· History," 
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. II, No.1, pp. 1-::-15. .. 
,. . 
'., 
BROUSSEAU, P. (1983). "Generalisation des Etats Limites et de la Destructuration des Argile Naturelles," 
. 
. . . M.S. thesis, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada. 
. 
. 
BRUMUND, W.F., JoNAS, E., AND LADD, C. C. (1976). "Estimating In Situ Maximum Past Preconsolida-
tion Pressure of Saturated Clays from •Results of Laboratory Consolidometer Tests," Special 
Report 163, Transportation Research Board, pp. 4-12. 
BS1377 (1990). "Methods of Testing Soils for Civil Engineering Purposes,': Parts 1, 2, 3, 4, British Stan-
·dards Institution .. 
1 BUDHU, M. (2007). Soil Mechanics and Foundations, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 634 p. 
·• , .BURLAND, J.B. (1989). "Small is Beautiful-The Stiffness of Soils at Small Strains" (9th Laurits Bjerrum 
Memorial Lecture), Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 26, pp. 499-516 . 
.. BURLAND, J.B. (1990). "On.the Compressibility and Shear Strength of Natural Clays/: Geotechnique, 
Vol. XL, No.3, pp. 329;-378. · 
• . , . . 
· .< '. 
BURMISTER, D.M. (1948). Discussion of "Classification and Identification of Soils~' byA. Casagrande, 
· Transactions,ASCE, Vol.113, pp. 971:-977. , · 
' 
BURN, K.N. (1976). Frost Action and Foundations, Canadian· Building. Digest CBD-182, National 
Research Council, Ottawa, 4 p. 
BURNS, S.E., SANTAMARINA> J.C., AND MAYNE, P.W. (Eds.) (2008). Deformational Characteristics of 
Geomaterials, Rotterdam, Millpress-IOS Press, 1111 p. , ·;. 
, 
,•: 
BuTTERFIELD, R. (1979). "A Natural Compression Law for Soils (An Advance on e-logp')," 
Geotechnique, Vol. XXIX, No.4; pp. 469-480. · 
. 
·• 
BYRNE, P.M., SALGADO, F., AND HowiE, J.A. (1991). "Gmax from PressuremeterTest: Theory, Chamber 
. Tests, and Field Measurements," Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Recent 
Advances in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics, St. Louis, MO, Vol. 1, 
. pp. 57-63 .. 
c 
, 
~ ~ 
' 
< 
; 
,' 
' ' • 
CAD LING, L. AND ODENSTAD, S. (1950). "The Vane Borer," Proceedings No.2, Royal Swedish Geotech-
. . nical Institute, pp. 1-88. 
•. CALIFORNIA DWR (1962). "Review of the Visual Method of Classification and Description of Soils in 
. Foundations and Borrow Areas Based on the USBR Earth Manual Designation E-3, DWR 
'~' . 
' ' . ~ 
References 
811 
Designation S-4,'.' Manual. of Testing• Procedures for Soils, California Department of Water 
. Resources, Sacramento, 7 p. . 
CAMPANELLA, R.G. AND RoBERTSON, P.K (1991). "Use arid Interpretation of a Research Dilatometer,'' 
·· Canadian Geotechnical Journal; Vol. 28, No.1, pp. 113.::.126. 
. ; • 
··' • • 
CAMPANELLA, R.G. ANDV AID, Y.P. (19Ti)."A Simple K 0-Triaxial Cell,'~ Canadian Geotechnical Jour-
nal, VoL 9, No.3, pp. 249-260. 
CANADIAN GEOTECHNICAL SOCIETY (2006). Canadian Foundation· Engineering: Manual,· 4th ed., 
Canadian Geotechnical Society, BiTech Publishers; Richmond, British Columbia, 488 p. 
CARRIER, W.D., III (2003). "Goodbye, Hazen; Hello, Kozeny-Carman,'' Journal of Geotechnical and 
Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, Vol.129, No.11,pp. 1054-1056. 
CARRIGAN, R.A. (1978). "Decimal Time,'' American Scientist, Vol. 66, No.3, pp. 305-313. 
CARROLL, R.G. (1983). "Geotextile Filter Criteria,'' Engineering •Fabrics in TransjJOrtation· Construc-
tion, Transportation Research Record No. 216, pp. 46-53. ',,. 
· 
CARTER, D.L., MORTLAND, M.M., AND KEMPER,W.D. (1986). "Specific Surface,''. Chapter 16 in Methods 
. : .·.;of Soil Analysis, Part 1, Physical and Mineralogical Methods, Agronomy Monograph No.9, 2nd 
ed., American Society of Agronomy:__ Soil Science Society of America, Madison; WI, pp. 413-423. 
:• CASAGRANDE, A (1932a). Discussion of "A New. Theory of Frost Heaving,'' byA.C. Benkelman and 
F.R. Ohlmstead, Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, VoL 11, pp. 168-172. 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1932b). "Research on the Atterberg Limits of Soils,'' Public Roads, Vol.13, No.8, 
pp.121-136. 
. 
. : 
. . . <; ' . . .; 
·: 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1932c). "The Structure of Clay imd Its Importance in Foundation Engineering,'' 
Journal. of. the·· Boston·. Society of Civil· Engineers,. April;. reprinted in ·contributions to Soil 
Mechanics 1925-1940, BSCE; pp. 72-113. 
. 
. CASAGRANDE, A. (1936a). "Characteristics of Cohesionless Soils Affecting the Stability of Slopes and 
Earth Fills,'' Journal of the Boston Society of Civil Engineers, January; reprinted in Contributions 
to Soil Mechanics 1925-1940, BSCE, pp. 257-276. 
· ·· ·' • 
. '•' 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1936b ). "The Determination of the Pre-Consolidation Load and Its Practical Signif-
•, , ·. 
icance,'' Discussion D-34, Proceedings of the First International. Conference on Soil Mechanics 
and FoundationEngineering, Cambridge; Vol. III, pp. 6o.::.64 .. ·· 
• · ·. · ... 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1937). ~'Seepage Through Danis,'' Journal of the New England Water. Works Associa-
•. tion, Vol. 51, No.2; Reprinted in Contributions to Soil Mechanics 1925-1940;BSCE, pp. 295-336. 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1938). "Notes on Soil Mechanics-First Semester,'':_ Harvard University (unpub-
lished), 129 p. 
· · 
· 
CASAGRANDE, A; (1948). "Classification and Identification of Soils,''· Transactions,ASCE, Vol. 113, 
• .. pp. 901-'-930. 
. . •: 
': '• 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1950). "Notes on the Design of Earth Dams,'' Journal of the Boston Society of Civil 
Engineers, October; reprinted in Contributions to Soil Mechanics 1941-1953, BSCE, pp. 231-255. 
CASAGRANDE, A. (1958). "Notes on the Design of the Liquid Limit Device," Geotechnique, Vol. VIII, 
: No.2, pp. 84-91. 
CASAGRANDE, .A: (1975). "Liquefaction and. Cyclic Deformation of Sands,' a Critical Review,'' 
Proceedings of the Fifth Panamerican Conference on Soil Mechanicsand Foundation Engineer-
·. ing, Buenos Aires; reprinted as Harvard Soil Mechanics Series, No. 88, 27 p. 
CASAGRANDE, A. AND FADUM, R.E. (1944). Closure to "Application of Soil Mechanics in Designing 
Building Foundations,'' Transactions, ASCE, Vol. 109, 467 p. 
CATERPILLAR.TRACTOR' Co. (1977). Caterpillar Performance Handbook, Form AEKQ 3313, 8th ed., 
Chapter 14, Peoria, IL, 6 p. · 
· 
CEDERGREN, H.R. (1989). Seepage; Drainage, and Flow Nets, 3rd ed;, Wiley, New York, 465 p. 
CHAMBERLAIN, E.J.; GASKIN, P.N.; Escfi, D., AND BERG, R.L: (1982). ''Identification and Classification 
of Frost Susceptible Soils,'' Preprint, ASCE Spring Convention, Las Vegas; NV, April, 38 p. 
812 
References 
·.CHANDLER, R.J. (1967). "The Strength of a Stiff Silty Clay,': Proceedings of the Geotechnical Confer-
ence Oslo on the Shear Strength Properties of Natural Soils and Rocks, VoL I, Published by the 
' , Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, Olso, pp. 103-108. 
CHANDLER, R.J. (1987). "The In Situ Measurement of the Undrained Shear Strength of Clays Using the 
Field Vane," Vane Shear Strength Testing in Soils: Field and .Laboratory Studies, A.F. Richards 
(Ed.), ASTM Special Technical Publication 1014, Philadelphia, pp. 13-44. 
CHEN, F.H. (1988). Foundations on Expansive Soils, 2nd ed., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 298 p. 
CHEN, W.F. (1994). Constitutive Equations for Engineering Materials, Vol. 2-Plasticity and Modeling, 
Elsevier,Amsterdam, 1096 p... 
· :. 
, ; .< ·,, . 
CHEN, W.F. AND BALADI, G.Y. (1985). Soil Plasticity: Theory and Implementation, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
Til~ 
. 
. 
' 
CHEN, W.F. AND SALEEB,A.F. (1982). Constitutive Equations for Engineering Materials,Vol.l, Elasticity 
and Modeling, Wiley, New York, 580 p .. ·· 
· 
. . " . 
CHERNICOFF;S. AND VENKATAKRISHNAN,R (1995). Geology, Worth Publishers, NewYork, 593 p. 
CHRISTIAN, J.T. AND CARRIER, W.D. (1978). "Janbu, Bjerrum, and Kjaernsli's Chart Reinterpreted," 
· · Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol.l5, No.1, pp. 123-128. 
·CHRISTIAN, J.T. AND URZUA, A. (1996). Productivity Tools for Geotechnical Engineers; Magellan Press, 
'"Newton, MA, 181 p. (with disk). 
· 
•, • 
CHRISTOPHER, B.R. AND HOLTZ, R.D:(1985). Geotextile.Engineering.Manual, U.S. Federal Highway 
Administration, Washington, D.C., FHWA-TS-86/203, 1044 p. 
CLARKE, B. G. (1995). Pressuremeters in Geotechnical Design, Blackie, London, 364 p . 
. CLAYTON, C.R.L AND KHATRUSH, S.A. (1986). "A New Device for Measuring Local Strains on Triaxial 
Specimens," Geotechnique, Vol. XXXIV, No.4, pp. 593-597. · · 
· . CLEMENCE, S.P. AND FINBARR, A.O. (1981). "Design Considerations for Collapsible Soils," Journal of 
'" 
the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 107; No. GT3, pp. 305...:.317. 
CLEVENGER, W.A. (1958). "Experiences .With Loess as a Foundation Material," Transactions, ASCE, 
Vol.123, pp. 151-169. 
. 
· 
. 
, . CoATS, D.R. (1991). "Glacial Deposits," Chapter 15 in The Heritage of Engineering Geology; The First 
Hundred Years, G.A. Kiersch (Ed.), Centennial Special VoL 3; Geological Society of America, 
• 
J 
•• • 
; 308p. 
· · CoDUTO, D.P. (2001). Foundation Design: Principles and Practices;2nd ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ, 883 p. . 
· :. • 
CoLLIN, A. (1846). Recherches Experimcmtales sur les Glissements Spontanesdes Terrains Argileux, 
· ; • 
Accompagnees de Considerations sur Quelques Principes de la Mechanicque Terrestre, Carilian-
Goeury and Dalmont, Paris. Translated by W.R. Schriever under the title "Landslides in Clays by 
·Alexandre Collin1846,'' University of Toronto Press, Canada, 1956, 161 p. (21 plates). ' 
· COLLINs;K. AND McGowN,A. (1974). "The Form and Function of Microfabric Features in a Variety of 
Natural Soils," Geotechnique, Vol. XXIV, No.2, pp. 223-254: 
. CoRNFORTH, D.H. (1964). "Some Experiments on the Influence of Strain Conditions on the Strength of 
Sand," Geotechnique, Vol. XIV, No.2, pp. 143-167; 
· . ; . · 
COULOMB, C.A. (1776) .. "Essai sur une application des regles de Maxim us et ·Minimis a Quelques 
Problemes de Statique, Relatifs a 1' Architecture," Memo ires de Mathematique et de Physique, 
. .Presentes a l' Academie Royale des Sciences, par. Divers Savans, et las dans ses Assembtees, Paris, 
Vol. 7 (Vol. for 1773 published in 1776), pp. 343-382. . ' 
CRAWFORD; C.B. (1965). "Resistance .of Soil Structure to Consolidation," :Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, Vol. 11, No.2, pp. 97-99. 
. ' .. 
CROOKS, J.H.A. AND BECKER, D. E. (1988). Discussion of "Slide in Upstream Slope of Lake Shelbyville 
Dam" by. D.N. Humphrey :and G.A. •Leonards, Journal of. Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, 
Vol. 114, No.4, pp. 506-508. 
' 
References 
813 
CRUD EN, D.M. AND VARNES, D.J. (1996). "Landslide Types and Processes,'~ Chapter 3 in Landslides: 
Investigation and Mitigation, Special Report 247, Transportation Research Board, National 
· Academy Press, Washington,pp. 36-75: 
" 
. , 
.1 
D 
': > 
',- i: 
DAFALIAS, Y.F. (1986). "Bounding Surface Plasticity 1: Mathematical Foundations and Hypo-Elasticity," 
Journal of Engineering Mechanics, ASCE; Vol. 112; No: 9, pp. 966-987.' . . . 
.c 
DAFALIAS, Y.F. AND L.R. HERRMANN (1982). "Bounding Surface Formulations of Soil Plasticity," in Soil 
Mechanics: Transient and CyclicLoads~ConstitutiveRelations and Numerical Treatment, G.N. 
Pande and O.C. Zienki~wicz (Eds.), Wiley, NewYork, pp. 253-282. · 
DAFALIAS, Y.F. AND POPOV, E.P. (1975). "A Model for Nonlinearly Hardening Materials for Complex 
Loading," Acta Mechcmica, Vol. 21, pp. 173-192. 
· 
. 
. • · c D' APPOLONIA, D.J., LAMBE, T.W., AND POULOS, H. G. (197la). "Evaluation of Pore Pressures Beneath an 
E~bankment," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division; ASCE, Vol. 97, No. SM6, 
pp. 881-897. 
;'. 
{ . 
':' ,. 
D'APPOLONIA; D.J., Pouws,H.G., 'AND LADD, C.C. (1971b). "Initial Settlement of Structures.on 
. ·Clay," Journal ofthe:Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division,'ASCE,Vol; 97, No. SMlO, 
'.pp.:"1359-:-1377. 
-~ 
! ' 
• 
'J. 
D'APPOLONIA,' D.J., WHITMAN, R.V., AND D'APPOLONIA, E.D. (1969) .. ''Sand Compaction with Vibra-
tory Rollers,~' Journalof the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 95, No. SMl, 
' pp. 263-284. 
' 
' ' 
. 
DARCY, H. (1856). Les Fontaines Publiques de Ia Ville de Dijon, Dalmont, Paris. 
. . 
. DAVIS;T.N. (200l):Permafrost: A Guide to Frozen.Ground in Transition, University of Alaska Press, 
· ' Fairbanks, 368 p. · 
· · . 
. 
· 
DAWSON, R.F. (1944). Discussion of "Relation of Undisturbed Sampling to Laooratory Testing," by P.C. 
Rutledge, Transactions, ASCE, Vol. 109, pp. 1190-1193. 
DEERE, D.U. (1963): "Technical Description of Rock Cores for Engineering Purposes," Rock Mechan-
ics and Engineering Geology,Vol. i; pp. 18-22; 
. · · 
DEERE, D.U. AND DEERE, D.W. (1988). "The Rock Quality Designation'(RQD) Index in Practice," in 
• · Rock Classification Systems for Engineering Purposes,ASTM Special Technical Publication 984, 
L. Kirkaldie (Ed.), American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, pp. 91-lOL 
· ··DE MELLO~ V.F.B. (1971). "The Standard Penetration Test,'' Stateof the Art Paper, Proceedings of the 
•· · •· Fourth Panamerican Conference on Soil MechanicsandFoun'dation Engineering; Vol. I, pp. 1-86 . 
.' DEJON'G,J.T. AND BOULANGER, R.W. (2000). "Introduction toDrillingand Sampling in Geotechnical 
Practice,". Educational Video, 2nd ed:; Department of· Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of California, Davis, 35 min> See also http://cee.engr.ucdavis.edu/faculty/boulanger/ 
video/DrillingAndSampling.mpg. 
·· 
' 
·' 
· 
'· 
' 
,. ; ' · 
DELAGE;P.,AUDIGlJIER, M., CUI, Y.~J., AND HOWAT, M.D. (1996); "Microstructure of a Compacted Silt," 
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, VoL33, No.1, pp. 15ac:158~' ·.·' 
· 
DIAZ-RODRfQUEZ, J.A., LEROUEiL, S., AND ALEMAN, J.D. (1992): ''Yielding of Mexico City Clay and 
Other Natural Clays,'' Journal of Geoiechitical Engineering, ASCE; Vol.l18, No.7, pp. 981-995. 
DIBIAGIO, E. AND STENHAMAR, P. (1975). "Prs>ivefylling til Brudd pa Blot Leire," Proceedings of the 
Seventh Scandinavian Geotechnical Meeting, Copenhagen; Polyteknisk Forlag; pp. 173-185. · · 
'· DoNOVAN, N.C. (1969). "Research Brief-Soil Dynamics SpeCialty Session," Seventh International 
Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering; Mexico City, 154 p. 
··DowniNG, C.H. (l985);Blast Vibration Monitoring and Control, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ,297p. 
. . 
. 
. 
.. 
' 
DOWDING, C.H. (1996). Construction Vibrations, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 610 p. 
814 
References 
DRISCOLL; F.G. (Ed.) (1986). Groundwaterand Wells, 2nd ed.,Johnson Well Screen Co., St. Paul, MN, 
1089 p. 
. 
. 
. . 
' 
DRNEVICH, V.P., HALL, J.R., Jr., AND RICHART, F.E., Jr. (1966). '~Large Amplitude Vibration Effects on 
the Shear Modulus of Sand," University of Michigan Repori to Waterways Experiment Station, 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Contract DA-22-()79-Eng-340, Oct.1966. 
. 
DRUCKER, D.C., GIBSON, R.E., AND HENKEL, D.J. (1957). "Soil Mechanics and Work-HardeningTheories 
of Plasticityt Transactions, ASCE, Vol.112, pp. 338-346. · 
DUDLEY, J.G. (1970). "Review of Collapsing Soil," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engi-
neering Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. SM3; pp. 925c..947. . . ' ' 
. 1 ' 
• 
• 
DuNCAN, J.M. (1980). "Hyperbolic Stress~Strain Relationships,". Limit Equilibrium, Plasticity and 
Generalized Stress-Strain in Geotechnical Engineering, Proceedings of the workshop sponsored 
by NSF and NSERC, McGill University, Montreal, R.N. Yong and H.Y. Ko (Eds.), ASCE, 
pp. 443~60. 
.. 
. 
DUNCAN, J.M. AND BUCHIGNANI, A.L. (1976). "An Engineering Manual for Settlement Studies," 
Geotechnical Engineering Report, University of California, Berkeley, 94 p. · 
. DUNCAN, J.M., BYRNE, P., WONG, K.S., AND MABRY, P. (1980). "Strength, Stress~Strain and Bulk Modu-
. Ius. Parameters for Finite Element Analyses of. Stresses and Movements in Soil Masses," 
· Geotechnical Engineering Report No .. UCB/GT/80-01, University of California,· Berkeley, 70 p. 
DuNCAN, J.M. AND CHANG, C.Y. (1970). "Nonlinear Analysis of Stress and Strain in' Soil," Journal of 
· Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. SM5, pp. 1629-1653. 
DuNCAN, J.M. AND WRIGHT; S.G. (2005). Soil Strength and Slope Stability, Wiley, New York, 297 p. 
DUNNICLIFF, J. (1993). Geotechnical Instrumentation for Monitoring Field Performance, Wiley, New York, 
608p. 
. 
· · DYVIK, R. AND MADSHUS, C. (1985). "Lab Measurements of Gmax Using Bender Elements," in V. Khosla 
· 
(Ed.), Advances in the Art of Testing Soils under Cyclic Conditions, ASCE, pp. 186-196. 
E 
·,, 
EDELEN, B. (Ed.) (1999). Proceedings of the Behavioral Characteristics of Residual Soils (GeoCongress 
1999), ASCE, Charlotte, NC, 178 p; 
· 
: : 
. EDEN, W.J. (1971). "Sampler Trials in 'overconsolidated Sensitive Clay," Sampling of Soil and Rock, 
·ASTM Special Technical Publication No. 483, pp. 132-:-142." ' 
, , 
EDEN, W.J. AND KUBOTA, J.K. (1962). ''Some Observations on the Measurement of Sensitivity of Clays," 
Proceedings of the American Society for Testing and Materials, Vol. 61, pp. 1239-'-1249. 
EDIL, T.B. AND SAWANGSURIYA,A. (2006). "Use of Stiffness and Strength for Earthwork Quality Eval-
' uation," Proceedings of the ASCE GeoShanghai Conference, Shanghai, China, H. Zui, F. Zhang, 
... 
·E. Drumm, and C.T. Chin (Eds.), pp. 80-87. 
. 
... 
EIDE, 0. AND HOLMBERG, S. (1972). "Test Fills to Failure on the Soft Bangkok Clay," Proceedings of the 
ASCE Specialty Conference on Performance of Earth and Earth-Supported Structures, Purdue 
University, Vol. I, Partl, 163 p: 
EL-EHWANY,·M. AND HousTON, S.L. (1990). "Settlement and Moisture Movement in Collapsible Soils," 
. Journalof Geotechnical Engineering,ASCE, Vol.116, No.lO, pp. 1521-1535. 
EMMONS, W.H., THIEL, G.A., STAUFFER, C.R., AND ALLISON, I.S. (1955). Geology: Principles and 
.,, 
.: Processes,McGraw-Hill,NewYork,638p.· 
· .. 
EscARIO,V. (1980). "Suction Controlled Penetration and Shear Tests," Proceedings of the Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Expansive Soils, Denver, CO, Vol. 2, pp. 781-797. , 
ESOPT (1974). Proceedings of the European Symposium on Penetration Testing, Stockholm, Swedish 
Council for Building Research, Vols. 1, 2.1, 2.2, and 3. 
·' 
References 
815 
F 
I . , 
' 
' 
. 
, 
~ , . ; ; 
, 
' 
-, '. 
,' ·. · 
. 
· . 't 
FADUM, R.E. (1948). "Influence Values for Estimating Stresses in ElastiC Foundations," Proceedings 
Second. International Conference on Soil. Mechanics. cmd. Fo~ndation. Engineering, Rotterdam, 
Vo1.3,pp. 77-84. · 
. · 
.·· . 
· .'·, 
.. · . 
.·· · · 
•: .: . 
FAGAN, B.M. (2000). The LittleiceAge: How Climate Made. History,l300-1850, Basic Books, New York, 
272p.' 
. 
. 
. . 
' 
' 
' .. ' 
'· 
FANG: H.Y. (1997). Iritrodz:tetion .toEnvironmerital Gedtechiwlogy, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 652 p. 
FANNIN, R.I., ELiADORANI, A., AND WILKINSON, M.T. (2005). "Shear Strength of Cohesionless Soils at 
, 
Low Stress," Geotechnique, Vol. LV, No.6, pp. 467-478. 
. 
.. 
, . 
, 
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION (1991). Rock and Mineral Identification for Engineers, u.s. 
Department of 'franspo.rtation, Washington, 50. p. (useful color:pamphlet): . . 
. 
·FERNAU, E.A. (1977). "Application of Soil Taxonomy' in E~gineering~" Transportilfion Research Record 
. . 
. . 642, 'fransportation Research Board, pp. 24-27. 
. .. 
. 
· . 
. . 
· 
FLAATE, K. AND PREBEi~, T. (1974 ). "Stability of Road Embankments," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 
Vol.ll,No.1,pp: 72-88. . .. 
.· 
. 
. 
... 
. , 
'· ·: · 
FLEMING, R.W. AND VARNES, D.J. (1991): "Slope Movements," Chapter 9 inThe Haitage of Engineer-
.· 
ing Geology; The First Hundred Years; G.A. Kiersch (Ed.), Ce'lltennial SpecialVol. 3, Geological 
. SoCiety of America, pp. 201-218. 
. 
' 
. 
. 
. 
FLoYD, R.P.(1979). Geodetic Bench Marks, NOAA Manual NOS NGS 1, National Oceanic and Atmos-
. 
pheric Administration, 58 p. · . 
· · · . , . , ·· . , 
. 
· 
FosTER, C.R. AND AHLVIN, R.G. (1954). "St~esses·and_Deflecti~ns Induced, by a. Uniform Circular 
· 
Load," Proceedings of the Highway Research' Board, Vol. 33,j)p; 467-470. 
. . 
. Fox, R.F. AND HILL, T.P. (2007): "An Exact Value for Avogadro's Number,'.~.Americim Scientist, Vol. 95, 
' 
No.2,pp.104.:.1o7. 
· ·· 
· • ··. ·. · 
·· ·;·~ _ 
·· 
·. · 
·· 
· · · 
FREDLUND, D.G. (1973). "Volume Change Behavior of Unsaturated Soils," Ph.D. thesis, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. 
FREDLUND, D.G. (1997). "An Introduction to Unsaturated Soil Mechanics," in Unsaturated Soil Engi-
neering Practice, S.L. Houston and D. G. Fredlund (Eds.), Geotechnical Special Publication No. 68, 
. ASCE,NewYork,pp: 1-37: 
' .· 
. 
. 
, 
. 
· FREDLUND, D. G. AND MoRGENSTERN, N.R. (1977). "Stress State· Vari.ables for· Unsaturated Soils,'' 
Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division,ASCE, Vol.l03, No.5, pp. 447-466. 
FREDLUND, D.G. AND RAHARDJO, H. (1993). Soil Meclu1nicsfor_Unsaturated Soils,Wiley, New York, 
. 
517p. 
' 
' 
. 
' 
' 
.· ·. 
. 
. 
' 
FREEZE,.R.A. AND, CHERRY, J.A .. (1979): Groundwater; Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 604 p. 
' FuNd, Y.C. (1965). Solid Mechanics~ Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 525 p. 
\ 
J ' 
' 
• 
: 
' • ; ' > -' 
• 
' 
' ' • 
: 
' 
~ 
' ', 
• 
• 
, 
• ! • 
G 
.; ' . ~ ' 
~ 
GALSTER, R.W. (1992). Notes on E~gineering Geology, CESM 599B,University of Washington, EG 2: 
. , ~'Origin and Classification of Geologic Materials,'? EG3/4, 11 p.; Geologic Processes and their 
Importance in Civil Engineering, 18 P: • 
GAN, J.K.M., FREDLUND, D. G., AND RAHARDJO, H. (1988). "Determination of the Shear Strength Para-
meters of an Unsaturated SoilUsing the Direct Shear Test,'' Canadian Geotechnicallournal,Vol. 
25, No.3, pp. 500-510. 
. . 
. GARCIA-BENGOCHEA, I.; LOVELL,C.W., AND ALTSCHAEFFL, A. G. (1979). ~'Pore Distribution and Per-
meability of Silty Clays," Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering.Division, ASCE, Vol. 105, 
No. GT7,pp. 839-856. ' 
.1 ,. • 
' ... , 
816 
References 
GIBBS, H.J. (1969). Discussion, Proceedings of the Specialty Session No.3 on Expansive Soils and Mois-
ture Movement in Partly Saturated Soils, Seventh International Conference on Soil Mechanics 
•.. ,. . · and FoundationEngineering,Mexico City.·.·_· . : ! •.. ··: •: : ' .... ' ' . 
: ..... · 
: 
; ; ' . GOODMAN,R.E. (1989). Introduction to Rock 'Mechanics; 2rid ed:, Wiley, New York;562 p. 
GoODMAN, R.E. (1993). Engineering Geology, Wiley, New York,412 p. 
.· 
, .. · . 
• GOODMAN,R.E. (1999). Karl Terzaghi:The Engineer as'A.rtist:AsCE Press~ 340 p: ·. : . 
GORMAN, C.T., HOPKINS, T.C., DEEN, R.C., AND DRNEVICH, V.P. (1978). "Constant-Rate-of-Strain and 
· 
· · • coi1trolled~Gradient Consolidation Testing,". Geoiechnicat Tesiini Journal, A.s1M, Vol. 1, No. 1, 
pp.3-15.········ ', 
· 
. 
. 
··:: 
' 
·· 
• :_. 
·-··. ··-
,· 
GRAHAM,J., CRooKs,J.H.A., AND LAu, S.L~K.'(1983). ·~Yield States and St~ess-strain Relationships in a 
· ' · '··'Natural Pla~tic Clay," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol: 26~ No.3, pp, 502-516. '' 
' 
GRAY, H. (1945). "Sinmltanedus Cbnsolidation' of Contiguo~; Layers of Unlike Compressibility," 
" 
Transactions,ASCE,Vol.'ll0,1321p. 
'" ' 
·. 
· ';; 
·' 
· · 
' 
. · 
GREENFIELD, S.J. AND SHEN, C.K..(1992). Fou~d~tions in Problem Soils, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
, 
Cliffs;NJ. 
.· .. 
' 
·: ·.·· ·:. 
.,,. 
· .. :•·_.: 
.. ' ... •,·., .,· .. 
' GREGORY, C.H. (1844). "On Railway Cuttings and Embankments with anAccounf of Some Slips in 
· 
··: London Clay, on the Line of the London imd Croydon Railway," Minutes 'and Proceedings of the 
''. · 'In;titution of Civil Enginde'rs, Vol. 3, pp. 135-145: Reprinted in A ce'niury of Soil Mechanics, 
. . ·.. 
Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1969, 482 p: 
. · . 
· ' ' · 
· ' ' 
'GRIFFITH, A.A. (1924). "nleory of Rupture," Proceedings of the First.'Ititerlwtional Congress on 
Applied Mechanics, Delft, pp. 55-;63. 
, 
. 
. . ' ' 
. · · 
. GRIM, R.E. (1959). "Physico~Chemical Properties of Soils: Clay Minerals," Journal of the Soil Meehan-
, •. ::, 
, , 
icsandFoundatio'nsJ?ivision,~~C~,V<;>t:_85,No.SM2,pp. 1;--17. 
• . , 
... · .... 
· 
· GROMKO, G.J. (1974). "Rev1ew of ExpanslVe Smls," Journal of the Geotechmcal Engmeermg Dzvzszon, 
;; ... 
I • 
•J 
ASCE, Vol.lOO,No. GT6,pp, 667-687.. 
' 
. 
'1-
•• -· ' 
' 
; 
' 
• 
; ; 
; :' '·, u ':. 
: -' 
,' ,. ·, ~ ' 
.H 
': 
... 
.:. 
.•l 
< 
• 
" 
' 
•' 
-
~ , 
: HANDBOOK OF CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS (2008).' (89th ed.) D.R. Lide (Ed.); CRC 'pr~ss; Boca Raton, FL. 
'.HANDY, R.L. (1986). "Borehole Shear Tests_ and Slope Stability,'; Use of In Situ Tests in, Geotechnical 
' 
·. · .. 'Engineering, Proceedings of the In Situ '86 Specialty Conference, Blacksburg: VA, S.P. Clemence 
. '(Ed.), Geotechnical Special PubiiCati~~ No'. 6, ASCE,'pp.161~ 175. 
. · 
HANDY, R.L. (1995). The Day the House Fell: Ho.meow.ner Soil Problem;.:__From Landslides to Expan-
sive Clays and Wet Basements, ASCE Press, Reston, VA, 230 P: .·. . 
·. 
' ' ' 
. . 
. 
HANSBO, S. (1957). "A New Appro~ch to the Determiruitioh o(the Shear' Strength of Clay,by the Fall-
Cone Test,'' Proc~edings No: li; Swedish Geotechnicaliristitute, 47 p.' 
· 
1 · : ; 
• 
· 
HANSBO, S. (1960). "Consolidation of. Clay with Special Reference to Influence of Vertical Sand 
Drains," Proceedings No. IS, Swedish Geotechnical Institute, pp. 45-50. 
HANSBO, S. (1975). Jordmaterialliira, Almqvist & Wiksell Forlag AB, Stockholm,218 p. 
HANsBo; S. (1994). Foundation Engilieeririg, Elsevier Scit:ince B.V;; Amsterdam, 519 p. ' 
.·. HARDER, L.F. AND SEED, H.B. (l986). "Determination of the Perietration.Resistance for Coarse-Grained 
Soils Using the Becker Penetration Resistance," Report No: UCBiEERC-86/06, University of 
California,· Berkeley, 119 p. 
· ' 
· " 
· · 
' 
' 
· ' 
·HARDiN, B.O. (1965). "The Nature of Damping in Sands,'' Journal of the Soils Mechcmics and Founda-
tions Division, ASCE, Vol: 91; No. SM1, Jan.1965, pp. 63~7:: 
' 
· 
. · 
·HARDiN, B.O. (1978). "The Nature of Stress-strain Behavior for Soils." Proceediizgsof the Conference 
· onEarthquakeEnginee;ingandSoilDynamics;ASCE,pp:3-90:': 
·· '' 
· 
HARDIN, B.O. AND DRNEVICH,V.P. (1970a). "Shear Modulus and Damping in Soils; I. Measurement and 
Parameter Effects," ·University of Kentucky, College of Engineering, Technical Report UKY 
26-70-CE2, Soil Mechanics Series No. 1, July, 45 p. 
References 
817 
HARDIN, B.O: AND DRNEVICH, V.P. (1970b ). ~'Shear Modulus and Damping in Soils; II. Design Equations 
and Curves," Technical Report UKY 26-70-CE3, Soil Mechanics Series .No.: 2, University of 
Kentucky, College of Engineering, July, 49 p .. · 
HARDIN, B.O. AND DRNEVICH, V.P. (1970c). "ShearModulus and Damping in Soils; Design Equations 
imd Curves," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 98, No. SM7; 
Proceedings Paper 9006, July, pp. 667-692. 
HARNEY, M.D. AND HoLTZ, R.D.'(2001). "Flexible Wall Gradient Ratio .Test," Proceedings of the 
· Geosynthetics Conference 2001, Portland, OR, pp. 409~22 .. .,, 
HARR, M.E. (1962). Groundwater and Seepage, McGraw-Hill, New York, 315 p. 
HARR, M.E; (1966). Foundations of Theoretical Soil Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 381 p. 
HARR, M.E. (1977).'Mechanics of Particulate Media, McGraw-Hill, New York, 543 p .. 
HATHEWAY, A.W. (2000):" 'Clays'; Never Use the Term by Itself/' AEG News, Vol. 43, No.2, pp. 13-26. 
HAUSMANN, M.R. (1990). Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw-Hill, New York, 632 p. 
HAZEN, A. (1911). Discussion of "Dams on Sand Foundations," by A. C. Koenig, Transactions, ASCE, 
Vol. 73, pp. 199-203. 
HEAD, K.H. (1996). Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing, Vol. 2: Permeability, Shear Strength and Com-
pressibility Tests, 2nd ed., Wiley, 454 p; · 
•, · . HEAD, K.H. (1998). Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing, Vol. 3:Effective Stress Tests, 2nd ed., Wiley, 428 p. 
HEAD, K.H. (2006). Manual of Soil Laboratory Testing, 3rd ed., Whittles Publishing, 416 p. 
HEIM, G.E. (1990). "Knowledge of the Origin of Soil Deposits is of Primary Importance. to Under-
standing the· Nature of the .Deposit," Bulletin of the Association of Engineering Geologists, 
Vol. XXVII, No. 1, pp. 109-112. 
·>HENKEL, D.W. (1956). "The Effect of Overconsolidation on the Behaviour of Clays During Shear," 
, .. 
Geotechnique, Vol. XI, No.4, pp. 139-150. 
HENKEL D.J. (1958). "Correlation Between Deformation, Pore Water. Pressure, and Strength Char-
acteristics of Saturated Clays," Ph.D. thesis in Engineering, Imperial College of Science and 
Technology, London: 
' · 
HENKEL, D.J. (1960). "The Shear Strength of Saturated Remoulded Clays," Proceedings of the ASCE 
Research Conference on Shear Strength of Cohesive Soils, Boulder, pp. 533-554. · 
. HENKEL, D.J. AND WADE, N.H. (1966). "Plane Strain Tests on a Saturated Remolded Clay," Journal of 
the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE; Vol. 92, No. SM6, pp. 67-80. 
· HENRY, ·V.J., DEAN, R.G.,. AND OLSEN, E.J. (1987). Coastal Engineering: Processes, Practices and 
Impacts, Symposium Series, No. 3,Association of Engineering Geologists, pp. 1-58. 
HILF, J.W. (1961). "A Rapid Method of Construction Control for Embankments of Cohesive Soils," 
·,Engineering Monograph No. 26, revised, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, 29 p. 
HILF, J.W. (1991). "Compacted Fill," Chapter 8 in Foundation Engineering Handbook, 2nd ed., H.Y . 
. "' 
Fang (Ed.), pp. 249-316. 
,. · 
· · 
HIRSCHFELD, R.C. (1963) .. '~Stress-Deformation and Strength Characteristics of Soils," Harvard Univer-
sity (unpublished), 87 p. 
HJULSTROM, J. (1935). "Studies of the Morphological Activity of Rivers as Illustrated by the River 
Fyris," Bulletin of the Geological Institution of the University of Uppsala, Vol. XXV, 325 p. 
Ho, D.Y.F. AND FREDLUND, D. G. (1982). "Increase in Shear Strength due to Soil Suction for Two Hong 
Kong Soils," Proceedings of the ASCE Geotechnical Conference on Engineering and Construe-
. tion in Tropical and Residual Soils,pp.263-295. 
·. 
. 
. 
, Ho, D.Y.F. AND FREDLUND, D.G. (1989). "Laboratory Measurements of the Volumetric Deformation 
.: , : ( .:. :Moduli for 1\vo Unsaturated·Soils," Proceedings· of the Forty-Second Canadian Geotechnical 
Conference, Winnipeg, pp. 50-60. 
. •' ·· 
HOBBS, P. AND JONES, L. (2006). "Shrink Rethink," Ground Engineering, VoL 39, No.1, pp; 24-5. 
HOEG, K.,ANDERSLAND, O.B., AND RoLFSEN, E.N. (1969). "Undrained Behaviour of Quick Clay Under 
Load Tests at Asrum," Geotechnique, Vol. XIX, No.1, pp.101-115. 
· 
818 
References 
• 1 '':, HoEK, E. (1983). "Strength of Jointed Rock Masses," 23rd Rankine Lecture, Geotechnique; VoL XXXIII, 
No.3, pp.187-223. · 
'·-" , :, ' 
' : 
HoEK, E. (2007); Practical Rock Engineering, updated shortcourse notes available as a pdf file from 
· www.rockscience.com; 342 p.' 
> HOEK; E. AND BROWN, E.T. (1980). "Empirical Strength Criteria for Rock Masses," Journal of the 
Geotechnical Engineering Division; ASCE, VoL106, No. GT9, pp.1013-'-l035.• • 
· HoEK, E. AND BROWN, E.T. (1988). "The Hoek..:.Brown Failure Criterion -A 1988 Update," Rock Engi-
neering for Underground Excavations, Proceedings of the Fifteenth Canadian Rock Mechanics 
Symposium, I C. Curran (Ed.),Toronto, pp. 31-38.. . 
'~ ,, :' 
· .. HOEK, E. AND BROWN, E.T. (1997). Practical Estimates of Rock Mass Strength; International Journal of 
Rock Mechanics.& Mining Science and Geomechanics Abstracts, VoL 34, No. 8, pp. 1165-1186. 
:HoEK, E., KAISER, P.K.,'AND BAWDEN;W.F. (1995). Support for Underground Excavations in Hard 
. ~ 
' 
. ·Rock, Balkema, Rotterdam; 300 p; 
.. 
·; . . 
· · 
· ' 
,. 
HOGENTOGLER; C.A. AND TERZAGHI, C. (1929). "Intem!lationship of Load, Road, and Subgrade,'' 
• 
Public Roads, Vol.10, No; 3, pp. 37-64. 
· 
· 
· 
·. ' 
HoLDEN,J.C. (1974). "PenetrationTesting in Australia," Proceedings oftheEuropean Symposium on 
Penetration Testing (ESOPT); Vol. 1, pp. 1557 162 .. ' 
· ' : .. • : 
HOLL; D.L. (1940). "Stress Transmission in Earths," Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, Vol. 20, 
pp. 709-729; as cited by H. G.: Poulos and E.H:Davis, (1974). .. 
, , .: ' 
': , .·• 
, •· · HoLM, G. AND HOLTZ, RD. (1977). ~'A Study of Large Diameter Piston Samplers," Proceedings of the Spe-
cialty Session No.2, Ninth biternational Conference' on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineer-
ing, Tokyo, 77 p.; also in Proceedings of the International Symposium oil Soft Clay, Bangkok, 381 p. 
• HoLTZ, R.D. (1989). "Treatment of Problem Foundations for Highway Embankments," Synthesis of 
Highway Practice 147, National Cooperative. Highway Re'search Program,·Transportation 
· ' 
· Research Board, 72 p. 
' 
; . · 
· 
· • ' 
. 1,: .HOLTZ; RD .. (1991 ). "Pressure • Distribution.· and . Settlement,'l. Chapter' 5, Foundation Engineering 
Handbook, 2nd ed., H.Y. Fang (Ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, pp.166-222 . 
. HOLTZ; R.D. AND SCHUSTER, RL. (1995). "Stabilization· of Soil Slopes,'' Chapter 17 in Landslides: 
·Investigation and Mitigation, Special Report 247, Transportation Research Board, pp.'439-473. 
,, HoLTZ, RD. (1980). "SI Units in Geotechnical Engineering," Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol. 3, 
No.2, pp. 75-88. · 
·· ,, HoLTZ, RD., CHRISTOPHER, B.R, AND BERG, RR. (1997):Geosynthetic Engineering, BiTech Publish-
. ers, Vancouver; British Columbia, 451 p. 
: · · 
.·.HoLTZ, RD., CHRISTOPHER, B.R, ·AND. BERG,. RR (2008). Geosyruhetic :Design 'and Construction 
.: Guidelines, U.S. Federal Highway Administration; National Highway Institute, Washington, 
:,.:;. D.C.,PublicationNo.FHWA~NHI-07-092,553 p. 
. 
' 
':. 
· ·•'' 
HoLTZ, RD. AND BROMS, B.B. (1972). "Long-Term Loading Tests at Ska-Edeby, Sweden,'' Proceedings 
.·' of the ASCE Specially Conference on Performance of Earth imd Earth-Supported Structures, 
·Purdue University,Vol.J, Part 1, pp. 435-464. · 
· • ' 
'HOLTZ, RD. 'AND Hou..i, G. (1979): "Test Embankment on an Organic Silty Clay,'' Proceedings of 
the Seventh European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation 'Engineering, Brighton, 
: Engia:nd, Vol. 3, pp: 79-86. · · · 
HoLTZ, RD., JAM.IOLKOWSKI, M.B.; AND LANCELLOTTA; R (1986). ~'Lessons froin Oedometer Tests on 
High-Quality Samples,'' Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 112, No.8, pp. 768-776 . 
. : ·, ,. HoLTZ, RD., SHANG; J.Q., AND BERGADo; D. T: (2001 ). "Foundation Soil Improvement,". Chapter 15 
. . in Geotechnical and Geoenviromnental Engineering Handbook, RK: Rowe (Ed;), Springer, 
New York; pp. 429-462. 
i . . 
HoLTZ, W.G. (1959). "Expansive Clays..:Properties and Problems," Quarterly of the Colorado School 
. ofMines,VoL54,No.4,pp.89-125. 
References 
819 
· · ; · HOLTZ, W.G; AND GIBBS, H.J. (1956). "Engineering Properties of Expansive Clays," Transactions, 
. ASCE, Vo1.121, pp. 641-677. 
. 
HoLZER, T.L. (1991). "Nontectonic Subsidence," Chapter 10 in The Heritage of Engineering Geology: 
. The First Hundred Years, G.A. Kiersch (Ed.), Centennial Special Vol. 3, Geological Society of 
America, pp. 219-232. · 
· 
HoRN, H.M. AND LAMBE,T.W. (1964). "Settlement·of Buildings on the MIT Ca~pus," Journal of the 
Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No. SM5, pp.181-196. 
HoUGH, B.K. (1969).Basic Soils Engineering, 2nd ed;, The Ronald Press Company, New York, 634 p. 
HoUSTON, S.L., HoUSTON, W.N., AND SPADOLA,D).' (1988). "Prediction of Field Collapse of Soils Due 
to Wetting," Journal of Geotechnical Engineering,ASCE, Vol. 114, No. I; pp. 40-58. 
HousToN,W.N. AND HousTON, S.L (1989). "State-of-the-Art-Practice Mitigation Measures for Col-
lapsible Soil Sites," Proceedings of the Foundation Engineering Congress, ASCE, Evanston, 
pp. 161-175. 
. 
. 
. 
HoWARD, A.K.; (1984). "The Revised ASTM Standard on the' Unified Soil Classification System," 
Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 2l6-222. 
HRYCIW, R.D. (1990). "Small-strain-shear Modulus of Soil by Dilatometer," Journal of Geotechnical 
Engineering,ASCE, Vol.l16,No.ll,pp.1700-1716. 
HuANG,A.B. (2008). Personal communication. 
HuANG, A.B., Hsu, S.P., AND Kuim, H.R. · (1994). "A Multiple Purpose Soil Testing Apparatus," 
Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol.17; No.2, pp:227-232. 
· ·' · 
· 
HuANG, Y.T, HUANG, A.B., Kuo, Y.C., ANDTSAI, M.D. (2004). "A Laboratory Study on the Undrained 
Strength ofa Silty Sand from Central Western Taiwan,'' Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engi-
neering, Vol. 24, No. 9/10, pp. 733-743. · 
. 
·· · ' · 
HuMPHREY, D.N. AND LEONARDS, G.A. (1986). "Slide in Upstream Slope of Lake'Shelbyville Dam," 
·Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 112, No.5, pp. 564-577; with discussion and 
closure, Vol.114, No.4, pp. 50~513. 
· · 
HuNT, RE. (2005). Geotechnical Engineering Investigation Manual, 2nd ed.; McGraw-Hill, New York. 
HvORSLEV, M.J. (1937). "Uber die Festigkeitseigenshaften GestOrter Bindiger Boden" ("On the 
Strength Properties of Remolded Cohesive Soils"), thesis, published by Danmarks Naturviden-
skablige Samfund, Ingeni¢rvidenskabeligeSkrifter, Series A, No. 35, K!ZSbenhavn, 159 p: 
HvoRSLEV, M.J. (1949). Subsurface Exploration cmd Sampling of Soils for Civil Engineering Purposes, 
U.S.· Army· Engineer Waterways Experiment· Station, Vicksburg, MS; · 521 p.; reprinted by the 
Engineering Foundation, 1962. · 
· 
· 
HVORSLEV, M.J. (1960). ''Physical Components of the Shear Strength of Saturated Clays," Proceedings 
of the ASCE Research Conference on the Shear Strength of Cohesive Soils, Boulder, pp. 169-173. 
I 
IDRISS, I.M. (1966). "The Response of Earth Banks During Earthquakes," Ph.D: dissertation, Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley, 208 p; 
· 
· · 
IDRISS, I.M. AND BOULANGER, R.W. (2008). "Soil Liquefaction During Earthquakes," Earthquake 
Engineering' Research Institute, Report No. MN0-12, 243 p. · · 
IMAI, T. AND ToNoucm, K. (1982). "Correlation of N-value with S~wave Velocity and Shear Modulus," 
Proceedings of the Second European Symposium on Penetration Testing, Amsterdam, pp. 57-72. 
IEEE/ ASTM (2002). SI 10: American National Standard for Use of the Modern System of Units (SI): The 
Modern Metric System, Designation SI 10-02, ASTM, 62 p. 
. 
· 
INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR ROCK MECHANICS . (1978). "Suggested· Methods for the Qualitative 
Description· of Discontintuities in Rock Masses," International Journal of Rock Mechanics, 
Mineral Science & Geomechanics, Abstracts, Vol. 15, No.6, pp. 319-368. 
820 
References 
. ::'; 
.. INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY FOR ROCK MECHANICS (1981); ''Suggested MethodsJor the Quantitative 
Description of Discontinuities in Rock Masses," in Rock Characterisation and Testing and Moni-
toring-ISRM Suggested Methods, E.T.Brown (Ed.), Pergamon Press, 215p. 
INTERNATIONALSOCIETYFOR SOIL MECHANICS AND FOUNDATION ENGINEERING (1977). "List of Sym-
bols, Units, and Definitions," Subcommittee on Symbols, Units, and Definitions, Proceedings of 
the Ninth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation' Engineering, Tokyo, Vol. 3, 
pp. 156-170,. 
' 
' 
'' 
' . 
ISENHOWER, ,W.M. (1979). ~'Torsional Simple Shear/Resonant Column. Properties of San Francisco Bay 
, . . Mud,". M.S. thesis, Department of Civil Engineering University of Texas at Austin, 306 p .. 
ISHIBASHI, I. (1992). Discussion o("Effect of Soil Plasticity on Cyclic Response" by M. Vucetic and 
R. Dobry,Journal ofGeotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol.l18, No.5, pp. 830-,-832 .. 
. ISHIBASHI, I. AND ZHANG, X. (1993). ';Dynamic Shear Moduli and Damping Ratios of Sand and Clay," 
Soils and Foundations, Vol. 33, No.1, pp. 182-191. 
; • 
· I WAN, W.D. (1967). "On a Class of Models for.the Yielding Behavior of Continuous and Composite 
Systems," Journal of Applied Mechanics,ASME, Vol. 34, pp. 612-617. • 
J 
; ; 
' 
~ 
' . ' 
. JAEGER, J.C.,Cook, N.G.W., AND ZIMMERMAN, R.W. (2007). Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics, 4th ed., 
· 
· Blackwell, Malden, MA, 488 p. 
, . . . . . 
. 
. . 
. . 
: JAKY, J. (1944). "The Coefficient of Earth Pressure at Rest,'.' Magyar Mernok es Epitesz Egylet 
, . Kozdonye (Journal of the Society of Hungarian Architects and Engineers), Vol. 78, No. 22, pp. 
355-358 (in Hungarian). 
JAKY, 1(1948). '~Earth Pressure in Silos/' Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Soil 
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Rotterdam, VoL I, pp.103-107. 
JAMES, AN. (1992). Soluble Materials in Civil Engine~ring, Ellis Horwood, 434 p. • . 
JAMIOLKOWSKI, M., LADD, C. C., GERMAINE, J.T., AND.LANCELLOTA; R. (1985). "New Developments in 
Field and Laboratory Testing of Soils,".Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on 
.: Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, San Francisco, Vol. 1, pp. 57:-154 . 
. JANBU, N. (1998). '.'Sediment Deformations," Bulletin 35, Norwegian University of Science and Tech-
.. no logy, Department of Geotechnical Engineering, Trondheim,86 p., 383 p .. 
,JANBU,'N., BJERRUM. L, ANDKJAERNSLI,_B. (1956). "Veiledning ved L¢sning avFundamenteringsopp-
gaver," Publication No. 16,Norwegian GeotechniCal Institute; Oslo, 92 p .. 
.. JANBU, N. AND SENNESET, K. (1973). "FieldCompressometer-:-Principles and Applications," Proceedings 
· ·· , 
_; oftheEighth International Conferenceon Soil Mechanics and Foundation. Engineering, Moscow, 
·; 
'.I, 
Vol. 1.1, pp. 191-198. : · 
· 
JANSEN, R.B. (Ed.) (1988). Advanced Dam Engineering for Design, Construction, and Rehabilitation, 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, NewYork,811 p. 
JARDINE,R.J., FOURIE, A., MASWOSWE, J., AND BURLAND, J.B. (1985)/'Field and Laboratory Measure-
ments of Soil Stiffness," Proceedings of the Elev~nth1rtteinational Conference on Soil Mechanics 
.·and Foundation Engineering, San Francisco, VoL 2, pp. 511:-514. 
JENNINGS, J.E. AND BRINK, A.B.A. (1978). "Application of Geotechnics to the Solution of Engineering 
· Problems-:-Essential Preliminary Steps to Relate the Structure. to the Soil Which Provides Its 
.. : . Support,'~ Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Part 1, Vol. 64, pp: 571-589. 
JOHNSON,A.W. AND SALLBERG, J.R. (1960); "Factors that Influence Field Compaction of Soils," Bulletin 
272, Highway Research Board, 206 p .. : 
. " 
. 
, .. 
, 
. 
.· . 
..·· 
'''.JOHNSON, T.C., ~ERG, R.L., CHAMBERLAIN, E.J., AND COLE, nM. (1986). Frost Action Techniques for 
. Roads, and Airfields: A Comprehensive Survey of Research Findings, U.S. Army Cold Regions 
Research and Engi,neering Laboratory Report No,86-l8. . : , 
References 
821 
JONAS, E. (1964). "Subsurface Stabilization of Organic Silt-Clay by Precompression," Journal of the 
Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No. SMS, pp. 363-376. 
JORGENSON, L. (1934). "The Shearing Resistance of Soils,'' Journal of the Boston Society of Civil Engi-
neers, July, reprinted in Contributions to Soil Mechanics, 1925-1940, BSCE, pp. 184-217. 
. 
'>··· 
. 
. K 
KALIAKIN, V.N. AND DAFALIAS, Y.F. (1990a). "Theoretical Aspects ofthe Elastoplastic-Viscoplastic 
·Bounding Surface Model for Cohesive Soils," Soils and Foundations, Japanese Society of Soil 
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 11-24. 
KALIAKIN, V.N. AND DAFALIAs; Y.F. (1990b). "Verification of the Elastoplastic-Viscoplastic Bounding 
Surface Model for Cohesive Soils," Soils and Foundations, Japanese Society of Soil Mechanics 
and Foundation Engineering, Vol. 30, No. 3,pp. 25-36. · 
, 
KANE, W.F. AND AMADEI, B. (Eds.) (1991). "Detection of and Construction at the Soil/Rock Interface," 
Proceedings of the Symposium, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 28, ASCE, 156 p. 
KAR.LSSON, R (1977). "Consistency Limits," in cooperation with the Laboratory Committee of the 
·Swedish Geotechnical Soeiety, Swedish Council for Building Research, Document D6, 40 p. 
KARLSSON, R. AND PuscH, R. (1967). "Sheiu Strength Parameters and Microstructure Characteristics 
of a Quick Clay of Extremely High Water Content," Proceedings of the Geotechnical Conference 
Oslo on the Shear Strength Properti~sof Natural Soils mid Rocks, Vol. I; Published by the Nor-
wegian Geotechnical Institute~ Olso, pp. 35-42. 
·· 
KAUFMAN; R.I. AND SHERMAN, W.C., Jr; (1964), "Engineeri~g Measure~ents for Port Allen Lock," 
· · ·Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division,A~CE, Vol; 90; No. SMS, pp. 221-247; 
also in Design ofFoundations for Control of Settlement, ASCE, pp. 281-307. 
KAWAGUCHI, T., MITACHI, T., AND SHIBUYA, S. (2001). "Evaluation of Shear Wave Travel Time in Labo-
. ratory Bender Element Test," Proceedings of the Fifteenth Int~rnational Conference on Soil 
Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, Istanbul, Vol.1, pp.155-158. 
'KAY, J.N. (1990). "Use of the Liquid Limit for Characterisation of Expansive Soil Sites," Civil Engi-
neering Transactions, Institution of Engineers, Australia, Vol. 32, No.3; pp. 151-156. 
KEENE, P. (1964). Discussion of "Design of Foundations for Control of Settlement," Pro'ceedings of the 
· ASCE, Evanston, IL. 
· 
· 
KENNEY, T.C. (1959). Discussion of "Geotechnical Properties of Glacial Lake Clays," by T.H. Wu, 
Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 85, No. SM3, pp. 67-79. 
KENNEY, T.C. (1964). "Sea-Level Movements and the Geologic Histories of the Post-Glacial Marine 
Soils at Boston, Nicolet, Ottawa, and Oslo,'' Geotechnique, Vol. XIV, No.3, pp. 203-230. 
KENNEY, T.C. (1976). "Formation and Geotechnical Characteristics of Glacial-Lake Varved Soils," 
· · Laurits Bjerrum Memorial Volume-Contributions to Soil Mechanics, Norwegian Geotechnical 
Institute, Oslo, pp.15-39~ 
· 
. · · ' ·' 
KENNEY, T.C AND LAU, D. (1985). "Internal Stability of Granular Filters," Canadian Geotechnical Jour-
nal, VoL 22, No.2, pp. 215-225. 
. 
·. KENNEY,T.C. AND LAu, D. (1986). "Internal Stability of Granular Filters," Reply to discussions, 
. ' Canadian Geotechnicallournal, Vol. 23; No~ 3, pp. 420-423. 
. . ' . · · · . 
. 
· 
KiERSCH, G.A. AND JAMES, L.B. (1991): The Heritage of Engineering Geology; The First Hundred Years, 
· 
G.A. Kiersch (Ed.) (1991), Centennial Special VoL3, GeologiCal Society of America, 605 p. 
KIRKALDIE, L. (Ed.) (1988). Rock Classification Systems for Engineering Purposes; ASTM Special 
Technical Publication No. 984,167 p. 
· .. · ' · · 
KISHIDA, H. AND TAKANO A. (1970). "The Damping in the Dry Sand," Pro~eedings of the Third Japan 
. 
. Earthquake Engineering Symposium, Tokyo, pp.159-166; ·. 
. 
' 
KoERNER, R.M. (2006). Designing with Geosynthetics, 5th ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 816 p. 
822 
References 
KONDNER, R.L (1963).,"Hyperbolic Stress-Strain Response: Cohesive Soils,'! Journal oftheSoil Mechan-
ics and Foundation Division, ASCE, Vol.89; No. SM1, pp.l15-,-143. · 
. KOOREVAAR, P., MENELIK, G., AND DIRKSEN,C. (1983); Elements of Soil Physics, Elsevier,Amsterdam, 
. 
228p. . 
; 
. 
' 
.• · 
. 
. : 
: 
'.· 
_. 
KORHONEN, K.H. ANDLOJANDER, M. (1987). "Yielding of Perno Clay," Constitutive Laws for Engineer-
ing Materials: Theory and Applications, Elsevier, Vol. 2, pp.1249-1255. 
KovAcs, W.D. (1968). "An Experimental Study of the Response of Clay Embankments to Base Excita-
. tion,'' Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, 126 p.: 
.· KOVACS, w.D., EVANS, J.C., AND GRIFFITH, A.H. (1977). "Towards a More Standardized SPT,'' 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineer-
ing, Tokyo, Vol. 2, pp. 269-276. 
: . 
. __ , 
. 
_ -•-· _ 
KovAcs, W.D., SEED, H.B., AND CHAN, C.K. (1971). "Dynamic Moduli and Damping Ratios for a Soft 
- · 
.. Clay," Jou~nal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE,Vol.97, N(). SM1, pp. 59-75. 
KRAHN, J., FREDLUND, D.G., AND KLASSE~, M.J. (1989), "Effect of Soil Suction on Slope Stability at 
Notch Hill," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 26, No.2, pp. 269-278. _ , _ 
.. 
KRAMER, S.L. (1996). Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Prentice Hall; Upper Saddle River; NJ, 653 p. 
·K_RIZEK, R.J. AND FRANKLIN,A~G. (1967). ;,Energy Dissipation in a Soft Clay,''. Proceeding; of the Sym-
-· 
-
' 
.. ,_ 
-
' 
,, 
,,· 
-
. 
'' , 
--
-"'" 
: posium on Wave Propagation and Dynamic Properties of, Earth Materials, University of New 
:Mexico, Albuqu~rque. ·. 
_ 
· 
· · 
. . · 
_ _ · 
· 
KROPI\ A.L, McMAHON, D.J., AND HousTON,S.L (1994)·. "Ca~e History of a Collapsible Soil Fill," 
Vertical and Horizontal Deformations ofFo~ndati~ns and Embankments, A.T. Yeung and G.Y. 
, , •. . . . • Felio (Eds.), Geotechnical Special Publication No.40,ASCE, Vol. 2, pp. ~?31,_1542. _ . 
. :' KRYNINE, D.P. AND JUDD, W.R. (1957). Principles of Engineering Geology and Geotechnics, McGraw-
. · 
· 
Hill Book Co., New York, 730p. 
_ " . : 
. 
· 
-- .. 
, ; KuLHAWY;F.H. (2005). ~'Estimation of Soil Properties for Foundatio~Design,~' Notes for a short course 
•,· 
sponsored by the ASCE Seattle S~ctionGeotechncial Group_. . _ 
_ 
; . 
KULHAWY, F.H. AND MAYNE, P.W. (1990), Manual on Estimating Soil Properties for Foundation Design, 
Fin_ al Report,.Report No. EL-6800, Researdi Projectl493~, Electric Power Resea_ rch Institute, 
• 
' 
. ~' 
• 
·• .. • 
. 
" 
I. 
' 
Palo Alto, 308 p. 
. 
. 
. · 
. 
_ . 
_ 
. 
KULHAWY, F.H., TRAUTMAN, C.H., AND O'RoURKE, T.D. (1991). "The Soil-Rock Boundary: What is it 
and Where is it?" Proceedings of the Symposium Detection of and Constr'!:ction at the Soil/Rock 
Interface, W.F. Kane and B. Amadei (Eds.), Geotechnical Special Publication No. 28, ASCE, 
PP< 1:-15. 
- . • 
, .. 
L 
' 
-
. 
" 
. 
. . 
~ i' 
:·. ·_ . )- ·.: ~; ; ~-
. 
. . 
. 
' 
. 
. . LACY, S.J. AND PREVOST, J.H. (1987). "Constitutive Model for Geomaterials," inProceedings of the 
· 
Second International Conference on Constitutive Laws f(}rEngineering Mf!tf7rials, C.S. Desai, 
E. Krempl, P.D. Kiousis, andT. Kundu (Eds.), Elsevier;NewYork, pp.149-,-160. 
LADD·, C. C .. (1964). "Str~~s~Strain Behavior ofSaturated Clay and Basic Strength Principles,'; Research 
_ . ReportR64,_17, Department of Civil Engineering; Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 67 p. 
LADD, C. C. (197la),"Settlement Analyses for CohesiveS()ils,'' Research Report R71-2, Soils Publica-
... -. 
, tion 272, Department of Civil Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 107 p. 
.-
. LADD, C. C. (1971b). "Strength Parameters ?lnd S!~e~s-Strain Behavior ,of Saturated Clays," Research 
Report R71-23, Soils Publication 278, Department of Civil Engineering, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, 280. p: 
· · 
-
. ·· · · _ · 
_ . _-· 
· 
LADD, C. C. (1972). "Test Embankment on Sensitive Clay,': Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Confer-
ence onPe.rformanc~ ofEarth and Edrth-Supported Structures, ASCE, Purdue University, Vol. I, 
Part 1, pp.103 and 107., ... , · , -
· 
· 
· . . 
. . 
. 
'; 
., 
.. 
· 1-' 
• 
References 
823 
LADD, C. C. (1975). '.'Foundation Design of Embankments Constructed on Connecticut Valley Varved 
_ . Clays," Research Report R75-7, Geotechnical Publication 3~3, Department of Civil Engineering, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 438 p. 
LADD, C.C. AND DEGROOT, D.J. (2003). "Recommended Practice for Soft Ground Site Characteriza-
. tion: The Arthur. Casagrande Lecture,~' Proceedings .of the Twelfth Panamerican Conference on 
Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Cambridge, MA, Vol.l, pp. 3-57. 
LADD, C. C. AND EDGERS, L. (1972); "Consolidated-Undrained Direct;Simple Shear,Tests on Saturated 
Clays," Research Report R72-92, Soils Publication 284, Department of Civil Engineering, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, 245 p. 
. 
.. LADD, C. C. AND Foorr,R. (1974). "A New Design Procedure for Stability of Soft Clays," Journal of the 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 100, No. GT7, pp. 763,-786. · 
LADD, C.C.,FOOTE, R., ISHIHARA, K., SCHLOSSER, F., AND POULOS, H.G. (1977). "Stress-Deformation 
and Strength Characteristics," State-of-the-Art Report, Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering,Tokyo,Vol. 2, pp. 421-494. 
LADD, C. C. AND LAMBE, T.W. (1963). "The Strength ofUndisturbed Clay Determined from Undrained 
Tests," Laboratory Shear Testing of Soils, Special Technical Publication No. 361, ASTM, 
pp.342-371. 
' 
LADD, C. C. AND LUSCHER, U. (1965). "Engine.ering Properties of the Soils Underlying the M.I.T. Cam-
pus," Research Report R65-68, Soils Publication 185, Department of Civil Engineering, Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology. 
· 
LADD, R.S. (1965). "Use of Electrical Pressure Transducers to Measure Soil Pressure," Research Report 
R65-48, Soils Publication 180, Department , of Civil Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 79 p. 
· · 
·· . 
. . 
. · · 
. 
, 
. 
· 
LADE, P.V. (1977). "Elasto-Plastic Stress-Strain Theory for Cohesionless Soil with Curved Yield Surfaces," 
International Journal of Solids and Structures, ASCE, Vol.13, pp.1019-1035 ... 
LADE, P.V. AND DUNCAN, J.M. (1975). '~Elastoplastic Stress-Strain Theory for Cohesionless Soil," Jour-
nal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol. 101, No. 10, pp.1037-1053. 
LADE, P.V. AND LEE, K.L. (1976). "Engineering Properties of Soils," University of California, Los Angeles, 
Report No. UCLA-ENG-7652, 145 p. 
LAFLUER, J., MLYNAREK, J., AND ROLLIN, A.L. .(1989). "Filtration of Broadly .Graded Cohesionless 
Soils," Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol.l15; No. 12, pp: 1747-1768 .. 
LAMBE, T.W. (1950). "Capillary Phenomena in Cohesionless Soil,"ASCE, Separate No.4, January. 
·LAMBE, T.W. (1951). Soil TestingforEngineers,Wiley, New York; 165 p. 
LAMBE, T.W. (1953). "The Structure of Inorganic Soil," Proceedings of the ASCE, Vol. 79, Separate 
No. 315,49 p. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
.LAMBE, T.W. (1958a). ~'The Structure of Compacted Clay;: Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Founda-
.. tions Division, ASCE, Vol. 84, No. SM2, pp. 1654-1 to 1654-34. 
LAMBE, T.W. (1958b),~'The Engineering Behavior of Compacted Clay," Journal of the Soil Mechanics 
, and Foundations Division,ASCE, Vol. 84; No. SM2, pp.1655-1 to 1655-35 . 
. LAMBE, T.W. (1964). ''Methods of Estimating Settlement," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Founda: 
tions Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No. SM5, pp. 43-67; also in Design of Foundations for Control of 
·Settlement, ASCE, pp. 47-72. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
LAMBE,T.W. (1967). ~~Stress Path Method," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, 
. 
ASCE, Vol. 93,No: SM6, pp. 309-331. 
, 
. 
LAMBE, T.W. AND MARR, W.A. (1979). ·~stress Path Method: Second Edition," Journal of the Geotech-
nical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.105, No. GT6, pp. 727-738. · 
LAMBE, T.W. AND WHITMAN, R.V. (1969). SoilMechanics, Wiley, New York, 553 p. 
LAMBERT, D. AND THE DIAGRAM GROUP. (1988). The Field Guide to Geology, Facts On File1 Inc., New 
York,256 p. 
824 · References 
LAMBRECHT$, J.R AND LEONARD$, G.A. (1978). "Effects of Stress History on Deformation of Sand," 
::Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.104,No. GT11, pp.1371-1387. 
LANE, K.S. AND WASHBURN, S.E. (1946). ~'Capillarity Tests by Capillarimeters and by Soil Filled Tubes," 
Proceedings of the Highway Research Board, Vol. 26; pp. '460-473. · · 
, 
LAROCHELLE; P. AND LEFEBVRE, G. (1971). "Sampling Disturbance in Champlain Clays," Sampling of 
Soil and Rock, Special Technical Publication N6.483,ASTM, pp. 143-163. . · 
· 
'• 
LARoc:HmiE, P., TRAK, B.; TAVENAS, F.; AND RoY, M. (1974 ). "Failure of a Test Embankment on a Sen-
sitive Champlain Clay Deposit," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 11, No.1, pp. 142-164. 
LAROCHELLE, P., SARRAILH, J., TAVENAS, F., ROY, M., ANI) LEROUEIL, S. (1981):"Catises of Sampling 
·,· · Disturbance and Design of a New Sampler for Sensitive Soils," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 
. Vol. 18, No.1; pp; 52-66. 
' ' 
· 
· · 
-
- LARSSON, R. (1977). "Basic Behavior of Scandinavian Soft Clays," Report No. 4, Swedish Geotechnical 
.-. 
-~Institute; 138 p.· 
.,· 
·· 
. 
· 
·· · · 
LAw, K.r. AND HOLTZ, R.D. (1978):."A Note on Skempton's A Parameter with Rotation of Principal 
-; 
1 
; ' Stresses,'~ Geotechnique,Vol. XXVIII, No.1, pp: 57-64. '. 
' 
' ' 
' 
LEA, N.D. AND BRAWNER, c.o. (1963)."'Highway Design and Construction Over Peat Deposits in 
Lower British Columbia,'' Highway Research Record, No.7. pp. 1-32. 
LEE; K.L (1965). "Triaxial Compressive Strength of Saturated Sands Under Seismic Loading Condi-
.. tions," Ph.D. dissertation; University of California, Berkeley; 520 p. · _ 
- .. 
LEE, K.L. AND FocHT, J.A. (1976). "Strength of Clay Subjected to Cyclic Loading," Marine Geotech-
.. 
nology, VoLi,No.3,pp.165-185: 
_ 
-
· LEE, K.L:· AND SEED, H.B. (1967). '~Drained· Strength Characteristics· of Sands," Journal of the Soil 
Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 93, No. SM6, pp. 117-141. 
'LEE, K.L. AND SINGH; A. (1971). "Compactionof Granular Soils," Proceedings of theNinthAnnual 
· Symposium 'on Engineering Geology and Soils Engineering, Boise, Idaho, pp.161-174. 
'LEE, W.F. (2000). "Internal Stability Analyses of Geosynthetic Reinforced Retaining Walls," Ph.D. thesis/ 
-
dissertation, Doctor of Philosophy, University of Washington, 380 p. 
·- . 
· 
LEONARDS, G.A. (Ed.) (1962). Foundation Engineering, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1136_ p. 
LEONARDS, G.A. (1973). Discussion of "The Empress Hotel, Victoria; British 'Columbia: Sixty-five 
Years of Foundation Settlements," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 10, No.1, pp. 12{}-122. 
LEONARDS, G.A. (1976). "Estimating Consolidation Settlements of Shallow Foundations on Overcon-
solidated Clays," SpecialReport163, Transportation Research Bciard,pp.13-:16. 
LEONARDS, G.A. (1977). Discussion to Main Session 2; Proceedings of the Ninth international Confer-
. ence on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Tokyo, VoL 3,pp. 38~386. 
LEONARDS, G.A.,ALARCON,A., FRosT, J.D., MoHAMEDZEIN, Y.E., SANTAMARINA, J.C., THiwANAYAGAM, S., 
.ToMAZ, J.E., AND TYREE, J.L. (i986): Discussion of"DynamiC Peneti<itiori Resistance and the 
Prediction. of the Compressibility· of a Fine-Grained Sand-A Labonitory • Study," by C. R.I. 
ciayton, M.B. Hababa, and N.E. Simons, Geotechnique, Vol. XXXVI, No. i; pp. 275-279. 
LEONARDS, G.A. AND ALTSCHAEFFL; A. G.: (1964). "Compressibility of Clay," Journal of the Soil 
- · · -_ •Mecha'nics and Foundations Division; ASCE, Vol. 90, No. SM5, pp. 133-156; also in Design of 
' 
' Foundations for Control of Settlement, ASCE, pp.' 163-185. 
. 
LEONARDS, G.A., CUTTER, W.A., AND HoLTZ, R.D. (1980). "Dynamic Compaction of Granular Soils,'' 
·'Journal of the Geotechnical EngineeringDivfsion;ASCE, Vol.106~No.l,pp:35-44.' · 
LEONARDS, G.A. AND GrRAULT, P. (1961). "A Study of the One-Dimensional Consolidation Test," 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on' Soil Mechanics arid Foundation Engineer-
ing,Paris,Vol.l,pp.116-130.· • 
· 
· 
: 
. · 
· 
LEONARDS, GA. AND RAMIAH, B.K. (1959):''Time Effects in the Consolidation of Clay,'' Papers on 
· '' '. 
Soils-' 1959 Meeting, American Society for Testing ana Materials, Special Technical Publication 
No.254,pp.116-130. 
' 
References 
825 
~LEROUEIL, S., MAGNAN, J.P., AND TAVENAS, F. (1990). Embankments on Soft Clays, a translation by 
D. Muir W~od of Remblais sur Argiles MoUes, 1985, Ellis Horwood, 360 p. 
LEROUEIL; S., TAVENAS; F., MIEUSSENS, C.,'AND PEIGNAUD, M. (1978b ). "Construction Pore Pressures in 
<:]ay Foundations Under Embankments. Part II: Generalized Behaviour," Canadian Geotechni-
ca!Journal, Vol.15, No.1, pp. 66-82. 
· 
.. · 
LEROUEIL, S., TAVENAS, F., TRAK, B., LAROCHELLE, P., AND ROY, M. (1978a). "Construction Pore Pres-
sure in Clay Foundations Under Embankments. Part 1: The Saint-AlbanTest Fills," Canadian 
Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 15, No.1, pp. 54-65 .. 
LITTLE, A.L. (1969). "The Engineering Classification of Residual Tropical Soils," Proceedings of the 
Specialty Session on the Engineering Properties of Lateritic Soils, Vol.1, Seventh International 
Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Mexico City, pp.1:-10. 
Lm, T.K. (1970). "A Review of Engineering Soil Classification Systems,'' Special Procedures for Testing Soil 
and Rock for Engineering Purposes, 5th ed., ASTM Special Technical Publication 479, pp. 361-382. 
Lo, K.Y. AND HEFNY,A.M. (2001). "Basic Rock Mechanics and Testing," Chapter 6 in Geotechnical and 
Geoenvironmental Handbook, R.K. Rowe (Ed.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp.147-172. 
· LOBECK, A.K. (1939). Geomorphology, An Introduction to the Study of;Landscapes,.Mc~Graw-Hill 
Book Company,NewYork,731 p. 
LOJANDER, M. (1988). "The Parameters of the Mechanical ModCI of Anisotropic Clay," Proceedings of 
the.Nordiska Geoteknikermote, Oslo, Norway. 
~ 
Loos, W. (1936). "Comparative Studies of the Effectiveness of Different Methods for Compacting 
.Cohesionless Soils," Proceedings of the First International Conference on Soil Mechanics and 
Foundation Engineering, Cambridge, Vol. III, pp.174-179. 
LOWE, J., III. (1974). "New Concepts in Consolidation and Settlement Analysis,''.Journal of the Geo-
technical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.lOO, No. GT6, pp. 574-612. 
· 
LoWE, J., III. AND ZACCHEO, P.F. (1991 ). "Subsurface Explorations and Sampling,'' Chapter 1 in Foundation 
Engineering Handbook,2nd ed.,H.Y. Fang (Ed.), Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, pp.1-71. 
LOWE, J., III., ZACCHEO, P.F., AND FELDMAN, H.S. (1964). ~'Consolidation Testing with Back Pressure,'' 
Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division. ASCE, Vol. 90, No. SMS; pp. 69-86; also 
in Design of Foundations for Control of Sfittlement, ASCE, pp.73-90 .. 
Lu, N. AND LIKOS, W.J. (2004). Unsaturated Soil Mechanics, Wiley, Hoboken, 556 p: · 
. LUKAS, R.G. (1980). '~Densification of Loose Deposits by Pounding;: Journal of the Geotechnical Engi-
neering Division, ASCE, Vol.l06, No. GT4, pp. 435-446, . 
· 
LUKAS, R.G. (1995). '~Dynamic Compaction,'' Geotechnical Engineering Circular No.1, FHWA Publica-
' tion No.1, Report No. FHWA-SA-95-:037,0ffice of Technology Applications, Washington, 105 p. 
LUNNE, T., ROBERTSON, P.K., AND POWELL, J.J.M. (1997). Cone Penetration Testing in Geotechnical Prac-
tice, Chapman & Hall, London. 
; . . : · 
LUPINI, J.F., SKINNER, A.E., AND VAUGHN, P.R. (1981). "The Drained Residual Strength of Cohesive 
Soils," Geotechnique, Vol. XXXI, No. 2;pp.181-:-213 .. ·. 
, 
LYONS AssoCIATES (1971). Laterite and Lateritic Soils and other. Problem Soils of Africa,An Engineer-
ing Study for the Agency for International pevelopment, Lyon Associates Inc., Baltimore, MD, 
and Building and Road Research Institute, Kumasi, Ghana; 290 p. 
M 
MACDONALD,A.B. AND SAUER, E.K. (1970). "The Engineering Significance of Pleistocene Stratigraphy 
in the Saskatoon Area, Saskatchewan, Canada,'' Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 7, No.2, 
pp. 116-126. 
' 
' . 
' 
MAGNAN, J.P., SHAHANGUIAN, S., AND JossEAUME, H. (1982). "Etude en Laboratoire des Etats Limites 
· 
d'une Argile Molle Organique,'' Revue Franr;aisede Geotechnique, Vol. XX, No.1, pp.13-19. 
826 
References 
'MAIR, R.J. AND WooD, D.M. (1987). Pressuremeter Testing: Methods and InWpretation, CIRIA~Butter-
worths, London, 160 p. 
. 
· · 
. 
MANNHEIM, B.R.S. (1979). "A New Conception of the Formation of the Kola PeninsulaApatite 
· 
Deposit: The Coprogenic Impact Theory-CIT," The Journal of Irreproducible Results, Society for 
Basic Irreproducible Research, Society for Basic Irreproducible Research, Vol. 25, No.1, pp. 6-7. 
· · MANSUR, C.l. AND KAUFMAN, R.I. (1962). "Dewatering," Chapter 3 in Foundation Engineering, G.A. 
· 
Leonards (Ed.), McGraw-Hill, pp. 241-350. 
· 
· 
· 
' 
MARACHI, N.D., DUNCAN, J.M., CHAN, C.K.; AND SEED, H.B. (1981). "Plane-strain Testing of Sand," 
· 
Laboratory Shear Strength of Soil, R.N.Yong and F. C. Townsend (Eds.),ASTM Special Technical 
Publication 740; pp. 294-302. 
•· 
. 
" 
MARCHETTI, S. (1980). "In-Situ Tests by Flat Dilatometer," Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering 
Division,ASCE, Vol. 106, No. GT3, pp. Z99..:.321. 
MARCHETTI, S.(1997). "The Flat Dilatometer: Design Applications,"Proceedings of the Third Interna-
tional Geotechnical Engineering Conference, Cairo, Egypt, pp: 421-448 (as referenced in Sabatini, 
·et a1.;2002). 
' · 
·· ': MARCUSON, W.F., HYNES M.E., AND FRANKLIN,A.G. (1990). "Evaluation and Use of Residual Strength 
in Seismic Safety Analysis of Embankments," Earthquake Spectra; Vol. 6, No: 3, pp. 529-572. 
·MARIN-NIETO, L.(1997). "Some Experiences with Clay Soil in Southwestern of Ecuador," Proceedings 
of the Fourteenth Internation{ll Conference on Soil Mechanics mid Geotechnical Engineering, 
· Hamburg, Germany, Vol.· 1, pp. 157-160. 
· · , · 
•. :.·.. 
·• ·; MARIN-NIETO, L.(2007). "Correlaci6n Entre los Panimetros Climaticos y los Movimieritos de una Zap-
ata Cimetada en Rocas Expansivas, al Suroeste • del Ecuador" ("Correlation Between Climatic 
Parameters : and the Movements · of a Footing' on Expansive Rock, Southwest Ecuador"), 
Proceedings.ofthe ThirteenihPanamerican Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engi-
neering, Isla de Margarita, Venezuela, pp. 54-58 (CD-ROM). ·. · 
· 
' 
:MARINOS, P. AND HoEK, E. (2000). "GSI-A Geologically Friendly Tool for Rock Mass Strength Estima-
. 
tion," Proceedings of the GeoEngineering 2000 Conference, Melbourne, Australia, pp.l422-1442. 
MARINOS, P. AND HoEK, E: (2001): "Estimating the Geotechnical Properties of Heterogeneous Rock 
Masses Such as Flysch," Bulletin of the Engineering Geology and the Environment (IAEG), Vol. 60, 
~~ 
. 
. 
. 
MARINOS, P. AND HoEK, E: (2004). "Discussion of Rock Mass Characterization," presented at the Forty-
Seventh Annual Meeting, Association of Engineering Geologists, Dearborn, MI (abstract). 
i MASSARsCH; K.R. (1979). "Lateral Earth Pressure in Normally Consolidated Clay," Proceedings of the 
Seventh European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Brighton, Eng-
"·· · · ····land;VoL 2, pp. 245-:-250.· 
. 
MASSARSCH, K.R., HOLTZ, R.D., HOLM, B. G., AND FREDRICKSSON, A. (1975). ''Measurement of Hori-
: · • :: zontal In Situ Stresses," Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference on In Situ Measurement 
of Soil Properties, Raleigh, NC, VoL I, pp. 266-286. · · 
.. 
MATSUOKA, H. AND NAKAI,T. (1977). ·,'Stress~strain Relationship of Soil Based on the 'SMP'," 
Proceedings of Specialty Session 9, Ninth International Conference Soil Mechanics and Foun-
dation Engineering,Tokyo, pp.153-162, · 
· 
MATSUSHITA, K., KISHIDA, H., AND KYO, K. (1967). "Experiments on Damping of Sands," Transactions 
of the Architectural Institute of Japan, Summaries of Technical Papers (Annual Meeting of AIJ, 
1967), 166 p. 
. 
MAYA, J. AND RoDRIGUEZ, J. (1987). "El Subsuelo ·de Bogota y los Problemas de Cimentaciones," 
Proceedings of the Eighth Panamericdn Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineer-
ing, Colombia, pp. 197-264. 
' · ' · MAYNE; P.W.' (2006). "Critical State· Soil MechaniCs for Dummies," http://geosystems.ce.gatech.edu/ 
Faculty/Mayne/papers/index.html, last accessed August,2006. . 
References 
827 
· MAYNE, P.W. (2007). "Cone Penetration Testing,'~ Synthesis of Highway Practice 368, National Cooper-
. : . ative Highway Research Program, Transportation Research Board, 162 p. 
MAYNE, P.W., CHRISTOPHER, B.R., AND DEJONG, D.J. (2001). "Manual on Subsurface Investigations, 
' .National Highway Institute, Federal Highway Administration, Publ. No. FHWA NHI-01-031, 
394p.· 
' 
' 
. 
MAYNE, P.W. AND KULHAWY,F.H. (1982). "K0-0CR Relationships in Soil,'' Journal of the Geotechnical 
Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.108, No.GT6, pp. 851-872.·. 
·.MAYNE, P.W.AND PouLOs, H. G. (1999). "Approximate Displacement Influence Factors for Elastic Shal-
. 
low Foundations,'~ Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmenial Engineering; ASCE, Vol. 125, 
No. 6,pp. 453-460; imd closure to discussion by Fowler et a1.(2001), Vol:127;No.'l,pp. 99-102 . 
. MAYNE, P.W. AND RIX, G.J. (1993). '~Gma~-qc Relationship for Clays," Geotechnical Testing Journal, 
· ASTM, Vol. 16, No.1, pp. 54-60. '· 
McCARRON, W.O. AND CHEN, W.F. (1994). "Soil Phisticity and Implementation,'' Chapter 8 in Consti-
tutive EquationsforEngineering ~Materials, Vol. 2: Plasticity and Modeling, .W.F. Chen and A.F. 
. Saleeb (Eds.), pp. 991-1059: 
· 
· 
· 
McGowN, A (1973). "The Nature of the Matrix in Glacial Ablation Tills,'' Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Symposium on Soil Structure, Gothenburg; Swe.den; 95 p. · 
McKEEN, R.G. (1992). "Investigating Field Behavior of Expansive Chiy Soils," Expansive Clay Soils 
and Vegetative Infiwince on Shallow Foundations, C. Vipulanandan, M.B. Addison, and M. Hasan 
(Eds.), Geotechnical Special Publication No.115,ASCE, pp. 82-94. 
McNEILL; R.L. (1969). ·"Machine Foundations-The State-of-the-Art,'' Proceedings of the Specialty 
.. · .. : Session 2, Seventh>International Conference of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, 
·. ' 
MexicoCity,Mexico, pp. 67-100. :. · 
· 
· 
·· 
MEANS, R.E. AND PARCHER, J.V. (1963). Physical Properties of Soils, Charles E. Merrill Books, Inc., 
: ·Col unibus, OH; 464 p. 
·· 
. . . . 
· 
· MEEHAN, R.L. (1967), "The Uselessness of Elephants in Compacting'Fill," Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, Vol.IV,N0.3,pp.358-360.i~ 
,\ ·,: .. · 
MEIGH, A.C. (1987). Cone Penetration Testing: Methods and Interpretation, CIRIA~Butterworths, 
· London, 141 p. 
· 
· 
· 
· 
MENARD, L.F. (1956). "An Apparatus for Measuring the Strength of Soils in Place,'' MSCE thesis, Uni-
. · ve'rsity of Illinois. 
· 
· 
MENARD, L.F. (1975). "The Menard Pressuremeter,'' Les Editions Sols-Soils, No. 26, pp. 7-43. 
MENARD, L.F. AND BROISE, Y. (1975). "Theoretical and Practical Aspects of Dynamic Consolidation,'' 
Geotechnique, Vol. XXV, No.1, pp. 3-18. 
· 
· 
MESRI, G. (1973). "Coefficient of Secondary Compression,'' Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Founda-
tions Division, ASCE, Vol. 99, No. SM1,pp.l23-137. · · · 
· 
• MESRI, G. (1975).' Discussion of "New Design Procedures for Stability of Soft Clays,'' Journal of the 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.101, No. GT4, pp. 409-412. ·• 
MESRI, G. (1989). "A Reevaluation of Su(mob) = 0.22a~ Using Laboratory Shear Tests,'' Canadian Geo~ 
technical Journal, Vol. 26,No,l,pp.l62-164. 
MESRI, G. AND CASTRO, A. (1987). "Ca!Cc Concept andK0 During Secondary Compres'sion,'' Journal of 
Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol.ll3, No.3, pp. 230-247. 
MESRI, G., FENG, T.W., ALI, S., AND HAYAT, T.M. (1994). "Permeability Characteristics of Soft Clays,'' 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engi-
neering, New Dehli; Vol. 1, pp; 187-192 .. 
MESRI, G. AND GODLEWSKI, P.M. (1977). "Time- and Stress-Compressibility Interrelationship," Journal 
of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.103, No. GT5, pp. 417-430. 
MEYERHOF, G. G. (1956). "Penetration Tests and Bearing Capacity of Cohesionless Soils,'' Journal of the 
Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 82, No·. SMl, pp.1...:.19. 
828 
References 
,"; 
. MILLIGAN, V. (1972). Discussion of "Embankments on Soft Ground," Proceedings· of the ASCE Spe-
cialty Conference on Performance of Earth and Earth-Supported Structures, Purdue University, 
Vol. III,pp.41-48. 
. 
. 
. . .. 
, 
.. 
. . . 
. . . 
. 
. 
MILLS, W.T. AND DE SALvo, J.M; (1978). "Soil Compaction and Proofrolling," Soils; Newsletter of Con-
verse, Ward, Davis, and Dixon, Inc., Pasadena, CA, and Caldwell, NJ,Autumn, pp. 6-7. 
MILOVIC, D.M. (1970). ''Contraintes et Deplacemens dan une Couche Elastique d'EpaisseurLimitee, 
Produits par une Foundation Circulaire, Le Genie Civil; T.147, No.5, pp. 281-285. 
MITCHELL; J.K. AND SITAR, N. (1982); ''Engineering Properties of Tropical Soils," Proceedings of the 
· .·:::.ASCE Geotechnical Engineering Division Specialty. Conference on· Engineering and Construe~ 
• · . · ... • . tion in Tr~pical and Residual Soils, ASCE, Honolulu; HI, pp. 30-57. ;. : 
· 
·... . MITCHELL, J.K. AND GARDNER, W.S. (1975). "In Situ Measurement of Volume Change Characteristics," 
State-of-the-Art Report, Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference on In Situ Measurement 
,,! 
of Soil Properties, Raleigh, NC, Vol. II, 33:5 p. · 
. . 
. 
. • · • · 
. 
MITCHELL, J.K; AND SOGA, K. (2005).Fundamentals of Soil Behavior, 3rd ed.,Wiley, 577 p. 
MoH,Z.C.,BRAND,E.W.,ANo NELSON,J.D. (1972). "Pore Pressures Under a Bu~d on Soft Fissured Clay," 
·.. Proceedings· of the ASCE Specialty Conference: on· Performance'· of Earth. and Earth-Supported 
Structures, Purdue University, Vol.I, Part 1, pp. 243-272 .. • . 
. 
. · · 
.· \ MoHR, 0.. (1887): "Uber die Bestimmung und die Graphische Darstellung von Tragheitsmomenten 
. , . ebener Flach en," Civilingenieur, columns 43-68; also in .Abhandlungen aus. dem Gebiete der 
Technischen Mechanik, 2nd ed., W. Ernst u; Sohn, Berlin, pp. 90 and 109 (1914). • 
MoHR, 0. (1900). ·~welche Umstande Bedingen die Elastizitatsgrenze und den Bruch eines Materi-
ales?" Zeitschrift des Vereines Deutscher Ingenieure, Vol.44, pp.1524-1530; 1572-1577 ... 
MORAN, D.E. et al. (1958). "Study of Deep Soil Stabilization by Vertical Sand Drains,'' OTS Report, PB 
· , 151. 692, Bureau of Yards & Docks;Departmentof the.Navy, Washington. 
MORGENSTERN, N.R. AND EISENSTEIN, Z. (1970), "Methods of Estimating Lateral Loads and Deforma-
·. tion,'.' Proceedings of the ASCESpecialty Conference on Lateral Stresses in the Ground and 
Design of Earth-Retaining Str'uctures, Cornell University, pp. 51-102.: . 
MORRIS, D.A. AND JOHNSON; A.l. (1967). :·summary of Hydrologic and Physical Properties of Rock 
and Soil Materials," as analyzed by the Hydrologic Laboratory of the ,U.S. Geological Survey, 
U.S. Geology Survey ofWater~Supply Paper 1839-D, 42 P·. 
. · 
:; . : 
:. , ;; 
. MouLIN, G. (1988). "Etat limite d'une Argile Naturelle-L'argile de Pornic," Ph.D. thesis, Ecole 
. 
·· National Superieure de Mecanique, Nantes, France. 
.. 
. 
· . 
. . 
:MOULIN, G. (1989). "Caracterisation de l'Etat Limite de l'Argile de Pornic,". Canadian Geotechnical , 
Journal, Vol. 26, No.4, pp. 705-717. 
: : 
. 
. 
.. " 
, ... MROZ, Z. (1967). ~'On the Description of Anisotropic Hardening,'' Journal of Mechanics and Physics of 
. 
Solids, Vol. 15, pp; 163-175. 
. 
. 
. 
MUIR WooD, D. (1990). Soil Behaviourand Critical State Soil Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, 
462 p. ' 
' . . 
' •. 
. .. ; . ; 
, : :. , MUIR WooD, D. (2004). Geotechnical Modelling, E &FN Spon, London, 488 p. 
MuRFF, J.D. (1987). "Pile Capacity in Calcareous Sands: State of the Art,'' Journal of the Geotechnical 
Engineering Division,ASCE, Vol.113, No.5; pp. ~90-507;: 
.. 
N 
. ,t 
! -' 
' 
> 
' 
' 
\ 
,, 
NATIONAL COOPERATIVE HIGHWAY RESEARCH PROGRAM (2006):Rock-socketed Shafts for Highway 
. Structure Foundations, NCHRP Synthesi~ 360, Transportation Research Board, Washington, 
D.C.;109 p. 
. 
.. ·. 
: NELSON, J.D. AND MILLER, D.J. (1992). Expansive Soils: Problems and Practice in-Foundation and Pave-
ment Engineering, Wiley, New York, 259 p .. 
References 
829 
NEWLAND, P.L. AND ALLELY, B.H. (1960). "A,Study of the Consolidation Characteristics of a Clay," 
Geotechnique, Vol. X, pp. 62-74. 
' 
' ' 
· 
NEWMARK, N.M .. (1935). "Simplified Computation of Vertical Pressures in· Elastic Foundations," 
University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station Circular 24; Urbana, IL, 19 p. 
NEWMARK, N.M. (1942). "Influence Charts for Computation· of Stresses in Elastic Foundations," 
University of Illinois Engineering Experiment Station Bulletin, Series No. 338, Vol. 61, No. 92, 
Urbana, IL, Reprinted 1964, 28 p. 
' 
NICHOLS, T.C. AND CoLLINS, D.S. (1991). "Rebound, Relaxation, and·Uplift," Chapter 13 in The Her-
itage of Engineering Geology; The First Hundred Years, G.A. Kiersch (Ed.), Centennial Special 
VoL 3, Geological Society of America, pp. 265-276. 
· 
· 
NoE, D.C., JoACHIM, C.L.,AND RODGERS, W.P. (2007).A Guide to Swelling Soils for Colorado Homebuyers 
and Homeowners, 2nd ed., Special Publication 43, Colorado Geological Survey, Denver, 76 p. 
NooRANY, I. (1989). "Classification of Marine Sediments," Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, 
ASCE,Vol.115,No.l,pp.23-37. 
NooRANY, I. AND GrziENSKI, S.F. (1970). "Engineering Properties of Submafine Soils: State-of-the-
Art Review," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundation Division, ASCE, Vol. 96, No. 5, 
pp. 1735-1762. 
. 
' 
. 
NooRANY, I. AND SEED, H.B. (1965). "In-Situ Strength Characteristics of Soft Clays," Journal of Soil 
Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 91, No. SM2, pp. 49-80: · 
NooRANY, I. AND STANLEY, J.V. (1994). "Settlement of Compacted Fills Caused by Wetting," Vertical 
and Horizontal Deformations of Foundations and Embankments, Geotechnical Special Publica-
tion No. 40, ASCE, Vol. 2, pp. 1516-1530. 
. 
. ' 
0 
I!; ·• 
." 
OHTA, Y. AND GoTO, N. (1976). "Estimation of S-wave Velocity in Terms of Characteristic Indices of 
Soil," Butsuri-Tmiko, Vol. 29, No.4, pp. 34-41. 
' 
O'KELLY, B.C. AND NAUGHTON, P.J. (2008)."Use of Proximity Transducers for Local Radial Strain 
Measurements in a Hollow Cylinder Apparatus," Proceedings of the Fourth International Sym-
posium on Deformation Characteristics of Geomaterials,Atlanta, GA, Vol. 2, pp. 793~800. 
OKA, F., ADACHI, T., AND MIMURA, M. (1988). "Elasto-visco Plastic Constitutive·Models for Clays," 
International Conference on Rheology and Soil Mechanics, Coventry, UK, Vol. 1, pp. 12-28. 
OSTERBERG, J.O. (1957). "Influence Values for Vertical Stresses in a· Semi-infinite Mass Due to an 
Embankment Loading," Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Soil Mechanics 
· and Foundation Engineering, London, Vol. I, pp. 393-394. 
OsTERBERG, J.O. (1963). "Current Practice in Foundation Design-II," Chicago Soil Mechanics Lecture 
Series;ASCEand Illinois Institute of Technology, pp. 6-22. · 
OsTERBERG, J.O. (1967). Lecture Notes, CE'D-50, Soil Mechanics,' Northwestern University (recorded 
· by R.D: Holtz, February 7). 
· 
OsTERMAN, J. (1960). "Notes on the Shearing Resistance of Soft Clays," Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica, 
Series CI-2 (AP 263 1959), pp.1-22. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
p 
PAPAGIANNAKIS, A.T. AND MASAD, E.A. (2008). Pavement Design and Materials, Wiley, Hoboken, 
NJ,542 p. 
PARSONS, A.W., KRAWCZYK, J., AND CROSS, J.E. (1962). "An Investigation of the Performance on an 
8 1/z Ton Vibrating Roller for the Compaction of Soil," Road Research Laboratory, Laboratory 
NoteNo.LN/64/AWP.JK.JEC. .·. 
·· 
'·' · 
830 
References 
PAVLOVSKY, N.N. (1956). Collected Works,Akad. Nauk USSR, Leningrad. 
PCA. (1992). PCA Soil Primer, Portland Cement Association, Skokie, IL, 40 p. · 
PECK, R.B. (1974). "The Selection of Soil Parameters for the Design of Foundations," Second Nabor 
Carrillo Lecture, Seventh National Meeting of the Mexican Society for Soil Mechanics, Guadala-
jara, Mexico, pp. 9-:49. c 
•PECK,· R.B., HANSON,·W.E., AND THORNBURN, T.H. (1974). Foundation Engineering, 2nd ed., Wiley, 
New York, 514 p. 
· 
PENNER, E. (1963): "Sensitivity in Leda Clay," Nature, Vol.197, No. 4865, pp. 347-348. 
·. PERLOFF, W.H. (1975): "Pressure Distribution and Settlement," Chapter 4 in Foundation Engineering 
Handbook, 1st ed., H.F.Winterkorn and H.Y. Fang (Eds.), Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 
. pp.148-196. :. 
. 
. 
. , PERLOFF; W.H. AND BARON; W. (1976). Soil Mechanics.:... Principles and Applications,The Ronald Press 
. , , 
Company, New York, pp. 359-361. 
·· 
. ,, 
PERZYNA, P. (1963). "The Constitutive Equations for Rate Sensitive Plastic Materials," The Quarterly 
,. , ... 
.,. of Applied Mathematics, Vol. 20,No. 4,pp. 321-332., .· 
· 
PESTANA, J.M. (1994). "A Unified Cmistitutive Model for Clays and Sands" MIT. Sc.D. thesis, 473 p. 
P:Ew:E, T.L. (1991). "Permafrost," Chapter 14 in The Heritage of Engineering Geology; The First 
Hundred Years, G.A. Kiersch (Ed.), Centennial Special Vol:3, Geological Society of America, 
pp. 277-298 . 
. ·PHILIP, J.R. (1995). "Desperately Seeking Darcy in Dijon," Soil Science Society of America Journal, 
Vol. 59, No.2, pp. 319-'-324. 
PIHLAINEN, J.A. (1963). "A Review of Muskeg and Its Associated Engineering Problems," Technical 
Report 97, Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, U.S. Army, Hanover, NH, 67 p. 
PouLOS, H. G. (1988a). "The Mechanics of Calcareous Sediments" Jaeger Memorial Lecture, Proceedings 
of the Fifth Australia-New Zealand Geomechanics Conference, Sydney, pp. 8-41. 
·PouLOs, H. G. (1988b ). Marine Geotechnics, Unwin Hyman, London, 512 p. , 
. PouLOs, H. G. AND DAVIS, E.H. (1974). Elastic Solutions for Soil and Rock Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 
411 p. 
PouLOS, S.J. (1981 ): "The Steady State of Deformation," Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Divi-
,· sion,ASCE,Vol.l07,No.5,pp.553-562. 
·. -, 
. ,,. 
PowRIE, W. (2004). Soil Mechanics: Concepts and Applications, 2nd ed., E&.FN Spon, London, 704 p. 
PREVOST, J.H. (1977). ''MathematicalModeling of Monotonic and Cyclic Undrained Clay Behavior," 
International Journal for Numerical. and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, Vol. 1, No. 2, 
' pp. 195-216. 
. . ' ' 
: ,, .: 
PREVOST, J.H. AND POPESCU, R. (1996). "Constitutive Relations for Soil Materials," Electronic Journal 
of Geotechnical Engineering, 43p:.' 
, : 
· · .. , ·· 
PROCTOR,R.R. (1933). "Fundamental Principles of Soil Compaction," Engineering News-Record, 
,.,Vol.lll,Nos.9,10,12,and13.;• 
· ... · 
·;, 
: ' 
PUPPALA, A.J., lNTHARASOMBAT, N., AND VEMPATI, R.K (2005). "Experimental Studies on Ettringite-
lnduced Heaving in Soils," Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, 
Vol.131, No.3, pp. 325-337. · 
.. , 
PuscH, R. (1973). General Report on "Physico-Chemical Processes which Affect Soil Structure 
and Vice Versa," Proceedings of the International Symposium on Soil Structure, Gothenburg, 
Sweden, Appendix p. 33. 
,;._·,' 
Q 
' 
' 
I 
' 
• 
' 
, 
' 
' 
' 
' 
; t 
• 
~ 
• 
,. ,. , QUIGLEY, R.M. AND THOMPSON, .C.D. (1966). "The Fabric of Anisotropically Consolidated Sensitive 
Marine Clay," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. III, No.2, pp. 61:-:73. 
References 
831 
R 
RAJu,A.A. (1956). ''The P;econsolidation Pressure in Cia~ Soils," ~SCE thesis, Purdue Uni~ersity,41 p. 
RANKINE, W.J.M. (1857). "On the Stability of Loose Earth,"Abstracts of the Papers Communicated to 
·the Royal Society of London, Proceedings of the Royal Society, London, Vol. VIII, pp. 185-187. 
RAYMOND, G.P. AND WAHLS, H.E. (1976). :'Estimating One~ Dimensional Consolidation, Including Sec-
ondary Compression of Clay Loaded fromOverconsolidated to Normally Consolidated State," 
· 
Special Report 163, Transportation Research Board, pp~ 17-23, 
. 
. . 
: 
. 
· 
· 
. ·: ... RAYMOND, G.P.,ToWNSEND, D.L., AND LOJKACEK, M.J. (1971 ). ~'The Effects of Sampling on the Undrained 
Soil Properties of the Leda Soil," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 8, No.4, pp. 546-557. 
: RECHENMACHER,A.L. AND FINNO, R.J. (2004)~ "Digital Image Correlation to Evaluate Shear Banding 
· 
in Dilative Sands," Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol. 27, No.1, pp. H-22. 
REDDI, L.N. (2003). Seepage in Soils: Principles and Applications, Wiley, 448 p .. 
REED, M.A., LOVELL, CW., ALTSCHAEFFL;A.G.,AND WooD, L.E. (1979), "Frost Heaving Rate Pre-
. dieted from Pore Size. Distribution," Canadian Geotechnical Journal,yol.l6, No.3, pp. 463-472 . 
. RENDULIC, L. (1936). '~The Relation Between Void Ratio and Effective Stresses for a Remoulded Silty 
. Clay," Discussion D-27, Proceedings of the First International Conference on Soil Mechanics and 
Foundation Engineering, Cambridge, MA, Vol. III, pp. 48-51. 
· 
RENDULIC, L. (1937). "Ein Grundesetz der Tonmechanik und Sein Experimenteller Beweiss" ("A Fun-
damentaL Principal of Soil Mechanics and Its Experimental Verification"),Der Bauingenieur, 
Vol. 18, pp. 459:-:467.. 
. 
REYNOLDS, 0. (1885). "On the Dilatancy of Media Composed of Rigid Particles in Contact, with 
Experimental Illustrations," PhilophicalMagazine, Series 5, Vol. 20,469 p. (as referenced/quoted 
in Scott, 1963). 
RICHARDs,A.F. (Ed.) (1988). Vane Shear Strength Testing in Soils: Field and Laboratory Studies, ASTM 
Special Technical Publication No.1014, 378 p. 
RICHART, F.E., Jr., HALL, J.R.;AND WOODS, R.D. (1970). Vibrations of Soils and Foundations, Prentice-
Hall,Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 414 p. 
. : . 
RIX, G.J. AND STOKE, K.H. (1991). "Correlation of Initial Tangent Modulus and .Cone Penetration 
Resistance," Calibration Chamber Testing, International Symposium on Calibration Chamber 
Testing, A.B. Huang (Ed.), Elsevier Publishing, New York, pp.351-362 .. 
ROBERTSON, P.K. AND CAMPANELLA, R.G. (1983). "Interpertation of Cone Penetration Tests. Part I: 
Sand," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 20, No. 4,pp. 718-733. 
ROBERTSON, P.K., CAMPANELLA, R.G., GILLESPIE, D., AND BY;T. (1988). "Excess Pore Pressures and the 
Flat Dilatometer Test," Proceedings of the First International Symposium on Penetration Testing 
(1SOPT-1), Orlando, Vol.l, pp. 567-576. 
. .1 •.. 
ROGERS, CD.F. (1994). "Types and Distribution of Collapsible Soils," in Proceedings of the NATO 
Advanced Research Workshop on Genesis and Properties of Collapsible Soils, E. Derbyshire, 
T. Dijkstra; and I.l Smalley (Eds.), pp.l-17. 
RoscoE, K.H. AND BuRLAND, J.B. (1968). "On the Generalized Stress-Strain Behaviour of Wet Clays," in 
J. Heyman and F.A. Leckie (Eds. ), Engineering Plasticity, Cambridge University Press, pp. 535-609. 
RowE, P.W. (1962). "The Stress-Dilatancy Relation for Static Equilibrium of an Assembly of Particles 
in Contact," Proceedings of the Royal Society A, Vol. 269, pp. 500-527. 
· 
·RowE, P.W. (1972). "The Relevance.of Soil Fabric to Site Investigation Practice," Twelfth Rankine 
Lecture, Geotechnique, Vol. XXII, No.2, pp.l95-300. 
RowE, P.W., BARDEN. L.,.AND LEE, I.K. (1964); Energy Components. During the Triaxial Cell and 
Direct Shear Tests," Geotechnique, Vol. XIV, No.3, pp. 247-261. 
RuTLEDGE, P.C. (1944). "Relation of Undisturbed Sampling to Laboratory Testing," Transactions, 
ASCE, Vol. 109, pp.1162-1163. · 
832 
References 
RuTLEDGE, P.C. (1947). Review of "Cooperative Triaxial Shear Research Program of the Corps of 
Engineers," USAE Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, MS, 178 p. 
,S 
SAADA,A.S. AND BIANCHINI, G.F. (1975). "Strength of One Dimensionally Consolidated Clays," Journal 
' 
of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.101, No. GT11, pp: 1151.:._1164. 
SABATINI, P.J., BACHUS, R.C., MAYNE, P.W., ScHNEIDER,J.A., AND ZETTLER, T.E.'(2002). Evaluation of 
Soil and Rock Properties, Geotechnical Engineering Circular No.5, Federal Highway Adminis-
tration; Report No. FHWA-iF-02-034, 385 p. 
· 
SALLFORS, G. (1975).'"Preconsolidation Pressure of Soft, High-plastic Clays," Ph.D. thesis, Chalmers 
University of Technology; Gothenburg, Sw,eden, 231 p. 
· 
. . 
· 
SAMTANI, N.C. AND NowATSKI, E.A. (2006). Soils and Foundations Workshop Reference Manual, NHI 
· Course No.132012, Federal Highway Administration, Publication No. FHWA-NHI-06-088, 944 p. 
SANGLERAT, G; (1972).The Penetrometer and Soil Exploration; Elsevier;Amsterdam,464 p. 
· SANTAGATA, M.C., GERMAINE, J.T., A~ID LADD, C.C: (2005). "Factors Affecting the Initial Stiffness of 
· Cohesive Soils," Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 131, 
· No.4 pp. 430-441. 
· 
' 
· 
SNm, P.M. AND SHAKOOR, A. (Eds.) (1997).' Characterization of Weak and Weathered Rock Masses, 
Association of Engineering Geologists Special Publication No.9, 233 p. 
SATIJA, B.S. (1978). "Shear Behaviour of Partly Saturated Soils," Ph.D. thesis, Indian Institute of Tech-
nology, Delhi, 327 p. 
· . SAWANGSURIYA,A, EDIL, T.B.; AND BosscHER, P.J. (2003). "Relationship Between Soil Stiffness Gauge 
Modulus and Other Test Moduli for Granular Soils," Transportation Research Record No.1849, 
Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC, pp. 3-10. 
· 
· 
ScHMERTMANN, J.H. (1955). "The Undisturbed Consolidation Behavior of Clay," Transactions, ASCE, 
' : 
, Vol.120, pp.1201-1233. 
· 
· 
ScHMERTMANN, J.H. (1970). "Suggested Method for Screw-Plate Load Test," Special Procedures for 
· ··· ... · 
Testing Soil and Rock for Engineering Purposes, 5th ed:, ASTM Special Technical Publication 
.J 
479,pp.81-85. 
. 
SCHMERTMANN, J.H. (1975). "Measurement of In Situ Shear Strength," State~of-the-Art Report, 
· ' 
Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference on In Situ Measurement of Soil Properties, 
Raleigh, NC, Vol. II, pp. 57-138. 
SCHMERTMANN, J.H. (1978): Guidelines for Cone Penetration Test, Performance andrDesign, Federal 
Highway Administration, Report FHWA-TS-78-209, 145 p. · • 
ScHMERTMANN, J.H. (1986). "Suggested Method for · Performing the . Flat' Dilatometer Test," 
Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol. 9, No~ 2, pp. 93-101. 
ScHMERTMANN; J.H. (1993). "Conical Test Load to· Measure Soil Compressibility," Technical Note, 
Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol. 119, No.5, pp. 965-971. 
SCHMERTMANN, J.H. (1994). Closure to discussion of 1993 paper, Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, 
ASCE, Vol. 120, No.11; 2075 p. · . 
' 
ScHMIDT, B. (1966). Discussion of ''Earth Pressures at Rest Related to Stress History," Canadian Geot-
echnical Journal, Vol. III, No.4, pp. 239-242. 
· 
' 
.SCHMIDT, B. (1967). "Lateral Stresses in Uniaxial Strain," Bulletin No. 23, Danish Geotechnical Insti-
tute, pp. 5-12. 
SCHOFIELD, A. AND WROTH, P. (1968). Critical State Soil Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, London. 
SCHOLEY, G.K., FROST, J.D., LOPRESTI, D.C.F., AND }AMI OLKOWSKI, M. (1995). "A Review of Instrumen-
tation for Measuring Small Strains during Triaxial Testing of Soil Specimens," Geotechnical Test-
ing Journal,ASTM, Vol. 18, No.2, pp. 137-156. 
References 
833 
SCHUSTER, R.L.Ar:m~MULLINEAux; D.R.'(1991). ·~volc'anic Activity/' Chapter 11 in The Heritage of 
Engineering Geology; The First Hundred Years, G.A: Kiersch (Ed.), Geological Society of Amer-
- ic·a, Boulder, CO, VOL 3, · pp. 233-250. 
· · , , 
, 
· 
SCHW~B, E.F. (1976). ~'Bearing Capacity, Strength; and Deformation Behaviour of Soft Organic Sul-
phide Soils,"' Ph.D: thesis, : Institutionen fOr 
Jord~ och: · Bergmekai1ik, Kungliga Tekniska 
Hogskolan, Stockholm, 368 p. :, , . ;. 
· 
, , ·, 
·. Scorr, R.F. (1963). Principles of Soil Mechanics; Addison-Wesley, Reading; MA, pp: 267-275. 
SEED, H.B. (1964). Lecture Notes, CE 271, "Seepage arid Earth Dam Design,"University ofCalifornia, 
· 
Berkeley (recorded byW.D. Kovacs,April13); 1 · 
.· • 
· 
· 
· 
SEED, H.B. (1979). "Soil Liquefaction and Cyclic Mobility Evaluation for Level Ground During Earth-
quakes," Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, Vol.105; No. GT2, pp. 201-255. 
SEED, H.B. (1987). "Design Problems in Soil Liquefaction," Journal of Geotechrdcal Engineering, 
ASCE, VoL 113,No. 8, pp. 827-845. · 
· • 
. 
SEED, H.B. AND CHAN; C.K. (1959). "Structure and Strength Characteristics of Compacted Clays," 
Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Division, ASCE, Vol. 85, No. SM5, pp. 87-128. 
SEED, H.B. AND IDRISS, I.M. (1970). "Soil Moduli and Damping Factors for Dynamic Response Analyses, 
Report No. EERC 70-10, Earthquake Engineering Research Ceriter, Berkeley; CA, 40 p. 
SEED, H.B. AND LEE, K.L (1967). "Undrained Strength Characteristics of Cohesionless Soils," Journal 
of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division; ASCE, Vol. 93, No. SM6, pp. 333-360. · 
SEED, H.B., WONG; R.T., IDRISS, LM;; ANDTOKIMATSU; K. (1984):"Moduli arid Damping Factors for 
Dynamic Analysis of Cohesionless Soils," Report No. UBC/EERC 84/14, University of Califor-
·. ni.a; Berkeley, ·40 p. ·. 
. , , : 
SEED, H.B.; WONG, R.T.; IDRISS, I.M., Ar-iD TOKIMATSU, K. (1986). "Moduli and.Damping Factors for 
Dynamic Analysis of Cohesionless Soils," Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE; Vol. 112. 
No. 11, pp; 1016-1032. 
" 
· · 
. 
SEED, H.B., WooDWARD, R.J., AND LUNDGREN; R. (1962). "Prediction of Swelling Potential for Com-
, pacted Clays," Journal of the Soil Mechanics and Fowidations Division; ASCE, Vol. 88, No. SM4, 
pp.l07-131. 
' ' 
' " 
. 
SELIG, E.T. AND LADD, R.S. (Eds.) (1973). ~·Evaluation of Relative Density and Its Role in Geotechnical 
Projects Involving Cohesionless Soils", Proceedings of a Symposium, ASTM Special Technical 
' Publication No. 523, 510 p. . 
· '. 
· • 
SELIG, E.T. ANP Yoo, T.S. (1977). "Fundamentals of Vibratory Roller Behavior," Proceedings of the Ninth 
International Confaence on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Tokyo, Vol. 2, pp. 375-380. 
SHARP, R.P. (1960). Glaciers, Condon Lectures, Oregon State Systerri of Higher Education, Eugene, 78 p. 
SHEAHAN, T.C. AND KALIAKIN, V.N. (Eds.) (1996). Measuring and Modeling Time Dependent Soil 
Behavior, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 61, ASCE, New York, 273 p .. · 
SHEAHAN, T.C., LADD,C.C., AND GERMAINE, J.T. (1996). ''Rate-dependent Undrained Shear Behavior 
of Saturated Clay/1 Journal of Geotechnical Engineering, ASCE, Vol.122,No.2, pp. 99-108. 
SHERARD, J.L., WOODWARD, R.J., GIZIENSKI, S.F.; AND CLEVENGER, W.A. (1963). Earth and Earth-Rock 
·Dams; Engineering Problems of Design and Construction, Wiley, New York, 725 p. 
·SILVER, M.L. AND SEED, H.B. (1971). "Volume Changes in Sands Due to Cyclic Loading," Journal of the 
• Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol.97, No.9, pp.1171-1182. · · · 
SIMONS, N.E. (1958). Discussion of "Test Requirements for Measuring the Coefficient of Earth Pressure 
at Rest," Proceedings of the Conference on Earth Pressure Problems, Brussels, Vol. III, pp. 50-53. 
, .SIMONS; N,E;,(1974). "Normally Consolidated and Lightly Overconsolidated Cohessive Materials," 
' · ·. General Report, 'Proceedings of the Conference on Settlement of Structures, Cambridge Univer-
sity, British Geotechnical Society, pp. 500-530; 
· 
• 
SITAR, N. (Ed.) (1988). Geotechnical Aspects of Karst Terrains: Explaoration, Foundation Design and 
Performance, and Remidial Measures, Geotechnical Special Publication No:14;ASCE, 165 p. 
834 
References 
· . SKEMPTON,A.W. (1953). '~The Colloidal Activity of Clays," Proceedings of the Third International Con-
• . , : 
ference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. I, pp. 57-61 
SKEMPTON,A.W. (1954). "The Pore-Pressure Coefficients A and B," Geptechnique, Vol. IV, pp.143-147. 
SKEMPTON,A.W. (1960). ~'Effective Stress in Soils, Concrete·~rid Rocks," in Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Pore Pressure and Suction in Soils, Butterworths, London, pp. 4-16. 
SKEMPTON, A.W. AND HENKEL, D.J. (1953). "The Post-Glacial Clays of the Thames Estuary at Till bury 
and Shellhaven," Proceedings of the Third International Conference onSoil Mechanics and Faun-
.'·· 
dation Engineering, Zurich, Vol. I, PP: 302-308. · 
SKEMPTON, A.W. AND NoRTHEY, R.D. (1952). '~The Sensitivity of Clays," Geotechnique, Vol. III, No.1, 
. pp. 30-53. 
• ; . 
SKEMPTON; A.W .. AND SowA, V.A. (1963). ':The Behaviour of Saturated Clays During Sampling and 
. ' Testing,"Geotechnique, Vol. XIV, No.4, pp. 269-290. 
SLADEN, J.A., KRAHN, J., AND HOLLANDER, R.D:'(l986). Discussion of "A State Parameter for Sands," 
· by K. Been and M.G. Jefferies, Vol. XXXV, No.2, pp. 99~ 112; Geotechnique, Vol. XXXIV, No.1, 
' pp. 123-124. 
SMSS (1990).Keys to Soil Taxonomy, Soil Management Support Services Survey Staff, SMSS Technical 
Monograph No.6, 4th ed., Blacksburg; YA, 422 p. 
SMITH, R.E:, GABR, M.A.,. AND KULA, J.R. (1991). "Soil-Rock Transition Zone: Uncertainties for 
Design and Construction," in W.F. Kane and B. Amadei (Eds. ), Detection of and Construction at 
·· the Soil/Rock Interface, Proceedings of the Symposium, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 28, 
ASCE, pp. 91-106. 
. 
. 
SMITH, R.E. AND W AHLS, H.E. (1969). "Consolidation Under Constant Rates of Strain," Journal of the 
·Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 95, No.2, pp. 519-539 . 
. SNEDEGAR, W.H. (1983). Letter. to the Editor, American Journal of Physics, Vol. 51, No; 8, 684 p. 
SoDERMAN, L.G. AND KIM, Y.D. (1970). "Effect of Groundwater Levels on Stress History of the 
St. Clair Clay Till Deposit," Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 7, No.2, pp.173-187. 
Sore CLASSIFICATION WoRKING GROUP (1998). The Canadian System of Soil Classification, 3rd ed., 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Publication 1646 (Revised), 187 p. 
SowERS, G.F. (1979). Introductory Soil Mechanics and Foundations: Geotechnical Engineering, 4th ed., 
Macmillian, New York,621 p .. 
SOWERS, G.F. (1992). "Natural Landslides," in Stability and Performance of Slopes and Embankments-II, 
Proceedings of a Specialty Conference; R.B. Seed and R.W. Boulanger (Eds.), Geotechnical Spe-
. cial Publication No. 31, ASCE, pp. 804,-833. 
··.SOWERS, G.F. (1996). Building on Sinkholes: Design and Construction of Foundations in Karst Terrain, 
. . ASCE Press, 202 p. 
. . 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
SOWERS, G. F. AND RICHARDSON, T.L. (1983). '.'Residual Soils of the Piedmont and Blue Ridge," TRR 919, 
National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., pp.l0-16. 
SRIDHARAN",A. AND PRAKASH, K. (2000). "Classification Procedures for Expansive Soils," Geotechnical 
Engineering, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, VoL 143; pp. 235-240. 
STATENS JARNVAGERS GEOTEKNISKA KOMMISSION (1922).191~1922 Slutbetiinkande, (191~1922 Final 
.. · ·Report), Presented to the Board of the Royal Swedish Railroads, Stockholm, 180 p. (42 plates). 
STOKOE, K.H.; II AND' LODDE, P.F. (1978). "Dynamic Response ·of San Francisco Bay Mud," 
Proceedings of the Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics Conference, Los Angeles, ASCE, 
Vol. II, pp. 940-959. · 
STOKOE, K.H., II, DARENDELI, M.B., ANDRUS, R.D., AND BROWN, L.T. (1999). "Dynamic Soil Properties: 
Laboratory, Field and Correlation Studies," Proceedings of the Second International Conference 
on Earthquake Geotechnical Engineering, Lisbon, Portugal, June, pp: 811-845. 
SULTAN, H.A. .AND SEED, H.B. (1967). "Stability of Sloping Core Earth Dams," Journal of the Soil 
Mechanics and Foundation Division, ASCE, Vol. 93, No. SM4, pp. 45-67.•· 
References 
835 
T 
TAN, T.K. (1957). "Structure Mechanics of Clay~," Academia Sini~a, SoilMeclia~ics Laboratory, Insti-
. tute of Civil Engineering and Architecture, Harbin; China, pp.' 1-17: 
. . 
· 
TATSUOKA, F. AND SHIBUYA, s. (1992). "Deformati~nChan~cteristics of S~ils and Rocks from Field and 
Laboratory Tests," Report of the Institllt~ of Industri~l Science, The University of Tokyo, Vol. 37, 
No. l(Serial No. 235), 136 p. . 
·· 
· 
. 
. 
. 
· 
· TAVENAS, EA., BLANCHETTE, G., LEROUEIL; S., RoY, M., AND LAROCHELLE, P. (1975). "DiffiCulties in the 
In Situ Determination of K 0 in Soft Sensitive Clays,"Proceedi~gs of theASCE Specialty Confer-
.·. ence on In Situ Measu~ement of Soil Properties, RalCigh,NC, Vol. I, pp.450-476. 
· · 
TAVENAS, F.A., CHAPEAU, C., LAROCHELLE, P., AND RoY, M. (1974). "I~ediate Settlements of Three Test 
. . . Embankments on Champlain Clay," Canadian Geotech'rzicalJournal, Vol. 11; No. 1, pp. 109-141. 
TAVENAS, F. AND LEROUEIL~ s. (1977). "Effects of Stresses and Time on Yielding of Clays," Proceedings 
of the Ninth International. Conference on Soil.Mechanics and !Foundation Engineering, Tokyo, 
Vol.l, pp. 319-J26. 
.. . .. 
. · .·.~ 
· . 
. .. · · · 
· 
··· 
·. 
· . ' 
TAVENAS, F. AND LEROUEIL, S. (1979). "LesConcepts d'Etude Limite ~t l'Etat Critique et Leurs Appli-
cation Pratiques a !'Etude des Argiles," Revue Franr;aise, de Geotechnique, Vol. VI, pp. 27-49 . 
. TAVENAS, F. ANDLEROUEIL, S. (1985). "Structural Effects on the Behaviour of Natural Clays," Discus-
. sion on Session 2B on Laboratory Testing, Proceedings of the. Elev~nth International Conference 
Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Vol. 5, pp.2693.,-2694.. 
. , · 
· 
TAYLOR, D.W. (1948). Fundamentals of Soil Mecha~ics, Wiley, New York, 712 p. · . 
.· 
TAYLOR, P.W. AND BACCHUS, D.R. (1969). "Dyilamic Cyclic Strain Test o~ a Clay," P,:oceeding~ of the 
. . . SeventhinternationalConference on Soil Mechanic~ and Foundation Engineering, Mexico City, 
·. Voll,pp.401-409. 
· 
. 
. 
· 
· 
· :' 
. · '. . 
. 
.. 
TAYLOR, P.W. AND HUGHES, J.M. (1965). "Dynamic Properties ofFoundation Subsoil asDetermine,d 
from Laboratory Tests," Proceedings of the Third World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, 
New Zealand, Vol.l, pp. 196-209. 
. · 
. · 
·. · ... · ·.· ·. 
· . 
TAYLOR, P.W. AND MENZIES, B.K. (1963). "Damping Characteristi~s of Dynamically Loaded Clay," 
Proceeding; of the Fourth Austrcllian-New Zealand Conferenceon E~rthquake Engineering, 
New Zealand, Vol.l, pp.196-211. 
· 
· · 
· 
TERZAGHI, CH. (1920). "New Facts about Surface Friction," The Physical Review, N.S.,Vol. XVI, No.1, 
.• pp.54.,-6l., 
... 
.· 
.. · .. •'. 
' 
. 
. 
. 
. .· .. ' ' 
.. 
.·. 
' ..... · 
TERZAGHI, K. (1922). "Der Grundbruch an Sta'uwerken and seine Verhtitung," Die Wasserkraft, Vol.l7, 
. · 
No. 24, pp. 445-449; reprinted in Fr~m Theory to Pra~tice i~ SoflMech£mi~s,Wiley, New York, 
pp.ll4-118. . 
. 
. 
' 
' 
. . 
. 
TERZAGHI, K. (1925a): ErdbaumechanikaufBodenphysikalischer Grundlage, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig 
und We in, 399 p.; "Structure and Volume ofVoids of Soils," pp. 10-13 (translated by A. Casagrande) 
in Terzaghi (1960). 
· 
. , 
. . 
. . 
TERZAGHI, K. (1925b). "Modern Conceptions.Concerning Foundation Engineering;: Journal of the 
• Boston Society of Civil Engineers, Vol.l2,No.10; also published in Contributions to Soil Mechan-
ics 1925-1940, BSCE, pp.l-43. 
. 
TERZAGHI, K. (1927). "Concrete Roads-A Problem in Foundation Engineering," Journal.of the 
Boston Society of Civil Engineers; May; reprinted in Contributions to Soil Mechanics 1925-1940, 
BSCE, pp. 57-58. 
. 
. 
• · 
.··. 
TERZAGHI, K. (1929). "Effect of Minor Geologic Details on the Safety of Dams," American Institute of 
Mining and Metallurgical Engineers, Technical Publication No. 215, pp. 31-44 .. 
TERZAGHI, K. (1938). ''Die Coulombsche Gleichung fur den Scherwiderstand bindiger Boden" ("The 
Coulomb Equation for the Shearing Resistance of Cohesive Soils"), Die Bautechnik, Vol. 16, 
No. 26, pp. 343-346. 
836 
References 
TERZAGHI, K. (1943). Theoretical Soil Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 510 p. 
TERZAGHI, K. (1960)~ From Theory to Practice in Soil Mechanics, Wiley, New York, 425 p. . 
· · TERZAGHI, K. AND FROHLICH, O.K. (1936). Thi/orie der Setzung von Tonschichten ("Theory of the Con-
. 
solidation of Clay' Layers',") F. Deuticke; Vienna. · ·' 
. 
. . 
' · . · 
· 
TERZAGHI, K. AND PECK, R.B. (1967). Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 
729p, 
' 
,, 
I 
' 
' 
• 
1 
.·• 
• 
'' 
• 
1 
, 
TERZAGHI, K., PEcK, R.B., AND MESRI, G. (1996). Soil Mechanics in Enginee~ing Practice, 3rd ed., Wiley, 
· NewYork,549p. · 
'·. . 
. 
.· .. · 
. · 
·. · 
· 
·. · · 
· · 
. · 
· 
· 
. 
TRIERS, G.R.· AND SEED, H.B. (1968). "Cyclic Stress~Strain Characteristics of Clay," Journal of the Soil 
Mechanics and Foundation Division, ASCE, VoL 94, No. SM2; pp. 555-569. I 
Tm)~PSON, J.C., LELIEVRE, B., BECKIE, R:D., NEGUS, K.J. (1987). "A Simple Procedure for Computa-
tion of Vertical Soil Stresses for Surface Regions of ArbitraryShape and Loading," Canadian 
. 
'GeotechnicalJournal,Vo1.24,No.l~pp.143_:_145. 
" 
'' 
· .. 
I 
' 
· THORNBURY, W.D: (1954). Principles of Geomorphology, Wiley, New York, 618 p. 
THORNBURY, W.D. (1969). Principles of Geomorphology, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 594 p. 
ToDD, D.K. (1980). Groundwater Hydrology, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 535 p. 
TODD, D.K. AND MAYS, L.W. (2004). Groundwater Hydrology, 3rd ed., Wiley, New York, 656 p. 
TORREY, V.H. AND DO NAG HE, R.T. (1994). "Compaction Control of Earth-Rock Mixtures: A New 
· 
Approach," Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 371..:.386. · 
TRANSPORTATION RESEARCHBOARD (TRB) (1977).Soil Taxonomy mid.Soil Properties, TRR642, 
Transportation Research Board; 81 p. · 
· 
· 
· 
TuRNBULL, W.J. (1950). "Compaction arid Strength Tests on Soil," presented at Annual Meeting, ASCE, 
January, as cited by Lambe, T.W. and Whitman; R.V. (1969), Soil Mechanics, Wiley; New York, 517 p. 
TuRNBULL, W.J. AND FosTER, C.R. (1956). "Stabilization of Materials by Compaction," Journal of the 
· 
Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 82, No. SM2, pp. 934-1 to 934:-23; also in 
Transactions, ASCE, Vol: 123, (l958), pp.1~26. 
. 
, 
TURNER, H.K. AND SCHUSTER, R.L. (Eds.) (1996). Landslides: Investigation and Mitigation, Special 
Report 247, Transportation.Research Boiui:!, National A~ademy Press, Washington, 673 p. 
. 
. 
' 
' 
' 
·> 
.,, 
I 
u 
ULUSAY, R. AND HUDSON, J. (Eds.) (2007). The Complete 1SRM Suggsted M~thods for Rock Characteri-
zation, Testing, and Monitoring: 197~2006, International Society for Rock MechaniCs; Laborat6rio 
N acional de Engenharia Civil, Lis boa, Portugal: · 
. . . 
U.S. ARMY CoRPs OF ENGINEERS (1986). "Laboratory Soils Testing," Engineer Manual EM 1110-2-1906, 
m~ 
. . 
. . 
. . 
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS (1994). "Engineering imd Design-RockFoundations," Engineer Man-
ual EM 1110-1-2908, 119 p. 
· 
u.s. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS (1999). Construction Control for Earth andRockfill Dams, Techni-
cal Engineering and Design Guides as adapted from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;No. 27, 
ASCE Press, 100 p.; also published as U.S. Army Corps of En'gineers Engineering Manual. 
. EM-1110-2--'1911. 
. 
. 
. . 
. 
. 
' U.S. ARMY.CORPS OF ENGINEERS (1994). Settlement Analysis; TechniCal Engineers and Design Guide 
No.9, Reprinted by ASCE, 136 p. 
U.S. ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT STATION (1949). "Compaction Studies on Silty Clay," 
Report No.2 of Technical Memorandum 3..:.271;. 
· 
U.S. ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYs ExPERIMENT STATION (1949); "Simplification oHhe Liquid Limit 
', Test Procedure,'? TechnicalMemorandum'No. 3-286, Correlations of Soil Properties with Geo-
logic Information, Report No.1, Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army, 48 p. · 
References 
837 
U.S, ARMY ENGINEER WATERWAYS EXPERIMENT. STATION. (1960) .. "Jne Unified Soil Classification 
System," Technical Memorandum No. 3:-357; Appendix A, Characteristics of Soil Groups Per-
. , taining to Embankments and Foundations; 1953; Appendix B, Chara'cteristics of Soil Groups 
Pertaining to Roads and Airfields, 1957. 
· 
· . · 
·. 
·· 
· ' ·; ·· · 
· • 
··.• 
'u.s. BUREAU OF RECLAMATION (1974). Earth Manual, 2nd ed., Denver, 810 p. 
' ; ' 
. 
u.s: DEPARTMENT oF THE ARMY (1983). Foundations in' Expansive Soils, Technical Manual No. TM 
5-818-7, Office of the Chief of Engineers, Washington, D.C; 98 p.' ' · 
U.S. DEPARTMENT oF THE ARMY (1984):Engineering mid Design·~· Pavement Criteria for Seasonal Frost 
Conditions- Mobilizaiimi'Construction;Engineer Manual EM lll0-3-138, 98 p. · 
. U.S. DEPARTMENT oF THE ARMY (1987). Arctic and Subartic Construction:.:.:. General Provisions, Vol. 1, 
Technical Manual TM 5-852~1, 55 p.· 
· · 
· 
· 
' 1 
. 
U.S. I?EPARTMENTOF THE ARMY, NAVY, AND AIR FoRCE (1971). ''Dewatering arid Groundwater Control 
· · for Deep Excavations," Chapter 6 in Army Tecchnical Manual No.5~18-5/NAVFAC Manual 
P-418/Air Force ManualBB-5, 187 p.~ 
, , . 
' '. ' · · 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 13 SOIL DYNAMICS AND SPECIAL DESIGN ASPECTS PUBL. MIL-HDBK-
, ' 1007/3, u.s. Navy Naval Facilities Engineering C6mm'a'nd, Norfolk~ VA; 145 p. · · 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR (1987). Design of Small Dams,: 3rd· ed.,· Bureau 'of Reclamation, 
· 
· • U.S. Government Printing Office, Denver, 860 p. · · 
· 
. 
. ·
1 
• 
·' , 
.··, 
· · . 
' 
. 
u.s. DEPARTMENT OF .nm' INTERIOR (1990): Earth Manual, Part 1; 3rd ed., Materials Engineering 
· Branch,311 p. 
.· 
. 
. . 
•· ·· • •:: 
., 
. 
.· 
· · 
U.S. DEPARTMENT oF THE'INTERIOR (1998): Earth Manual, Part 2; 3rd ed.; Materials Engineering 
.·Branch;1270p ... •;. '··' '. 
· 
.· 
·. '., .·: '' ' ... 
· 
· ,,·. 
u.s. DEPARTMENT OF TilE 'INTERIOR (1995): Ground Water Manual, 2nd ed., Bureau of Reclamation, 
U.S. Governm'ent Printihg Office, Washiitgtofl, .661' p~: : 
0 
• ( 
-
1 
; 
,.. , 
- ·, , 
U.S. DEPARTMENT oF THE INTERIOR (1998t Engineering Geology: Field •Manual, U.S. Government 
Printing Office, Washington; D.C. 478 p. · · 
• 
' · 
U.S. NAVY (1971). "Soil Mechanics; Foundations, and Earth Structures," NAVFAC Design Manual DM-7, 
Washington,D.C. · .. ·;; : 
: ·· · · '' . 
, 
, .. ": ,,,·.::· 
.· 
··• 
,· 
u.s. NAVY (1986). "Soil Mechanics; Foundations, and Earth Structures," NAVFAC Design Manual DM-7.2, 
· · Washington:nc.· 
· 
· 
· · 
' 
~ ' ) ; 
; ' '~' 
v 
,1', 
VAID, Y.P. AND CAMPANELLA;'R.O: (1974): "Triaxial arid Plai1e·Strain•Behavior of Natural Clay," 
' 
·Journal of the Geoiech'nical Engineering Division, ASCE; Vol. 100, No.3, pp. 207-224 .. · 
VANDER MERWE;D.H. (1964). "The Prediction of Heave from the Plasticity Index'and the Percentage 
Clay Fraction of Soils," Civil Engineering in South Africa, Vol.' 6, No: 6; pp.103-107; as referenced 
" in Nelson and Miller (1992) and Canadian Geotechnical Society (2006). '· · 
· 
VAN OLPHEN, H. (199l).An Introduction to Clay Colloid Chemistry: For Clay Technologists, Geologists, 
· • •· 
and Soil Scientists, 2nd ed., Krieger Publ. Co., Malabar, FL, 318 p: · ' · · 
· · 
· · · · · · 
VIPULANANDAN, C., ADDISON, M.B., AND HASEN, M. (Eds.) (2001 ). "Expansive Clily Soils and Vegetative 
· · Influence on Shaiiow Foundations," Proceedings of the Geo:Jnstitute Shallow Foundations and Soil 
Properties Committee Sessions and the ASCE 2001 Civil· Engineering ·Conference, Geotechnical 
SpeCial Publication 115, ASCE, 265 p. · ' 
~ ; · ' 
· ' 
VoN BANDAT, H.F. (1962). Aero geology, Gulf Publishing Company, Houston, TX, 350 p. 
VoN RosENVINGE,T. (2006):Personal communication. 
' 
· · · · · 
' 
·: ' 
· 
VucETIC, M. AND DoBRY, R. (1991 ). "Effect of Soil Plasticity on Cyclic R~sponse," Jour~al of Geotechni-
cal Engineering, Vol.117, No.1, pp. 89-107. 
· 
' ' 
· 
· 
838 
References 
···w 
'·,j 
WAHLS, H.E.· (1962). "An Analysis of Pr~mary, and Secondary Consolidation,'~ Journal of the Soil 
Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 88, No. SM6, pp. 207-231. , ' 
WALLACE, G.B. AND .()rro, W.f:_. (1964)~ "Diffe~ential Settlement at Selfridge Air Force Base," Journal 
of the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 90, No~ SMS, pp. 197-220; also in 
Design of Foundations forControl of Settlement, ASCE, pp. 249-272 . 
. WARSHAW, C.M. AND RoY, R (1961). '~Classification and a Scheme for the Identification of Layer Sili-
cates,'' Geological Society of America Bulletin, Vol. 72, pp.1455-1492 . 
. . WEISSMAN, G.F. AND HART, RR (1961). "The Damping Capacity of Some Granular Soils,'' Symposium 
on Soil Dynamics,ASTM Special Technical Publication No. 305, June 1961, pp. 45-54. 
WELSH, RA., VALLEJO, L.E., LOVELL, C.W., AND ROBINSON, M.K. (1991). '~The U.S. Office of Surface 
Mining (OSM) Proposed Strength-Durability Classification System,''jnW.F. Kane imd B. Amadei 
(Eds.), Detection of and Construction {u the Soil/Rock Interface, Geotechnical Special Publication 
No.28,ASCE,pp.1~15. 
, ··, .: . 
WESLEY, L.D. AND IRFAN, T.Y. (1997); "Classification of Residual Soils," Chapter 2 in Mechanics of 
Residual Soils, G.E. Blight (Ed.); Balkema, 237 p., 
, 
WEST, T.R (1995). Geology Appliedto Engineering, PrenticecHall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 560 p. 
, , . WESTERGAARD, H.M. (1938). "A Problem of Elasticity Suggested by a Problem in Soil Mechanics: A Soft 
Material Reinforced by Numerous Strong Horizontal Sheets," in Contributions to the Mechanics of 
, , . : :Solids, Stephen Timoshenko 60th Anniversary Volume, Macmillan, New York, pp. 268-277. 
WHITMAN, RV. AND K.A. HEALY (1962). '~Shear Strength Testing of Sands During Rapid Loading," 
; Journal oft he Soil Mechanics and Foundations Diyision, ASCE, Vol. 88, No. 2, pp. 99-132. 
WHITTLE, A.J. (1987). "A Constitutive Model for Overconsolidated Clays with Application to the 
Cyclic Loading of FriCtion Piles," MIT Sc.D. thesis, 641 'p.. . 
. 
WILLIAMSON, D.A. AND KUHN, D.R "The Unified Rock Classification System,''. Rock Classification 
. ~, .. , .. · 
Systems for Engineering Purposes, ASTM Special Technical Publication 984, L. Kirkaldale (Ed.), 
American Society for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia, pp. 7.,-16. · 
, WILSON, S.D. (1970). "Suggested Method of Test for Moisture-Density Relations of Soils Using Harvard 
Compaction Apparatus," Special Procedures for Testing Soil and Rock for Engineering Purposes, 
5th ed.,ASTM Special Technical Publication 479, pp.101-103. 
WINELAND, J.D. (1975). "Borehole Shear Device," Proceedings of the ASCE Specialty Conference on In 
Situ Measurement of Soil Properties, Raleigh, NC, Vol. I, pp. 511-522. 
WISSA, A.E.Z. (1969). "Pore Pressure Measurement in Saturated Stiff Soils," Journal of the Soil 
. 
Mechanics and Foundations Division,ASCE, Vol. 95, No. SM4, pp.1063-1073. 
WISSA, A.E.Z., CHRISTIAN, J.T., DAVIS, E.H., AND HEIBERG; S. (1971). "Consolidation Testing at Con-
stant Rates of Strain," Journalofthe Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division, ASCE, Vol. 97, 
No.lO, pp. 1393-1413. 
WoLFF, T.F. (1995). Spreadsheet Applications in .Geotechnical Engineering, PWS Publishing, Boston, 
, . , 305 p., with disk. · 
. 
. 
, 
. 
.. 
. 
WONG, P.K.K. AND MITCHELL, RJ. (1975). "Yielding and Plastic Flow of Sensitive Cemented Clay," 
.'. Geotechnique,Vol.XXV,No.4,pp, 763~782. , 
.· 
, 
. 
. 
. 
WooDs, RD. (Ed.) (1994). Geophysical Characterization ofSites, ISSMFE Technical Committee No. 10, 
· . 
Oxford & IBS Publishing, 141 p. 
..· 
, 
. 
·.. 
· , 
Woons, K.B., MILES, RD., AND LOVELL, C.W. (1962). "Origin, Formation, and Distribution of Soils in 
North America," Chapter 1 in Foundation Engineering, G.A. Leonards (Ed.), PP·. 1-65. 
WROTH, C.P. (1972). "General Theories of Earth' Pressures and Deformations," General Report, 
, Proceedingsofthe Fifth European Conferenceon Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, 
Madrid, Vol. II, pp. 33.:..52. 
References 
839 
WROTH, C.P. (1975). "In Situ Measurement of Initial Stresses and Deformation Characteristics," 
Proceedings of the ASCE. Specialty Conference on In Situ Measurement of Soil Properties, 
Raleigh, NC, Vol. II, pp.181-230. 
. 
WYLLIE, D.C. (1999). Foundations.on Ro.ck, 2nd ed., E & FN Spon, London, 432 p. 
WYLLIE, D.C. (1996). "Stabilization of Rock Slopes," Chapter 18 in Landslides: Investigation and Mitiga-
tion, Special Report 247, Transportation Research Board, National Academ.yPress, Washington, 
pp. 474-504. 
XYZ 
YAMAMURO, J.A. AND ABRANTES, A.E(2005) .. ''Behavior of Medium Sand Under Very High Strain 
Rates," in J.A.Yamamuro and J. Koseki (Eds.), Geomechanics: Testing, Modeling, and Simula-
tion, Geotechnical Special Publication 143, ASCE; pp. 61-70. · · 
· · · • 
YoDER, E.J. AND WITCZAK, M.W. (1975). PrinCiples of Pavement Design; Wiley, New York, 711 p. 
. 
YoNG, R.N. AND Ko, H.Y. (Eds.) (1980). Limit Equilibrium; Plasticity and Generalized Stress-Strain in 
Geotechnical Engineering, Proceedings of the Workshop Sponsored by NSF and NSERC, 
McGill University, Montreal, ASCE, 871 p. 
.· . 
, < " · ' · . , 
YoNG,RN. AND sH:imRAN, D.E. (1973). "Fabric Unit Interaction arid S~il Beha~iour,"Proceedings of 
the International Symposium 01i Soil Structure, Gothenburg, Sweden, pp.176-183. 
.·· .. 
· 
YoNG, R.N. AND WARKENTIN, B.P. ·(1975). Soil Properti~s and Behaviour, Elsevier, New York~.449 p. 
Yu, X. AND DRNEVICH,V.P. (2004). "Soil Water Content and Dry Density by Time Domain Reflec-
tometry,'; Journal 'of Geotechnical and Geoenvironiriental Engineering, ASCE, VoLl30, No.9, 
pp. 922-934. . . 
. . . . . . '· . . . . 
. . 
. .. 
ZIMMIE, T.F. (1973); "Soil Tests on a Clay from Ska~ Edeby, Sweden," Norwegian Geotechnical Institute, 
Internal Report No. 50306-3, 21 p. 
·· 
· 
· · · · 
· 
· 
· 
. . 
, 
ZIPCZECK, Z.Z.'(1956): "Soknak cask szemet, ami nekiink Kenyer meg vaj,''. C'Some People Call It 
Dirt; We Cali it Bread & Butter"), Proceedings of the Hungarian Academy of Sch~~ces, Vol. 104; 
pp. 47:-65 (in Hungarian). 
· 
· · · 
: l. 
· .. , 
'''· 
Index 
(n following page number indicates note, t indicates table) 
A 
: '.• 
·' ". 
A horizon, 150 · 
. . · .. 
AASHTO; See American Association 
of State Highway and Transportation 
Officials (AASHTO) system of soil' 
classification 
· 
Ablation till, lOG-101 
Activity, 60 · , · · 
·· ·of a clay, defined, 137 
··relationship to soil expansion, 
'239-240 
' 
!elationship to swelling potential, 
239-241,244 
.,typical values of, 138 
Adsorbed water, 135-136,214 · 
Alkali flats, 98 
. Allophane, 130,131,133,360,716 
Alumina (octahedral) sheet, 
123,125-129 
Alluvial fans, 92,98 
Alluvium, 87, 90, 92, 150 
American Association of State 
Highway and Transportation 
Officials (AASHTO) system of soil 
classification, 48; See also Soil 
classification systems 
AASHTO grooving tool, 43 
Amontons' laws,676 
· 
Amorphous, defined, 130 
Angle of internal friction, 498t, 506, 
511,515,516,537,539,54lt,542-543, 
545,553, 555,557' 561,602, 615t, 
680-681,697, 744; See also Shear 
strength 
Angle of repose, 113, 226, 443 
defined, 109 
of sands, 542-543 . 
sand dune, 109-110,542 
Anisotropy, 705,722,724-726 
Anticlines, 114 
Apparent cohesion, 225 
Aquiclude, 306-307 
Aquifer, 96,248,266,308-309,314 
840 
. Aquitard, 306 : 
Aquitart, 306 · 
Arches, 73,114 
Areal fill, 454 
'''I 
; ~ 
Artesian condition, 266, 304, 306 
Artesian pressure, 304, 354t , 
ASCE (American Society of Civir 
Engineers), 6 · 
' 
· · · 
ASTM (American Socieiy for Testing 
and Materials), 6 
Attapulgite, 130, 133 
SEM,131 
.. 
· '.Atterberg,Albert, 40 
Atterberg limits, 39-46 
: i air drying, effect of, 43 
. ·cohesion limit, 40 , . 
engineering properties, 
relation to, 40 
flow index, 44 
liquid limit (LL), 40,42-44,232, 
233,238-239,246,395 
cone,43-44 
device,42 
· flow curve, 43 
grooving tool, effect of, 
42-43 
rangeof,46 
one-point test, 44-45 
test description, 43 
plastic limit, 40 
test description, 43 
plasticity chart, 51-53,55,60, 
233,238 
plasticity index, 10, 40, 46, 58-60 
range, 43-44, 46 
shrinkage limit, 40, 46 
soil classification, use in, 
47-52 
sticky limit, 40 : · 
toughness index, 57-59 
Avocado's number, 137 
Avogadro's number, 137n 
Axi-symmetric conditions, 696 
B 
. B horizon, 150 
. , _, 
B-value; See Skempton's pore pressure 
parameters " ' ' . '" 
Back pressure, 572,574, 576,622,684, 
689-691,694 
.Backswampdeposits, 90 
Bajada,98 
·Bangkok clay, 667 
·, · profile, 391 · 
Barchan, 109 
Basal till, 100 
Basins, 114 
. . , 
Becker pentration test (BPT), 533,740 
Bentonite, 129,240 · 
Bernoulli energy equation, 274 
:Bifurcations, 679, 681 
Blasting, 175, 178, 305,682,696,738, 
· 742, 753; See also Compaction 
Body stress, 257, 669 
Boiling, 295,318, 327; See also 
Quicksand 
Bonding agents; See Clay minerals 
Borehole jack, 536 
Borderline classification, 52-55 
Boston blue clay, 729-730 
coefficient of consolidation, 405, 
427-435,452 
compression index, 394 
profile, 389 
values of CaiC0 394t, 395 
Bottomset beds, 92 
Boulders, 33, 37,49-50,60,79,84 
Boussinesq method, 456-469; 
See also Stress distribution 
influence charts, 457-471 
integrated over areas, 457-458, 
463,469 
' 
pointload,457-458,469 
Braided streams, 90 
Bras ted sand, 697 
Brucite, 124-125, 130-131 
Bulking, 148,225 
Bulldozer, 180; See also Compaction 
equipment 
· 
Buoyant density, 14,24-25 
c 
c!p ratio; See Shear strength ratio 
CPT; See Dutch cone 
' 
penetrometer test' 
C horizon, 150 
Caldera, 113 
Caliche,98 
California bearing ratio (CBR), 206-207 
Cambridge stress paths, 627 · 
Canadian Foundation Engineering · 
Manual,117 
Capillarity, 214,215-226 
adhesion forces, 215'-216 
height of rise, 215,310 :· , .. 
typical values, 222 · 
negative pressure, 230 ·'' 
in small tubes, 219 
· ' 
Capillary fringe, 227 
Capillary pressures: 
example, 226 
in frost action, 250-253 
in soils, 219-223 
, 
< · · . 
Capillary tubes, 215-221, 226,278 
analogy, 230-231 
· 
· 
Capillary water, 214,250 
Capillary zone, 227 
Carbonates, 71, 73,78-79 · 
· nonskeletal, 152 
Casagrande, Arthur, 5-6, 4~3 
Cation exchange capacity (CEC), 137 
Cavitation, 87,684, 690, 694; 696 · · · 
CD; See Shear strength; Shear str'ength ·. 
test's 
· 
CD tests, 566, 568, 575-576,601, 684, 
688 705 
'' 
Mohr failure envelopes; 509-510 
normally consolidated 
clays,578 
over consolidated clays, . 
575,577.: 
sands, 565, 688 ·. 
shear strength parameters, 576, 
622,706,709-710 
. 
triaxial test, 563-575,585, 591,601 
Cell pressure, 564, 566, 570, 572, · 
578-581; 607, 626.:.ti27; See also 
~ 
Confining pressure· :.· '. 
Channel bars, 87, 91 · 
' 
Chemical weathering, 77-78,80,97, 123 
Chicago clay: 
· 
coefficient ofconsolidation,: · 
416-419,452,784 
compression index, 394 '. 
consolidation behavior, 411 · 
· 
value of Ca!Cc, 417 
profile, 393 
· 
Chlorite, 71, 129-132, 135, 137 · 
Cinder cone, 113 
Cirque glaciers, 99.:...100 · 
Classification systems; See Soil 
classification systems 
Clay minerals, 32, 46, 60, 123-131 
; activity of, 133-'-134 
adsorbed water,135-136' · 
allophane, 130,131, 133,360,716 
attapulgite, 130, 133 
SEM,131 
bonding agents: 
: ; 
· brucite, 124-125i130-131 
' ''covalent bond, 161 
hydrogen bond, 125; 128, 
' : 135,138 
James bond, 161' 
van der Waal's forces, · · · 
128,138 
. chlorite, 71,129-132, 135; 137 
crystal structure: 
octahedral or alumina sheets, 
123-125;127,-128 
tetrahedral or silica sheets, 
123-125,127· 
defined, 123 · 
. 
. . 
flocculation, factors causing, · 
138-139 
gibbsite, 124-125;127;129-131' 
halloysite,126, 132-133 
·SEM, 127 
... 
hydrous aluminum silicates, 123 
identification, 131-133 
DTA (differential thermal 
analysis); 132 
· 
· 
electron microsopy, 132 
x-ray diffraction, 123, 
131-132,139,238 
illite, 129,130,132-133,135,137 
SEM,130 
; ion concentration, 138 
kaolinite, 77, 132-137; 143 
atomic structure, 125-128 
SEM,126 
marine, 132,137,140.:141, 143; 
151-152 
mixed layer minerals, 130-131 · · · 
montmorillonite (smectite), 
· 
127-130,132~138;150 
atomic structure, 127_:129 
SEM,129 
particle interaction, 141, 143 
plasticity chart, use of,132 
stabilization, lime, 138; · : · · 
silica sheet, 123-125,127-129,137 
soil structure, 139-147 .. 
dispersed, 138-139 
fine-grained soils, fabrics of, 
139-143 
flocculated, 138.:_ 140 
Index 
841 
microfabric/macrofabric, 
143-147 
tetrahedral (silica) sheet, 
123-125,127 
. 
vermiculite, 129 
Clay particles, interaction of, 138-139 
Clays, 5, 14-15,28,31-32, 51; See also 
Clay minerals, Shear strength 
consistency, 56-58 
consolidation behavior;349; 
353-356,357-362' '' 
'< ' 
defined, 49 
· 
· 
desiccated or dry crust, 
236,244 
' 
frost susceptibility, 252-256 
quick,46 
· 
sensitive, 46 · 
shrinkage, 230, 234-236, 241 
stability, critical conditions, 664 
stress-deformation of, 705-731 
structure, due to coni.paclliln, 
172.:_173. .. 
' . '. 
swelling; 240,363,369, 
texture, 31 
used in classification, 47-52,54-57, 
59-60. 
' 
' 
Clusters, 140; See also Soil fabric 
Coarse-grained soils, 31 ..:.32; 34, 39, 
47-'49, 51, 56,148,223,347. 
Cobbles, 33, 49.:.50, 60 ' . · · .. 
Coefficient of consolidation;408, 
427-'434,452,798 
., 
'' 
. 
Coefficient of curvature, 9. 
defined, 37 
. . . 
. 
typical values of, 37 
. 
Coefficient of lateral earth pressure, 
266, 619 
' 
' .. · ' 
Coefficient of linear extensibility 
(COLE)test,241' r: .... · ... 
Coefficient of permeability, 275-278, 
281, 283-'-284 ' 
'. 
' 
Coefficient of uniformity, 9, 55 
defined, 35 
. 
· 
typical values of, 35, 37 
Coefficient of volume change, 366 
Cofferdams, 301,304,306,315 
· 
Cohesion, 511; See also Shear 
strength 
· 
Cohesionless; 32, 56 
Cohesiveness, defined, 32 · 
Collapsing soils, 80, 151,246-247 
Colluvium; 85 
Compacted clays: 
earth dams, use in, 182, 184, 
191,207 .· 
. ' 
' ' 
·. 
expansive properties of, 241 
· pavement design, use in, 182; 199, 
205-206 
. 
"' .. 
performance of, 206-210 ·. · 
PH test results, 750-751 
842 
Index 
Compacted clays: 
(Continued) 
properties, 234-242,578 
shrinkage limit test, 231-234 
shrinkage properties, 234-236 
Compacted soils, consolidation. 
. 
behavior of, 357-364 · 
•, . : · 
Compacted soil, strength of, 124, 
508,564,568,572,575,580,590-591, 
596-599 
Compaction: 
, 
byblasting,l75,178 
. 
control tests, 192-204 .. 
curve, 167, . . . 
line of optimums, 168; 199 
. maximum dry density, 
167-168 
. optimum water content, 
' .. '167-168, 170 
defined, 164 
· 
, . 
. 
dry densities, typical values of, 
167,174' ' . 
dynamic,164-165, 174-175 
equipment summary, 189 
field versus laboratory, 
198-199 
' 
of granular materials, 183--188 
impact, 165 
kneading,165-166,172,181-182 
lift thickness, 178, 180, 185-186, 
187,189,191 
most efficient conditions, 203 
percent,191,2oo;202 
process, 166-168 
proofrolling, 182 
rapid control, 199-200 
relative compaction, 191 
relative density, 174 
relative compaction • 
versus, 192 · 
· of rockfill, 189 
'saturation curve, 168-:170 
specifications: . 
end-product, 191-192 
method,191 
static, 165-166, 172 
theory, 164-172 · 
in trenches, 204-206 
vibratory: 
frequency, effect of, 185 
lift thickness, effect of, 
186-187 
number of passes, effect 
of, 186 
optimum frequency, 185 
towing speed, effect of, 186 
. variables affecting, 185 
vibratory in situ, vibrofloation, 177 
vibratory surface, plate . 
· 
compactors, 184,205 .. , 
Compaction control, 192-206 
Compactionequipment, 124-140 
bovinas masculinus · 
· 
sonambulorum, 180. 
draglines, 178 , 
dump trucks, 180 
grid or mesh rollers, 182. • . 
motor grader or "blade," 180-181 
pneumatic roller, 182 
· 
power shovels, 178; 180 
.• 
rollers, 178,181-182,184,186,189, 
192,204 
. . 
·, 
rubber-tired roller, 164, 178, 182 
scrapers or "pans," 178-.-180 
sheepsfoot rollers, 182, 189, 192, 
203,207 
smooth wheel rollers, 1lH -183,203 
tamping foot rollers, 182-183,189 
vibrating drum, 183 . . . · 
vibrating plates and rammers, 183 
vibratory compactors, 178, 189, 197 
applications of, 189 
types of, 198 
Compaction problems: 
overcompaction, 202-203 
pumping or weaving, 203 
Compaction specifications, 191-192 
end product, 191-:192 . 
method specifications, 191 
Compaction tests: .. 
curves, typical, 168,170-171 
destructive, 192-193, 200, 202 
equipment type, 184 
field check point test, 199 
field density tests, 187, . 
198-199,202 
field drying, use of, 150 
nondestructive, 192,195-198 
nuclear density meters, 195; 198 
one-point Proctor test, 199. : 
Proctor test, 164-165: · . 
' 
modified, test details, 165, 191 
standard, test details, 165, 
167,191 
rapid method, 199-200 
Compactive effort, 165,167-168, 
203-204 
Composite cones, 113.: • 
Compound compressibility, 479 
Compressibility, 345,347, 362, 351-354, 
365,395,398,407-408,563,579,589, 
607, 786, 791 
coefficient of, 365,407,433, 797 
compacted clays, 173, 362 
compound, 479 
of clays, 348 
of sands, 348 
, . 
of soil and rock,345-399 
of soil skeleton, 349,405,408,452, 
607,703,784,787 
volume change, coefficient of, 366 
Compression, 349 . 
elastic, 432 
index,373,375,433 
modulus, 663,675 
ratio, 368, 436 
secondary, 347 
triaxial, 526, 555-557, 605, 
607-609,627-629 
Compression index, 373, 375,433 
field,385 
modified, 368-369,452 
modified secondary, 436, 452 
secondary, 435,436,438,452 
Compression ratio, 375; See also 
Consolidation parameters; Modified 
compression index . 
Compressive strength, 543,572,735 
unconfined, 515 
Compressometer, 528, 533-534 
Confining pressure: 
, 
critical, 548, 550-551 
example, 559 
triaxial tests: 
hydrostatic, 574-575, 
580-582,588-.-589,618 
non-hydrostatic, 575, 
580,618 
Conservation of mass, law of, 274 
Consistency: 
definition, 56 
descriptors, 56 
of fine-grained soils in the natural 
state, 585 
. 
Consistency limits, 5, 47; See also 
Atterberg limits 
Consolidation: 
coefficient of, 408,409,411,416 
correlations, 441 
determination of, 427-432 
relation to time factor, 
417,419 
typical values, 433 
defined,348 
degree of, 411,413-414, 
418--419,430 
hydrostatic, 629 
nonhydrostatic, 629 
percent; 351-352,372,410-411, 
413,785 
primary, 404,428-430,485 
prediction of, 435-437 
process, 340, 350, 405-407 
one-dimensional, 347-348,723, 
780-784 
ratio, 409-411,799 
secondary, 436 
. 
settlements, 347,419,453 
spring analogy, 349 
stress, 351-352,437,564,566,567, 
570-571,574 
Terzaghi's 1-D consolidation 
theory,415 
assumptions,407, 413,780-785 
boundary conditions, 409,411, 
422,425-426,780-785 
derivation, 407n, 780-785 
solution, 407,409-411, 
780-785 
finite difference, 419-427 
time factor,409,411;413, 
780-785 
theory,407-419,780-785 
, test, 281,350-352 
time factor, 799-800 
time rate of, 347; 404-442 
underconsolidated, 353 
Consolidation parameters: 
coefficient of: 
· compressibility, 369 
consolidation, 381 · 
volume change, 371 
compression index, 373, 375,433 
relation to modified 
compression index, 375 
consolidation ratio, 417, 799 
degree of consolidation, 140,405, 
411,419,430,434,442 
average degree of, 
421-422,427 
relation with time factor,· 
. 417,419 
modified compression index; 
relation to compression · 
index,375 
modified recompression index, 
relation to recompression 
index,379 
modified secondary compression · 
index (secondary compression 
ratio, rate of secondary 
compression), 435-436, 
453,485 
recompression index: 
method to evaluate, 382 
relation to modified 
· recompression index, 379 
secondary compression index, 
435-436, 438-439' 452 . 
timefactor,409,411-413. 
Consolidation ratio, 417; 799 
Consolidation settlement, 351 · 
of normally consolidated soils, 
370-372 
of overconsolidated soils, 372-375 
time rate of, 347,404-442 
Consolidation testing, 354--357 
curve-fitting methods, 427, 
435-450 
Casagrande's, 427,428-432 
Taylor's, 427,431-432 
data presentation: . 
. ·. 
: 
percent consolidation versus 
effective stress; 356 
void ratio versus effective 
· stress, 356 
fixed ring, 350 
floating ring, 350 
. , : 
incremental load, 351 
LIR, effect on, 380 · 
one-dimensional, 350-352. 
. test details, 350-352 · · 
Consolidation tests: 
sample disturbance, effect of, 363 
of typical soils, 363-366 
Chicago and Indiana glacial .. 
clay,368 
Leda clay, 363,366, 399 : :' · · 
Loessial soils, 370 
Mexico City clay, 367 
NC clays and silts, 300 
Newfoundland peat, 371. 
Newfoundland silt; 371 
OC clay tills, 301-302 · 
swelling days, 369 
windblown silts, 362 · ' 
Consolidation theory, Terzaghi: 
assumptions, 407,415,780 ·. · 
boundary conditions;783 
: , 
derivation, 415-416,796-798 
solution,417-419, 780-782 · 
time factor,409, 783.:.784 • 
Consolidometer, 240,350-351, 356.:.357 
Consolidation equation, 408-409,419, ·' 
780,782 
., 
: 
Consolidation testing, 350;-352 
Consolidation theory,407-427; 780-785 
Constant-head test, 277-280,282 • 
Constant rate of strain; 564 · 
Constitutive modeling, 669~75 
constitutive relations, 668-669 
classes of constitutive models,· 
672-673 
failure criteria, 670-672 
hyperbolic (Duncan-Chang) 
model, 673-675 
Constrained modulus, 366 
Continuity equation, 279 
Coprogenic Impact Theory (CIT), 826 · 
Creep, 82; See also Secondary 
compression 
Critical hydraulic gradient, 296 
Critical state soil mechanics (CSSM), 
669,706,710 
Critical void ratio, 544, 545 
defined, 544 
maximum, typical values 
of, 148 
minimum, typical values · 
of, 148 
volume change, effect on; 545 
Index 
843 
Crust, earth, 71; See also Dessication 
CU; See Shear strength; Shear strength 
tests 
CU tests, 404-406, 465; 545-558 
Mohr failure envelopes, 509-'-510 
normally consolidated clays, 
719-720 
. 
overconsolidated clays, 716 
preconsolidation stress, 685 
sands,508 
sensitive clay, 719 
shear strength parameters, 720-724 
relation with CD tests, 720, 
722' 
. 
typical values 'of, 594-595 
stress conditions, 73,524 
stress paths, 520, 628-639, 641-664 
applications to engineering 
practice, 659-664 · · 
during undrained loading-
heavily overconsolidated 
clays, 656-659 
during undrained . 
loading-normally and 
lightly overconsolidated 
clays,641-656' 
' 
ESP, 633-639,656,660-663 
pore pressure parameters for, 
639-641 
. 1 " 
. 
. TSP, 633-639, 656, 660-663 
(T.:. u0 )SP, 656, 660-663 . 
test details, 516; 521,527 
. typical behavior of, 628, 633, 
'637-639 
Cyclic loading, 663-664; 667,673, 695, 
737,738,741,749 .. 
Cyclic loading moduli, 663.:.664 · 
Cyclic mobility: 
defined, 308 
differences between liquefaction,· 
307-308. 
. 
factors affecting, 308 
Cyclic shear strain, 739,745-749 
Cyclic shear strength, 749 
Cyclic strain amplitude, 739 
Cyclic strain history, effect on cyclic 
· mobility, 739 
Cyclic stress, defined, 530 
Cyclic tests, 665,675,740-741,746 
D 
Darcy, Henry, 275n 
, 
Darcy's law, 275-277,325 
application to sands,·277,279<:> < · 
coefficient of permeability, 275 . : : 
defined, 275 · · 
deviation from, 277 
· .; 
validity for other soils, 277 
Datum plane, defined, 285 
Daytona Beach, Florida, 222-223 ·. 
844 
Index 
Debris avalanches, 82 · 
Debris flow, 82 
Decomposed granite (DG), 80 
Degree of saturation: 
· · defined, 12 
typical values of, 168-170 
Deltaic plain, 91 
Deltas, 87,90-91 · · 
Densification; See Compaction 
Density: 
, 
buoyantorsubmerged,14,24-25 
chunk,43 
descriptors, 19 .. 
dry: 
defined, 14 
typical values, 105' • 
field, 187 
index,174 ,,; 
maximum, 164,167-168,174 
minimum,174 
!. 
· nuclear, 195-196 •: 
relative: 
defined, 17 4, 
typical values, 174 
saturated, defined, 14 
solids, defined; 14 
·submerged, defined,14, 24-25 
total, (wet) defined, 14 
typical values of, 15, 105 
.water,25 · 
Density index; See Relative density 
Desert pavement, 109 
Desiccation: . 
. 
· 
causing preconsolidation, 353:...354 
dry crust, 244 
Desert areas, 96-97 
Diastrophism, 114 
Differential thermal analysis 
(DTA),132 
Diffuse double layer, 135 
Dilatancy, 57, 677-680; See also 
Soil characteristics 
Dilation; 547,550,677-681 
angle, 615t, 678-681 
in clays, 563, 565,702 
in sands, 548. . . 
Dilatometer test (DMT), 398, 435, 528t, 
532-533,740 
Dipolar molecule, 135 
Discontinuities, defined, 154 
Distortion settlement, 347,451,472 
Domains; See Soil fabric 
Domes,114 
Double angle equations, 500-501 
Drainage path, 417, 499 
Drainage patterns, 87 
DS; See Shear strength tests, direct 
shear 
. '··· 
DSS; See Shear strength tests,.; 
· special tests 
:,!, 
Drumlin, 101 
Dry density, 14, 105 
maximum, 167-168 
Dry mass, 12 
Dry strength, 57, 59; See also Soil 
characteristics · 
.. 
DTA; See Differential thermal analysis 
(DTA) 
:: . , 
Duncan-Chang model, 673-675 · · 
Dunes, 109-,-110.! 
Dutch cone penetrometer test (CPT), 
528t,530,533,558,563,588,667,740, 
745-747 ::.. 
. •: 
Dynamic compaction;175-176 
E 
Earth pressure, 5, 510, 619, 629 
active, 622, 629-630 
at-rest, 266, 54lt, 560-562, 
592-596; See also K 0 
coefficifint of, 266 
passive, 594n; 622, 629-630 
Earth structures, 2, 163,206, 315, 327 
Earthquakeengineering, 71,737, 
739,749 
Effective consolidation stress, 
351-352 
. : ·, 
Effective grain size,221,277, 281 ·1 
Effective pore diameter, 219,221 
Effective size: 
· · : 
defined; 35 · ·. · .. 
in filter design, 331 .. · · 
Effective stress, 153,222,231,245,. 
257-262,265-266,563-564,574 
changein,782,786,787,790-791. 
defined, 259 
groundwater lowering/raising, 
effect of, 260-261 
· 
· . : 
physical meaning, 256 
principle of, 256-259,798 
profiles, 263-266 
Effective stress analysis, 554, 664 
Engineering geology, 70 · · · 
Elastic: 
, 
.. 
materials, 345, ·460, 508, 629, 
788-792,794 
pore pressure coefficients 
for,607,609 
stress-strain-time 
relationships, 345,348 
secant modulus, 675 
settlement, 451,453,472, 474, 476 
stress distribution, 453,456-457 : 
tangent modulus, 377-380, 675 ·., • 
theory, 456-457, 460, 463, 469,. · 
474,489. 
' ... 
Elasticity: 
linear elastic material, 683 
modulus of, 469 
Electron microsopy, 132 
End moraine, 101 
End-product specifications, 191.:...192 
Energy equation, 274 
Equation of continuity, 274 
Equivalent, molar, 137 · 
Eolian landforms, 109-111 
desert pavement, 109 · 
dunes, 109-110 
loess, 110-111. 
Equipotential drops, 310,313,314,316 
Eskers, 106 
Ettringite, 246. 
Excess pore water pressure, 305,349, 
351,404-407,419-420,429,571 .• 
excess hydrostatic pressure, 409 
Exchangable cations;137-138 · 
valence of, 137 : 
Exit gradient, 313-318 
by method of fragments, 318 
Expansion index (EI) test, 240 
Expansive soil, 214,236-244,246 
F 
FAA; See Soil classification systems 
Fabrics: 
·as filters, 139,327,329,330,332 
See also Soil fabric; Soil structure; 
Structure . · 
Failure criteria: 
Hoek-Brown; 515, 75t: . 
maximum shear stress, 513,616,671 
Mohr, 508-510 , 
Mohr-Coulomb criterion, 
508-511,513, 515,516 • : 
Mohr failure hypothesis, 510-512 
Failure plane, angle of inclination of, 
508-511,516,518,591,639,653 
Fall-cone test; See Swedish fall-cone 
test 
Falling-head test, 277-279,281 
Fault scarp, 115 
Fault zone, 73 
Faults, 73, 115-116 · 
FHWA filter design procedure, 333-338 
clogging resistance, 335-336 
permeability criterion, 334-335 
retention criterion, 333-334. 
survivability and durability 
criteria, 336 . 
Field check point method, 198-199 
Field consolidation curves, 380-388 
Field density tests; See Compaction 
tests 
,. 
Field hydraulic conductivity tests, 
280-281 
Field identification procedures, 57 
Filter bridge, 329 
Filters: 
criteria, 329,332 
fabrics, 139, 329, 334 
... 
protective, 329 
used to control, 329,332,334 
Fine-grained soils: 
compaction of, 178 
fabrics of, 139-143. 
Fines,43 
Finite differences, defined, 419 
Fissure eruption, 112 
Fissures, 106 
Floating-ring test, 350 
Flocculation, factors causing, 138-139 
Flow,83 
Bernoulli energy equation, 274 
channels, 310-313,315 
confined,306,312-313 
debris,82 
discharge velocity, 276 
energy, 275,309-310 
head loss, 273,275, 29+-295, · 
306-307 
heads,285 
index,4~5 
Laplace's equation, 310 
lehars,82 · 
one-dimensional, 273-277, 
. ' 285.:.294 
piezometric head, 285 · 
potential (position) head,275 
pressure head, 275,285 
seepage velocity, 276 
tortuosity, 277 
total, example calculations, 
294,318 
. total head (piezometric), 285 
unconfined, 307, 313 
velocity head, 275,285 
Flow cure, 43 
Flow lines; See Flow nets 
Flow nets; See also Fragments, 
method of 
defined, 309 
. 
drawing rules, 310,· 325 · 
equation of, 310 
equipotential drops, 310,312,314 · 
equipotential (flow) lines, 
309-312,315,325 
exit gradients, 310,312,325,329 
flow channels, 312-314, 317, 325 
flow lines, 99,309-310,312, 325 
flow quantity calculation, 
312-313 
uplift calculations, 313-315 · 
Flow slides, 305; See also Liquefaction· 
Flow systems, 286 
Fluvial landforms, 87 
Fluvial terraces, 90 
Foliated metamorphic rocks, 73 
Form factor, 795-800 
Foundation engineering, defined, 2 
Foundation loading, 629-630,648-651 
Fragments, method of, 320,795-805 
defined, 795 
·" 
detailed example, 795.:.300 
exit gradient calculation; 800"-803 
form factor, 795-797 · 
· 
· 
' 
fragment types, 796-797 · 
Free swell test, 240 
. ·, ·. 
Free water surface, 217,227,303 
Freezing index, 250, 252 ; 
Friction angle; See Angle of internal 
friction; Shear strength· · · 
Frost action, 98;107, 164; 206,214 
defined, 249-250 · , 
heave,249~250,254-255 
frost-susceptible soils, 
identification of, 254-256 
ice lenses, 249-250, 252"-254 
necessary conditions, 249: 
pore size; effect of, 250-251 
Frozen ground, engineering 
significance of, 256-257 
Frozen soils, 249 
· 
Fully softened critical state strength, 680 
G 
Gap- or skip-graded soil, 35 
Genus bovinas masculinus 
sonambulorum, 180 
Geologic information, sources of, 117 
Geologic process, and the origin of " 
earthen materials, 76 
, . 
Geological Strength Index (GSI) for 
jointed rocks, 160 · · 
Geological Survey of Canada, 118 
Geology, 69 
· ' ' 
Geomorphology, 70 
Geotechnical engineering, defined, 1 
Geotextile filter design concepts, 334 
Gibbsite, 124-125,127,129-131: '· 
Glacial: 
drift, 100 
erratics, 106 
lakes, 106 
landforms, 99-107 
till, 106 
Glaciation, causing 
preconsolidation, 354 
Glaciers: · 
defined, 98 
origins/characteristics of, 98-99 
piedmont, 99 , 
' 
tidal, 99 
·. 
Glacio-fluvial deposits, 100 
Goodman jack, 536 · · 
Gradation; See also Grain size 
distribution 
poorly-graded, 49 
skip- or gap-graded, 35 
well-graded, 49 · 
Gradation curve, 35 
Index 
845 
Graded granular filters, design 
of, 332-334 •, ' 
' 
Grain shape, types of; See also Particle 
shape· 
angular,39 
bulky,39 
flaky, 39 
rounded;39 
subangular, 39 
· subrounded, 39 
Grain size, 32-37,47-48 
effective, use in capillarity, 221 
Grain size distribution, 32-37 
gap-graded, 35 
gradation test, 34 
hydrometer analysis, 34 
mechanical analysis, 34 
poorly graded, 35 
shear strength, effect on; 553, 555 
sieve analysis, 28 
skip graded, 35 
uniformly graded, 35-37: ,. 
well-graded, 35, 37 
See also Gradation curve, 35 
Granular deposits: 
compaction of, 173-175' 
densification of, 175-178 · 
Gravel; 15, 28 
characteristics, 31-32 
used in classification, 49-50 
Gravimetric water content, 225 
Grid roller, 182-183 · 
Ground moraines, 101, 106 
Groundwater processes, 113-114 
Groundwater table, 175,214,223,226, 
227,229,245,252-253,256-257 
Group index, 6L 
·· ' 
Gully shape, 87 
H 
Halloysite, 126,132-133 
SEM,127 
Hanging valieys, 100 
Harvard miniature compactor, 172 
Hazen's equation, 281-283 
Head loss; 273,275, 291, 301 
examples of, 289-298, 306-307 
Heads; See Flow 
· 
Heave; See Swelling 
Henkel's pore pressure coefficients, · 
628-629,791-793 
Hvorslev failure lines, 709 
Hydraulic conductivity, 275-285; 
See also Permeability 
Hydraulic gradient, 273 
critical: 
· 
defined, 296 
typical values of, 297 
defined, 273 
in permeability tests, 275 
846 
Index 
Hydrometer analysis, 34 
Hydrostatic consolidation; See 
Confining pressure; Consolidation; · 
Cyclic triaxial; Shear strength tests; 
Triaxial tests 
Hydrothermal alteration, 116 
Hydrous aluminum silicates, 123 
Ice caps, 99-100 
Ice-contact landforms, 103 
! .~I 
Ice lenses, 226,249,250,252-254 •, 
Igneous rocks, 72 
Illite, 129, 130, 132-133, 135, 137 , · 
SEM,130 
Immediate settlement, 347,435,450, 
451,472-476, 
cl 
Immediately after construction; 
See Shear strength, clays • · 
Impeded drainage, 419 
Influence charts, 466, 474; See also 
Stress distribution 
' 
Inselberg, 98 
Intergranular stress; See Effective·· 
stress 
Intermediate geo-materials, 153 
Intermediate principal stress, 500, 
515,523,553,558t,628,629,676,' 
696,717 
shear strength, effect on, 515 
Index density, 174-175 
Iowa borehole shear test, 528t, 533 
Irregular lump test, 526 
Isobars, 405n 
Isochrones,405-407,411,419,420,424, 
426,483 
Isomorphous substitution, 124, 
129-130,136-137 
Isopachs, 405n 
Isotropic consolidation, 564, 
ISRM (International Society of Rock. 
Mechanics), 6 
ISSMFE (International Society 
J 
for Soil Mechanics and Foundation,, 
Engineering), 6 , 
Joints in rock, 73 
Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, 711, 
716,717,721-722. 
K 
Kame terrace, 103 : 
Kames, 103, 107 
Kaolinite, 77,132-137,143 
atomic structure, 125-128 
SEM,126 
Kaopectate, 126 
Karst/karstic features, 78, 113 
Kettle moraine, 103 
Kettles, 101-103. 
Kt, 619-626,631 
defined, 620 
. Mohr-Coulomb, relationship 
with, 622 
parameters, Pt, qf; 620 
K 0 (coefficient of lateral earth 
pressure at rest): 
L 
clays, 592-593, 620-622, 644 
OCR, effect of, 593, 595 
relation to 4>', 561, 592 
· relation to PI; 712-713. 
stress path; effect of, 592-593 
defined, 266 
sands, 592,744 
·theoretical relationships, 
711,712 
typical values of, 226, 561, 
592,621 
Laboratory tests, 240; 255,280-281, 
329,516-526,601-606,740 
Lacustrine landforms, 96 
Lahars, 113 
Laminar flow, 273, 275 
LANDSAT imagery, 118 
Landslides, 82, 116 
Lapilli, 113 
Laplace's equation, 312 
derivation, 310,778-779 
Lateral earth pressure at rest; 
coefficient of, K0 ; See K0 
Lateral moraines,l01 · 
Laterites, 80 
Laurentian clay, 360, 392, 657,719 
Lava, 73 
Lava flows, 112 
Law of conservation of mass, 276 
Leda clay, 46,47 
compression curves, 360 . 
compression index, 394 
consolidation behavior, 
357-360 
profile, 392 
Lifts; See Compaction· 
Limit state, 540 
Limiting equilibrium methods of. 
analysis, 540 
Line of optimums (LOO), 
167-168,199 
Liquefaction, 82, 116, 148, 175, 
177,294,305-306,702,737,749 
defined, 294, 306,749 
differences between cyclic 
mobility, 306 
flow slides, 305 . 
relation to quicksand, 294, 305 
static, 305 
Liquid limit (LL),40,42-44,232;233, 
238-239, 395; See also Atterberg limits 
cone,43-44 
one-point test, 44-45 
rangeof,46 
Liquidity index, 46 
Linear materials, 739 
LIR; See Load increment ratio 
LL; See Liquid limit 
Load increment ratio, 380-381 
defined, 427. 
Lodgement till, 100 
Loess,86, 110-111,150-151,175, 
246-247,362-363,528t,533 
Longitudinal dunes, 109 
LOO; See Line of optimums 
M. 
Major principal stress, 500,511,514, 
724,788 
Mantle, earth, 71 
Marine soils, 151-152 
Materials: 
anisotropic, 3, 724 
brittle, 508, 515, 750 
density, typical values of, 15, 105 
elastic, 345,460, 508,629, 
788-792,794 
heterogeneous, 3 
homogeneous, 3 
isotropic, 3 
linear,345,753 • 
nonconservative, 3-4, 345 
nonlinear, 3, 345, 508 
plastic, 43,345,346,378,507,508, 
669-670 
visco-elastic, 345,507, 669 
work hardening and softening, 
507,508 
' 
Maximum density, 167, 174 . 
Maximum principal stress difference, 
543; See also Shear Strength 
Meanders, 87,90 
Mechanical analysis, 34 · 
Meniscus: 
below groundwater table, 227 
defined, 215-'-217 
geometry, 216 
shape,218 
Meniscus, Giacomo, 215n 
Mesh roller, 183 
Method specifications, 191 
Metric system, 7, 10,766-768, 774; 
See also SI units 
Mexico City clay: 
coefficient of consolidation, 433 . 
compression index, 439 
consolidation behavior, 360-362 
Mica, 39, 58, 60, 71, 78, 80, 123, 126, 
129,133 
Migrating dune, 542 
Minerals, 71 
Minor principal stress, 500,514,515, 
521,670,788 
' 
MIT stress paths, 627 
Mixed layer minerals, 130-131 
Mjala,51 
· 
Mo,51 
Modified compression index, 368-370, 
400,447,452 
secondary, 405,435-436,438, 
441-442,452 
' 
' 
' 
Modified Proctor test; See Compaction' 
tests 
, 
Modified recompression index, 373, 452 
Modulus: 
constrained, 366 
cyclic loading-related moduli, 663 
oedometric, 350 
secant,663 
tangent,377-380,663 
undrained, 474,664, 667t 
Mohr circle, 499-500 
failure plane, 508-518 
obliquity, angle of maximum, 
514-515 
obliquity relationships, 514-515 
pole method, 501-503 
origin of planes (pole method): 
definition, 499 
examples of, 501-507 · 
property of, 501, 526 
Mohr-Coulomb criterion, 510-513, 
515,516,670-671,734 
Mohr failure envelopes, 509,555, 677; 
See also Shear strength 
curved,511,681,694 
defined, 509 
normally consolidated clays, 
380-383,641-642 
overconsolidated clays, 357,377, . 
450,656-659 
sensitive clays, 580 
Mohr failure hypothesis: 
defined, 508 
use in direct shear, 516-518, 520 
Mohr failure theory, 508-10 
Montmorillonite (smectite), 127,-130, 
132-138, 150, 238 
atomic structure, 127-129 
SEM,129 
Moraines, 101 
end, 101 
ground, 101, 106 
kettle, 103 
lateral, 101 . 
marginal, 101 
terminal, 101 
Multistage testing, 601-606 
Muskeg,151 
N 
Natural levees, 87 
NC; See Normally consolidated soils 
Negative pore pressures, 563, 571-572 
Neutral stress, 257-259. 
' 
Newmark's charts, 466-468 
Newtonian liquid, 40 
. ·. 
Nonconservative materials,'3, 345 
Nonhydrostatic consolidation, 
564-565, 629 : 
Normal stress, 257,499,508-509,511, 
513-517 
. 
octahedral, 670 
Normally consolidatedsoils, 370-372, 
641-642 
. 
' ' . 
Nuclear density meters, 195, 198 
0 
Obliquity, angle of maximum, 514-515 
Obliquity relationships, 514 . 
Observation well, 227 
, ·· 
OC; See Overconsolidated soils 
Octahedral: 
normal stress, 670 · 
shear stress, 670 
Octahedral (alumina) sheet, 123-125, 
127-128 ' 
Octahedral shear stress, 670 
Oedometer; defined; 350; See also 
Consolidometer 
Oedometric modulus, 366 
, 
Optimum water content, 167 
Organic soils, 
classification of, 48-52 
peats/muskeg, 151 
Origin of planes, 501 · 
Outwash, 103 
Outwash plain, 103 
Overbank deposits, 87 
Overburden pressure or stress, 353, 
373,384-385,398,477' 
Overconsolidated soils: 
consolidation settlement of, 
372-375 
defined, 186· 
preconsolidated soils, 353,373, 
419,479 
., 
Schmertmann procedure for, 384 
settlement calculations, 
364-376,450 
Overconsolidation, causes of, 353 
Overconsolidation ratio (OCR), 
715-716 
' 
defined, 353 
. K 0 , effect on, 654-655. 
undrained shear strength, effect 
on,641,667 
undrained modulus, effect on, 
664,666 
Index 
847 
Oxbow lake, 90 
Oxides, 71 
p 
p; See Stress path 
Parabolic dunes, 109 
Particle shape, effect on shear strength, 
39, 553, 680; See also Grain shape 
Particle size, effect on shear strength, 
39,553-558 
. 
Particle-size analysis, 34; See also Grain 
size distribution; Gradation 
Particle surface roughness, effect on 
shear strength, 563 
Pavement: 
flexible, 206 
rigid,206 
California bearing ratio (CBR), 
206-207,596 
Peacock diagram, 550-551,682-684, 
689,690,695-696,704,717 
Peat, 48, 151 
classification of, 52 
consolidation behavior, 
404,438 
Pediments, 98 
Pedology, 1-2 
Peds; See Soil fabric 
Penetrometer: 
·Dutch cone, 530,558,563, 588 
pocket,586 
Standard Penetration Test, 56, 
527t,529;704 ' 
Percent consolidation, 351-352,366, 
368,371-372,410-411,413,429,784; 
See also Consolidation parameters 
Permafrost, 107-109,252 
continuous zones; 107 
defined; 107 
discontinuous zones, 107 
pingos, 107 
thawed, surface of, 108 
thermokarsts, 108 
Permeameter, 277,280 · 
Periglacial landforms, 107-109 
Permeability, 275, 277; See also 
Hydraulic conductivity 
coefficient of, 275,283, 
284-285,321 
Casagrande's benchmark 
values, 285 · 
empirical formulas, 281-283 
factors affecting, 281 
measurement of, 277 
relation to pore size, 277,282 
relation with effective grain 
· size,277 
typical values of, chart, 285 
compacted clays, 283-284 
criterion, 334-335 
848 
Index 
Permeability tests: 
constant head, 277 
factors affecting, 281 
falling head, 277 
laboratory measurements, 280-283 
PH test, 737 · 
Phase diagram:· 
defined, 11 
drawing, 15 , .. 
Phase problems, solution of, 15-31 
Phase relations, 10-15 
· 
Phenomenological model, 669 
Physical weathering, 76-77,122-123 
Piedmont glacier, 99 
·.: · · 
Piedmont plain, 98 
Piezocone penetrometer, 528t, 530, 588 
Piezometer, 228, 266, 285 
Piezometric head, 285 
Piping,113-114,214,283,314,327,329 
critical location, 314., 
defined, 314 
Plane-strain conditions, 696--697 
Plasticity, defined, 32 
Plasticity chart, 51-53, 55, 60, 233, 238; 
See also Atterberg limits 
with SL, 233-235 
Plasticity index (PI), 10, 40, 46, 53, 55, 
58-60; See also Atterberg limits 
· K 0 , correlation with, 592-593,725 
undrained modulus, correlation 
with,474,667 
undrained shear strength, correla-
tion with,474, 714,725-726 
Plastic limit (PL), 40, 43, 57t; See also 
. 
Atterberg limits 
' 
Plate tectonics, 71' 
Playas,98 
Plutonic processes, 116-117 
Pneumatic roller, 182 
Pocket penetrometer, 586-587 
Point bars, 87 
Poisson's ratio, 469, 470-471;474, 
475t-476t 
Pole, 501; See also Mohr circle, Origin 
ofplanes 
· 
,. ; · 
Poorly-graded soil, 35, 37.:.33 
Pore pressure coefficients, 607, 609 : 
Pore pressure parameters, 606--609, 
627;786-794 ' 
defined by principal stress 
increments, 640 
· · for different stress paths, 627-629, 
788-790 
' 
engineering practice, use in, 
' 606-607' 609 
' 
Henkel's parameters· 
(coefficients); 628, 791 
derivation,791-794' 
with rotation of principal 
stresses, 790 . 
· 
saturation on B, effect of, 607 
Skempton's parameters . 
(coefficients), 607-609,627 · · 
derivation, 786-788 
theoretical B values, 608t 
Pore size, effective, 221; 224,229,279 
frost action, 250, 252 
· 
permeability, 277, 282 
Pore water pressure: 
back pressure, 572,574,576,622, 
684,689,690-691,694. 
calculation of, 222 
defined, 222 
residual pore pressures, 578; 582 
Porosity:' 
~ 
' 
defined, 12 . 
typical values, 148 
Positive pore pressures, 563,571-573,689 
Potential head, 275 
Precipitates, 73 
Preconsolidated soils, 353,373,419,479 
Preconsolidation hump, 567 '. · 
Preconsolidation pressure, 352-357, 477 
Casagrande construction, 356 
defined, 353 
· 
determination of, 353-355. · 
sample disturbance, effect of, 
357-360 
graphical procedure for, · 
353-355,356 
,, 
methods to evaluate,351-352 
and stress history, 356-357 
Preloading, 404 
Pressure, relation between atmospheric 
and vapor,218 
Pressure head, 277 · 
Pressuremeter test (PMT), 395;398; 
·528t,530,532,588,740,745-746 
Prestress, effect on shear strength, 
553,558t 
Primary consolidation, 404,427, : 
428-430, 435-438,485; See also : ·· 
Consolidation ·. 
' 
Principal planes, 500, 517; See also Stress 
Principal stress, 500,521 · 
increments, 628, 788, 789t, 792 
intermediate; 500,515,523, 553, 
558t, 615t, 628,629,670, 676, 
696,717 
major, 500,511,514-515, 642; 659, 
753t, 788 
' 
minor; 500, 514-515, 670,750, 
753t, 788 
. 
rotation of, 517-518, 628; 640; : 
642,788 
Principal stress ratio, 545-547, 700t, 701t 
Proctor test; See Compaction tests 
Profiles; See Soil profiles . : · 
Proofrolling, 182 : · •: · i 
Pyroclastic debris, 113 
Q 
q; See Stress path 
Q test; See UU tests · · 
Quartz, 71-72 
density of, 14 
Quick clays, 46, 377,711 ' 
Quick condition, 295-299, 301, 304 · . 
' •. examples of, 298,299, 301-304 .•.. 
· 
blow up;304 · ·· 
·· 
sand boil, 304, 305 
Quick tests; See UU tests. 
Quicksand,l48, 175,294-301,318 
drowning in, 304 · 
Quicksand tank, 301-305 
R 
R horizon, 150 
R test; See. CU tests 
Rammers, 183 
Rankine,5 
Rapid drawdown, 25 · 
Rapid method, 199-200 
Reaction to shaking; See Soil 
characteristics, dilatancy 
Recessional moraines, 101 
Recompression index, 346, 373, 375, 
385,452 
' 
' 
modified, 373,452 
Reconsolidation curve, 357,723 
Reference elevation, 285 
Relative compaction, 164 
defined, 191 ·· · 
relative compaction versus, 192 
Relative density, 174'-175 · 
cyclic mobility, effect on, 306 
relative compaction versus, 192 
Residual pore pressure, 578 · 
Residual soils, 80, 81, 122 
Residuum, 77,122 
Rock correction factor, 166 
Rock engineering, defined, 2 · 
Rock fills, 178 
Rock flour, 51, 123 
Rock glaciers, 82 
Rock masses: 
classification systems, 156..:.160 
Geologic Strength Index (GSI) 
system, 159 
· 
' 
· 
properties of, 154 . 
Q-system/NGI System, 159, 
752-753 
Rock Mass Rating system 
· (RMR), 159,752-753 •· · 
rock quality designation (RQD), 
156-158, 600-601 
Unified Rock Classification 
System (URCS), 159 · 
Rock mechanics, 1 
Rock structure, 159 
Rocks, 72-73 
· defects, 525 
discontinuities in, 154.-:--155 
failure theories for, 497-536,614, 
750-753 . 
faults, 73 
joints, 73, 154.-:--155 
shear strength of,497-516, 
526-527,540-551,614 
structure, 73-75 
Rollers, 181-182 
. 
Rubber-tired rollers, 182 
Run up length, 94 ·; . 
Rutledge hypothesis, 614,705,711, 
716-722 
s 
S test; See CD tests 
Sample disturbance, consolidation 
methods to overcome, 722-724 
Sand boil, 304.-:--305 
San Francisco Bay mud: 
coefficient of consolidation, 408, 
427-435,452,782,784' 
compression index, 394 
consolidation behavior, 351 
Sands, 3, 5, 11, 14; See also Shear 
strength 
· 
characteristics of, 32 
frost susceptibility, 254.-:--256 · 
plane strain behavior of, 
696-702 
saturated sands, behavior in 
undrained shear, 682-685 
CD tests, using to predict CU 
results, 688-692 . 
consolidated-undrained 
behavior, 682-688 
. , . 
unconsolidated-undrained ; :. 
behavior, 693-695 · 
strain rate effects in sands, 
695-696' 
typical values of void ratios, 11 
used in classification, 11, 14 
Sapping, 114 
Saprolites, 80 
Saturated cohesive soils, behavior 
during shear, 563-564 
Saturated density, 14,25 
Scanning electron microscope (SEM); 
See Clay minerals 
Schmertmann procedure: 
for normally consolidated soils, 
380-383. 
for overconsolidated soils, 
384,386 
Scrapers or "pans," 178-180 
Screw plate compressometer, 528, 
533-534 
Secant modulus; See Elastic theory 
Secondary compression; 347, 354t,. 
404,407,431;432,435-436,438, 
452-453,780 
evaluation of, 435-436 ·· 
index, 436, 438, 452 . 
' , 
ratio,436 
· 
rates of, 436,453 : 
strain index,436 
Secondary compression ratio, 435-436 
Secondary settlement, evaluation of, 
435-442; See also. Consolidation 
parameters, evaluation of; Secondary 
compression· , 
Sedimentary rocks, 72 
Seepage; See also Flow 
control of, 327-329 
flow quantity calculations: .. 
with flow nets, 309-311 
with method of fragments, 321 
through dams and embankments, 
327-329. 
top line of, 325 
toward wells, 307-309,321-324 
Seepage analyses; See also Flow ' 
flow nets, 309-311 
method of fragments, 321, 795-805 
Seepage forces: · 
defined, 296 
evaluation of, 300 '· 
in filters, 331-333 
per unit volume (j), 300. · · 
Seepage velocity, 278, 340 
Self-boring pressuremeter test 
(SBPMT), 532 
Sensitive clays, 96,177,363 
Sensitivity, 580, 587, 591-592 
defined, 591 
relation with LI, 592 · 
typical values of, 591 
Settlement: 
calculations, 364.-:--376 
components of, 347 
consolidation, 347, 377~381 
defined, 347. 
distortion (immediate), 345-347 
as a function of time, 347 
normally consolidated soils, 
370-372 
. 
overconsolidated soils, 372-375 
rate of,349 
secondary compression, 347,354, 
404,407,431,432,435-436 
total, 347,348 
. SHANSEP method, 723-724 
Shape factor, 312 
Shear box; See Direct shear; Shear 
strength tests 
· 
Shear strength: . 
angle of internal friction, 498, 506, 
511,515,516 
Index 
849 
CD strength, use in engineering 
practice, 568-570 · 
clays, 705-731 
CD strength, use to predict 
CU strength, 688 
coefficient of earth pressure 
at rest for, 592 
compacted, strength of, 
··596-600 
critical conditions for 
stability, 664t 
definition of failure in CU 
tests, 705-706 
effective stress approach, 563, 
695-696 
Hvorslev strength· 
parameters, 706-710 
immediately after 
· construction, 751-752 
Jiirgenson-Rutledge 
hypothesis, 716 
saturated behavior, 563, 664t 
time, effect of, 587 
total stress approach, 563, 600 
unconfined compression, 749 
UU strength: · . ' 
in engineering practice, 
589-591 
typical values of, 584-585 
UU test behavior, 578-581 
cohesion (c),511 
. ' cu strength, use in engineering 
practice, 576-578 • 
CUtest behavior, 570-575 
defined,5 
determination of, 540 
drained shear, behavior of-
saturated sands during, 543-545 
drained strength parameters for 
. saturated cohesive soils, typical 
values of, 568 
. 
end of construction, 648-649,651 
envelope, Mohr failure, 511 
stable condition, 517, 523 
factor of safety, 512 · 
failure criteria: 
compressive strength,735 
maximum principal effective 
stress ratio, 719 
maximum principal stress 
difference, 707, 719 
failure definitions, 544,546, 548 
maximum shear stress, 503, 513, 
519-521,540,628,684,694 
mobilized, 740-741 
multistage testing, 601-606 
pore pressure parameters, 
606-609 
principal stress difference, 
defined, 521 
850 
Index 
Shear strength:, (Continued) 
residual: 
of clays, 702-704 
. of sands, 705 
rocks, strength of, 600--601 
sands: · 
. 
behavior during shear, 555 
cavitation, 87,684,690,694,697 
CD test behavior; 564-567 
CD triaxial test, 567,568, 575, 
591,602 
coefficient of earth pressure 
at rest for, 560--562 ·· 
confining pressure, effects 
of,659 
cyclic behavior, 306, 695,737 . 
CPT, 559-560 
~ ·. · 
DMT,560 
.. ; .. 
.. ·drained shear, 667 
· drained strength 
parameters, 568 
·factors that affect, 514, 
553.,-558 
Mohr circle, undrained 
shear,628 
Mohr circle concepts, 633 
negative pore water, 636 
.SPT, 558-559 
undrained shear, 667 . 
ultimate, 468 
using in situ tests, 558 . 
saturated cohesive soils, behavior 
during shear, 563-564 
sensitivity, 591-592. 
of soils and rocks, 540--609, 
614-681" 
stress history, 711,715-716 
transitional materials, strength 
of, 600--601 
unconfined compression test, 
581-584 
undrained shear, behavior of 
saturated sands in, 682-696 
undrained shear strength, 563, 
585-589•.·. 
undrained strength parameters, 
· typical values of, 575 · 
UU strength: . · 
. 
in engineering practice, 
589,591•; 
typical values of, 584, 585 
UU test behavior, 578, 581 , 
volume change, effect of void ratio 
· arid confining pressure on, 
545-553 
" 
.. 
Shear strength ratio: · 
: '· 
age, effect of, 725 
defined; 725 
overconsolidation, effect 
of, 728-729 
relation with LI; 725; 730 
relation with PI, 725,727-729 
stress path, effect of, 729 
Shear strength tests: , · 
CD,701-705 
CU,701-705 
cyclic triaxial: 
. dense sands, 679 
hydrostatically consolidated, 
626,656 . 
: , .loose sands, 677-678, 681'' · 
' direct shear:. 
Mohr circle, 752 
Mohr diagram; 687; 7 51· 
principal stress rotation, 724 
direct simple shear (DSS), 498, 
524,725. 
Dutch cone penetrometer, 497, 
528,530, 531•·: 
hollow cylinder test,'523, 665 • 
Iowa borehole shear i:est, 
528,533 
-
•' 
· rimltistage testing, 601-606 · · 
plane strain test, 523,627, 641· · 
pressuremeter test, 395, 398, 
'530,532 
screw plate compressometer test, ·. 
528,533,534 
. 
Standard Penetration Test (SPT), 
56,527,558-559 
: ,, 
correlation to Gmax• 746. 
related to residual 
· strength, 704 . 
strain controlled, 665 . 
stress controlled loading; 564 
test conditions, drainage, 564; · 
676,688 
torsional or ring shear, 702, 703 
triaxial test: 
· 
advantages and 
disadvantages,626::.: -
anisotropic (non-hydrostatic), 
564 
. . . 
' 
consolidation, 538 
·cyclic, 660 
. isotropic (hydrostatic) 
' 
consolidation, 668 
principles of, 660 
'true triaxial or cuboidal test, 523 
unconfined compression, 474,515, 
.526,751 
assumptions, 730, 735 
why it works, 660 ·, 
UD, unconsolidated-drained, 564 
UU, unconsolidated-undrained, 
521,580,626,650,652,682,693, 
694,695,736 
' 
Shear stress 
' in direct shear, 516.: 
in direct simple shear; 524 
in ring shear, 524 
in Mohr-Coulomb failure 
criterion; 511 
• octahedral, 683 
on the failure plane at' failure, 508 
sign convention in Mohr circle, 499 
Shear zone, 73 
' 
Sheepsfoot rollers, 182 . 
Shrinkage: ' , 
· · . 
causing overconsolidation, 245 
compacted clays, 234-236 · 
engineering significance, 244-246 
tube analogy, 219,221,226 · · 
· 
Shrinkage limit (SL), 231-234; ' · 
· ·:: 
See also Atterberg limits 
defined,40 
test de tails, 231-234 
SI units, 768-779; See also Metric;: 
system : .. : 
· basic units, 768-770 
conversion factors, 768,770-779' 
density and unit weight, 776 , : 
derived units, 768-770 
figanewtons, 785-786 , 
force, 771-772 
geostatic stress, 798-799 . 
length; 770 
· 
mass, 770--771 
prefixes, 769 
stress and pressure, 774-775 : 
time, 771·-
-'' ·· ' 
used in geotechnical engineering, 
770--779 
Sieve analysis; See Grain size 
distribution 
Sieve sizes, U.S. standard sizes, 34 
Silica (tetrahedral) sheet, 123-125 
Silicates, 71 
Silts, 3, 31-32; 48, 51; See also Shear 
strength 
characteristics of, 32 
· 
coefficient of consolidation, 408, 
' 427-434,452,784 
compression indices, 367-369, 
373,357 
'' 
consolidation behavior, 357-358 · ' 
frost susceptibility, 252; 254 
texture of, 31-32 · · 
typical values of, 15,28 · 
· used in classification, 50-52 '' '· 
values of Ca ICc, 438- · 
Single-grained fabrics, 147 • ' . , .. 
Sinkholes, 79-80, 85 .. 
Skempton's pore pressure parameters; 
See Pore pressure parameters·· 
SL; See Shrinkage limit • 
Slaking: 
defined, 226 
tube analogy, 226 
Slake durability test, 600 - · 
Slow test; See CD tests 
Smectite; See Montmorillonite 
(smectite) 
· 
Soil behavior: 
plasticity chart, use of, 51 
stress history, 139, 143, 149, 
345-346 
Soil characteristics, 173, 208t · 
compressibility, 2, 4, 48, 59 · 
dilatancy, 57 
dry strength, 57, 59 
permeability, 59 
plasticity, 57 
toughness, near PL, 57,59 
volume change, rate of, 59 
Soil classification: 
field identification procedures, 57t 
USCS and AASHTO compared, 48 
visual description, 55-58 
Soil classification systems, 47-61 
AASHTO, 48, 61 
comparison of, 47-48 
purpose of, 47-48 
Unified, 48-55 
procedures, 55-QO 
Soil deposits, 85, 87,96-98, 103; 
See also Soil profiles 
Soil formation, 557 
Soil fabric, 122 
cohesionless soil, 123 
cohesive soils, 139 
clusters, 140 
defects, 146 
domains, 140 
fine-grained soils, 139-143 
granular, 147-149 
honeycombed, 139,147 
macrofabric, 143-144 
microfabric, 143-146 
peds, 140, 145 
single-grained, 147 
Soil mechanics: 
defined, 1 
father of,5 
historical development, 5-8 
Soil profiles, 150 
glacial clays, 361 
marine clays, 132, 137,360, 
389,711 
quick clays, 46, 377, 711 
Swedish clays, 279, 390, 528 
typical, 150, 388, 477 
Soil skeleton, 11,348-349,405,408, 
419,452,607;782,786-787,791 
Soil structure, 139-147 
dense, 56 
fine-grained soils, 139 
loose, 2, 56, 178 
macrostructure, 154 · 
at same relative density, 149 
compacted clays, 143,172-173 
comparison of properties, 
234-236,241 
single-grained, 147, 
Soil taxonomy, 150 
Soils: 
residual, 59 
residual strength, 702.:_704 
drained residual shear 
strength of clays, 702-704 
of sands, 704 
· · 
shear strength of, 54Q-{i09 • · · 
topsoil, 150 
· 
transported, 150 
under dynamic loading: 
dynamic soil properties, 
measurement of, 740-742 
dynamically loaded soils, 
strength of, 749 
empirical estimates of Gmax• 
modulus reduction, and 
damping, 74J'-745 · 
properties of, 737-749 
stress-strain response of 
cyclically loaded soils,· 
737-739 
visual-manual classification of, 
55-58 
Solifluction, 82 
Specific gravity, 28-31 
Specific surface, defined, 133-134 
Spreads, 82 
· 
Spring breakup, 249, 253 
Stability, critical conditions, 664t 
Stabilization: 
· 
chemical, 246; 249 
mechanical, 163 
Standard Penetration Test (SPT), 56, 
527t,529,558-559,667,704,740,745; 
See also Shear strength, Standard 
Penetration Test (SPT) · 
Standard Proctor test; See Compaction 
tests 
Standpipe; See Piezometer 
Static compaction, 166 
Stationary dune, 542 
Steady flow, 275 
Steady state line; See Liquefaction 
Stiff dilatometer, 536 
' 
Storativity, use of term, 324 
Strain energy, 354 
Strain localization, 681 
Stratocones, 113 
Stress; See also Normal stress; Shear 
stress 
body,257 
due to surface loads, 450 
effective, 259-262 
physical meaning, 262-263 
intergranular, 257-261 
Index 
851 
Mohr circle, derivation, 500 
neutral, 257 
overburden, 349 
plane (two ,dimensional), 498,534 
at a point, 496--505 
preconsolidation, 477-479, 
567-568,574~575 
principal: 
intermediate, 653 
major,653 
minor,653 
, 
· principal planes, 500, 517-518 
principal stresses, 500, 509,511, 
616,628 
' 
intermediate, 653 
in soil masses: 
· 
· 
density changes, effect of, 267 
example calculations, 282-284 
ground water changes, effect 
of,256 
· 
relation between horizontal 
and vertical, 270-271 
vertical stress profiles, 262-276 
Stress-controlled loading, 564 
Stress-deformation of clays, 705-731; 
See also Shear strength 
anisotropy, 705,722,724-726 
consolidation methods to 
overcome sample disturbance, 
722-724 
c/p ratio, 711--715 
· definition of failure in CU 
effective stress tests, 705-706 
Hvorslev strength parameters, 
706-710 
. 
. 
validity of, 710 
Jiirgenson-Rutledge hypothesis, 
716-722' 
plane strain strength of clays, 
728-729 
strain rate effects, 729-731 
stress history, 715-716 
Stress distribution: 
· 
Boussinesq theory, 456-468 
influence charts: 
Newmark's, 474-476 
Westergaard, 477-480 
lineload,457-458 
long embankment, 463-464, 629, 
632,648 
pointload,457-458,469 
rectangular load, 474 
· 
sqllare load, 469 
strip load, 469,471 
theory of elasticity, 456; 463, 
469,532 
triangular load, 465 
2 to 1 (2:1) method,454 
uniform load, 468 
Westergaard theory, 466-470 
852 
Index 
Stress history, 345-"346 
. 
, 
and preconsolidation pressUre, 
352-357 
' 
.. 
Stress paths, 616.c.627 
· applications: ·• · 
1 
engineering 'practice; 647--{)52 
.·foundation excavation;·· 
650.:.652 
. 
foundation loading, 629--{)30, 
648--{)51 
.. 
. . . 
. ; . " 
sampling proce'ss, 6l4, 621· 
axial compression:.. 
· ·. 1 
normally consolidated clay, 
641-642,644,647 
.. 
examples, 484 :.: :. . 
· 
heavily 'overconsolidated clay, 
644-647;652,656~659 
. Cambridge, 627 
.. · .. ·. • 
clayS, normally consolidated: 
during drained loading, 622 
during undrained loading, 
' 622--{)23 
. 
days, overconsolidated: ' ,. 
. 
AE ·and LC tests, 64~41 
during undrained loading, 
656-659 
. 
. 
coefficient of later~! earth· 
pressure at rest, 619 . ' ... 
constitutive' models for soils,' 
672~73' 
. 
constitutive relations, 66s:-669 
critical state soil mechanics; 
. . 652--{)63 
' . 
energy corrections, 677,:.68l . 
examples of, 616 · · 
· 
. failure criteria for soils, 670-671 
: failllre l!ne (Kdin~), 648--{)49 
foundatiOn unloadmg, 630, 642 
frictional shear strength, 6767 677 
hydrostatic;616;629 , .• • · 
hyperbolic (Duncan-Chang) 
model; 673--{)75 ·. 
MIT, 627:. 
. ; . 
modulus of soils, 663-668 · · 
nonhydrostatic, 616--{)17, 619, 626 
p-q diagram; 616,622, 634 , 
plane strain, 629 ' ' •' . . 
pore pressure parameters, 627--{)29 
formula for, 627 ·. · .·. · : ; 
soil constitutive modeling, 
669~670 . . 
.,• 
.· 
.· .. · . 
stress-dilat~ncy, ~77 
· .:· · .. 
stress point 'representation, 616 
stress ratios, 619. 
• 
· · 
total (TSP), 621'-627 , . · 
vector curves; 627 
UU test, 626 
, . .. , 
Stress ratios, 547,572, 619; 657 · ... 
coefficient of passive earth ·. 
pressure1 594n · 
constant, 620 • ·:' : 
at failure, 577,619 
lateral 619 
. . 
· .. ·. · 
principal, 546-547; 590, 603; 605 
Stress-strain behavior; Se'e also . · 
Modulus, Constitutive modeling 
brittle, 766 
elasto-plastic, 508 
nonlinear, 507 
linearly elastic, 507 ·. 
nonlinear, 507·· · · · 
perfectly plastjc;508 . , 
· .. , · 
plastic, 508 ' ; 
' · 
rigid-plastic, 508 
visco-elastic, 507 
work hardening, 507-508 
work softening, ~08 . : ·. 
Submerged density, 14, 24-25 
Superficial velo'city, 278 
· 
Surface tension,215-219· .. 
Swedish clays, 279 
" · 
Swedish fall-cone test, 43, 497-498, 
585-586 
Swelling: 
. 
. 
clays,71; 138; 150; 238,242,360 
compacted clays, expansive 
T 
, properties o~ 241 
correlation with colloidal' 
content, 239 
engineering significance 0~ 2#-246 
identification, 238-241 
·. 
laboratory tests, 240, 255 · 
physical-chemical aspect~ 238 :. · 
prediction; 238-241 
. • .. 
prevention ·of damage,'238 
related to activity, 241 
· 
soils or rocks, 241-:-244. 
s.'Yelling pressure, 241 •. 
' 
'\:' 
>': 
• 
Trlu~o ratio; See Sh.~ar strength ratio 
Talus slopes, defined, 84 • 
Tamping foot rollers, 182 · 
Tangent modulus, 377-380, 675; . . 
See also Elastic theory; Modulus · 
Tectonic process, 114-116.:. · 
Tensiometer, 224 
· 
Tephra, 113 
Terminal moraine, 101 
Terzaghi, Karl, 5-6 
. 
·. 
, 
Terzaghi consolidation theory; See .. also· 
Consolidation 
, ;: 
· : .. 
assumptions, 407, 413, 780-785 
boundary conditions, 409, 411; '422, 
425-426;780-785 . 
derivation,407n, 780-785 . , · 
solution, 407,409-411, 78~785 
finite difference,419-427 
time factor, 409,411,413,780.:.785 
theory;407-419, 780:..785 
Tests; See specific types of 
Tetrahedral (silica) sheet, 
123-125,127 
Texture: 
clays, 31-:-32 . . 
. . 
coarse-grained, 31.,-32 ,· 
fine,31-32 
. 
. 
fine-grained, 32, 34, 37, 39-40 
gravels;31-'32 
· 
· 
sands,31-32 · 
· · silts,31-32 
soil, 31-32 · 
·. • 
. 
Thermal gravimetric-analysis· 
(TGA),132. 
. . 
.. 
Thermokarsts, 108 
. 
Tidewater'glaciers, 99-100 
Till plains, 106 
· 
· .... 
Time factor, 409,411,413,784-785 
Toedrain,309,316-317. 
' 
Topsoil, 150 
· · · 
· 
Tortuosity, 279: · 
· · 
Torvane,586-587 
Total boundary pore water 
pressure, 298' 
· 
Total settlement; 347,348,404,413, 
418,419,451;490 
' ' 
. 
Total stress: 
. . 
change in, 354, 651, 802, 809 ·. ' 
test, 578 ·· · 
: 
Toughness index, 66 
. · 
Transitional materials,' 152-153 
Transmissivity, 326 
· · · 
Trench compaction, 204-206 
Triaxial extension, 639,641, 
740,742 
. . . 
·. 
: 
Triaxial tests, 283,395, 520-523, 
526,635,637,639,641;659~60, '. 
665,668 
.. . . 
. 
· · · cyclic stress: ·' ·. 
· · · 
hydrostatic, 629,650,683, 
. 684,746 
. 
. .. · 
moduli related to, 663 · 
relnon-hydrostatic, 629, 
. 631,638 . 
'· .. 
undrained moduhis, 474; · 
. 676,680 
Tropical soils, 80 · , . 
Tsunami; 93 , 
· 
Thrbulent flow, 275-276,285 , 
2:1 (2 to 1) method, 453,454-456, 
. 460,469 
u 
Unconfined compression tests, 474, 
515, 660,723,-730 •. . . 
compensating errors in,584 
Unconfined compressive strength, 
515,751 
,··. 
Underconsolidated s~ils, 
defined, 353 
/' 
Undrained shear strength; See also · 
Shear strength 
clays, 534, 728 
from field tests: 
cone penetrometer, 56,174, 
497,528,530--531 
Dutch cone penetrometer, 
497' 528, 530, 531 
Iowa borehole shear test, 
528,533 
pressuremeter test; 395, 398, 
497,530,532 
screw plate compressometer, 
528, 533,534 
. 
standard penetration test, 56, 
498,527,529,717 ,. 
vane shear test, 398-399, 498, 
527,530,540,563,586-588, 
679,720,728,740 
laboratory tests: 
penetrometer, 530-;-531 
Swedish fall cone test, 43, 
497-498 
vane shear test, 679,720, 
728-729,740 
relationship between 
preconsolidation pressure 
and,398 
Uniaxial compression test, 526 
Unified Rock Classification 
System (URCS), 159 
Unified Soil Classification 
System (USCS), 33,48-56 
Uniformity coefficient, 35, 38, 333, 
335,340 
Unit weight, 26-30 
Unsaturated soils: 
matric suction in, 731-733 
Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope 
for,734-735 
shear-strength measurement 
in, 735-737 
soil-water characteristic curve 
(SWCC), 223-225,733 
Unsteady flow, 275 
Uplift pressures, 243,306,310,312, 
315-320 
USGS (U.S. Geological Survey), 
117-118 
UU; See Shear strength; Shear strength 
tests; UU tests 
UU tests, 578-581; See also Shear 
strength; Shear strength tests 
Mohr failure envelope: 
in terms of effective stress, 
580--581 . 
v 
partially saturated clays, 
562-564 
saturated clays, 591 . 
stress conditions,578 :' .. · 
. stress paths, 565. 
Vadose zone, 227-230 
Valley glacier, 99 
Valley train, 103 
Van der Waal's forces; See .Bonding 
agents; Clay minerals 
, 
Vane shear test (VST), 398-399,498, 
527t, 530,540,564, 586-588, 666, 
714-715,726 
Bjerrum's correction factor, 
728-729,740 
Vapor pressure, 218 
Varved clays, 96,255,321, 438 
Vector curve, defined, 627 · 
Velocity head, 277 
Velocity index, 158 · 
Vermiculite, 129 
Vertical strain, 346, 351-352, 364,373. 
use in consolidation tests, 351-352 
use in settlement calculations, 
364,368,371-372 .. 
Vibro-compaction, 177; See also 
Compaction 
vibro-flotation, 177 
Vibro-replacement, 177-178 ... 
Vibratory compactors, 178,189,198 
Vibratory roller, 184 
Virgin compression curve, 352-357; 
367-368,372,707 
evaluation of field curves: 
for normally consolidated 
soil, 370--372 
for overconsolidated soil, 
372-375 
field, 353, 356, 372 
slope of, 367-368 
Visco-elastic materials, 345, 
507,683 
Visual classification and visual 
description, 60, 529 
Void index, 395 
Void ratio, 9, 11, 134, 139 
critical, 148, 544, 545 
Volcanic processes, 111-113 
Volcanism, 111 
Volcanoclastics, 73 
Volume change; See also Shrinkage; 
Swelling 
. 
coefficient of, 346, 366 
Index 
853 
tendencies, 571, 683-684,689-691, 
696-697,702-704 
Volumetric strain: 
defined, 546 
dilation, 690 
·at failure, 548, 550 
Volumetric water content, 225 
w 
Wastage,98 
Waste materials/contaminated 
sites, 152 
Water: 
. 
· . 
, 
'adsorbed,135-136,214 
density,25 
dipolar molecule, 135 
engineering behavior and, 214 
free water, 135 
interaction between cl!ly minerals 
and, 134-138 
shear strength, effect on, 563 
Water content: 
defined, 12 
natural, 12, 40, 46, 127,236,238, 
248,360,362,364 
optimum, 164, 167~l68, 170,172, 
236-237,243 
Water flow; See Flow 
. 
Water pressure; See Pore water ' 
pressure 
Water table, changes in causing 
preconsolidation, 354 
Weald clay, 566, 572-573 
Weathering: 
chemical, 77-78,80, 
97,123 
defined, 76, 122 
mechanical, 97 
·physical, 76-77,84, 122,143 
products of, 122-123 ··· 
profiles, 89, 150 
Well-graded soil, 35; See also 
Gradation; Grain size distribution 
Westergaard theory, 468-473 
point load, 469 
rectangular area; 469-470,472 
square area, 471,493 
· 
strip load,469,471. 
X 
X-ray diffraction, 123,131-132, 
139,238 
z 
Zero air voids curve, 168, 171, 185 
