G u i d e  t o
G u i d e  t o
7    Edition
th
Gregg Drilling LLC
Corporate Headquarters
2726 Walnut Ave.
Signal Hill, CA 90755
Tel: 562-427-6899
Email: info@greggdrilling.com
www.greggdrilling.com
The publisher and the author make no warranties or representations of any kind concerning the
accuracy or suitability of the information contained in this guide for any purpose and cannot accept
any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may have been made.
Copyright ┬ę 2022 Gregg Drilling LLC. All rights reserved.
CONE PENETRATION
TESTING
GUIDE TO
BY
P.K. ROBERTSON
& K. CABAL
GREGG DRILLING LLC
SEVENTH EDITION
DECEMBER 2022
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Glossary ............................................................................................................ i 
Introduction ....................................................................................................... 1 
Risk Based Site Characterization ..................................................................... 2 
Role of the CPT ................................................................................................ 3 
Cone Penetration Test (CPT) ............................................................................ 6 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 6 
History .......................................................................................................................................................... 7 
Test Equipment and Procedures ................................................................................................................. 10 
Additional Sensors/Modules ....................................................................................................................... 11 
Delivery systems ......................................................................................................................................... 12 
Depth of Penetration ................................................................................................................................... 18 
Test Procedures .......................................................................................................................................... 18 
Cone Design................................................................................................................................................ 22 
CPT Interpretation ...................................................................................................................................... 25 
Groundwater Conditions and Piezometric Profile 
26 
Soil Profiling and Soil Classification 
27 
Non-Normalized SBT Charts 
27 
Equivalent SPT N60 Profiles 
36 
Soil Unit Weight (´üž) 
39 
Undrained Shear Strength (su) 
41 
Soil Sensitivity (St) 
42 
Undrained Shear Strength Ratio (su/´ü│'vo) 
43 
Overconsolidation Ratio (OCR) and Yield Stress (´ü│ÔÇÖy) 
44 
Consistency between values of k (for OCR) and Nkt (for su) 
46 
In-Situ Stress Ratio (Ko) 
47 
Relative Density (Dr) 
48 
State Parameter (´ü╣) 
51 
Peak Friction Angle (´üŽÔÇÖ) 
53 
Stiffness and Modulus 
55 
Modulus from Shear Wave Velocity 
56 
Estimating Shear Wave Velocity (Vs) from CPT 
57 
Identification of soils with microstructure 
58 
Hydraulic Conductivity (k) 
60 
Consolidation Characteristics 
63 
Constrained Modulus 
67 
Applications of CPT Results ....................................................................................................................... 68 
Shallow Foundation Design 
69 
Shallow Foundation - Bearing Capacity 
70 
 
 
 
Indirect Methods Based on Soil Parameters 
72 
Direct Approach to estimate Bearing Capacity (In-Situ Tests) 
73 
Shallow Foundation Design ÔÇô Settlement 
75 
Seismic Shear Wave Velocity 
79 
Deep Foundation Design 
89 
Ground Improvement Compaction Control 
101 
Design of Wick or Sand Drains 
104 
Liquefaction .............................................................................................................................................. 106 
Liquefaction Definitions 
106 
Cyclic Liquefaction (Level or Gently Sloping Ground Sites) 
110 
Flow (static) Liquefaction (Steeply Sloping Sites) 
135 
Software ....................................................................................................... 148 
Main References .......................................................................................... 151 
 
 
CPT Guide ÔÇô 2022                                                                                                                                 Glossary 
                                                                                                                                                                             i
 
 
 
 
Glossary 
 
 
This glossary contains the most used terms related to CPT and are presented 
in alphabetical order. 
 
CPT 
 
Cone penetration test. 
CPTu 
 
Cone penetration test with pore pressure measurement ÔÇô piezocone 
test. 
Cone 
 
The part of the cone penetrometer on which the cone resistance is 
measured. 
Cone penetrometer 
 
The assembly containing the cone, friction sleeve, and any other 
sensors, as well as the connections to the push rods. 
Cone resistance, qc 
 
The force acting on the cone, Qc, divided by the projected area of the 
cone, Ac.  
 
qc = Qc / Ac 
Corrected cone resistance, qt 
 
The cone resistance qc corrected for pore water effects. 
 
 
qt = qc + u2(1- a) 
Data acquisition system 
 
The system used to record the measurements made by the cone. 
Dissipation test 
 
A test when the decay of the pore pressure is monitored during a pause 
in penetration. 
Filter element 
 
The porous element inserted into the cone penetrometer to allow 
transmission of pore water pressure to the pore pressure sensor, while 
maintaining the correct dimensions of the cone penetrometer. 
Friction ratio, Rf 
 
The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the sleeve friction resistance, 
fs, to the cone resistance, qt, both measured at the same depth. 
 
 
Rf = (fs/qt) x 100% 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                                                                                                  Glossary
 
 
ii 
Friction reducer 
 
A local enlargement on the push rods placed a short distance above the 
cone penetrometer, to reduce the friction on the push rods. 
Friction sleeve 
 
The section of the cone penetrometer upon which the friction 
resistance is measured. 
Normalized cone resistance, Qt 
 
The cone resistance expressed in a non-dimensional form and taking 
account of the in-situ vertical stresses. 
 
 
Qt = (qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo) / ´ü│'vo 
Normalized cone resistance, Qtn 
 
The cone resistance expressed in a non-dimensional form taking 
account of the in-situ vertical stresses and where the stress exponent 
(n) varies with soil type and stress level. When n = 1, Qtn = Qt. 
 
 
Qtn = 
n
vo
a
a
vo
P
P
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´Çş
'
q
2
t
´ü│
´ü│
 
Net cone resistance, qn 
 
The corrected cone resistance minus the vertical total stress. 
 
 
qn = qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo 
Excess pore pressure (or net pore pressure), ´üäu  
 
 
The measured pore pressure less the in-situ equilibrium pore pressure. 
 
 
´üäu = u2 ÔÇô u0 
Pore pressure 
 
The pore pressure generated during cone penetration and measured by 
a pore pressure sensor: 
 
u1 when measured on the cone face 
 
u2 when measured just behind the cone. 
Pore pressure ratio, Bq 
 
The net pore pressure normalized with respect to the net cone 
resistance. 
 
 
Bq =  ´üäu / qn  
Push rods 
 
Thick-walled tubes used to advance the cone penetrometer 
Sleeve friction resistance, fs 
 
The frictional force acting on the friction sleeve, Fs, divided by its 
surface area, As. 
 
fs = Fs / As 
CPT Guide ÔÇô 2022                                                                                                  
                    Introduction 
                                                                                1 
Introduction 
 
 
The purpose of this guide is to provide a concise resource for the application 
of the CPT to geotechnical engineering practice.  This guide is a supplement 
and update to the book ÔÇśCPT in Geotechnical PracticeÔÇÖ by Lunne, Robertson 
and Powell (1997).  This guide is applicable primarily to data obtained using 
a standard electronic cone with a 60-degree apex angle and either a diameter 
of 35.7 mm or 43.7 mm (10 or 15 cm2 cross-sectional area).   
 
Recommendations are provided on applications of CPT data for soil profiling, 
material identification and evaluation of geotechnical parameters and design.  
The companion book (Lunne et al., 1997) provides more details on the history 
of the CPT, equipment, specification, and performance.  The companion book 
also provides extensive background on interpretation techniques.  This guide 
provides only the basic recommendations for the application of the CPT for 
geotechnical design. 
 
A list of the main references is included at the end of this guide.  A more 
comprehensive reference list can be found in the companion CPT book and the 
recently listed technical papers. Other technical papers on the CPT can be 
downloaded from www.cpt-robertson.com and https://usucger.org/books/. 
 
Additional details on CPT interpretation are provided in a series of free 
webinars that can be viewed at: 
https://www.youtube.com/user/GreggCPTWebinars. 
https://www.greggdrilling.com/resources/webinars/ 
 
The interpretations described in this Guide have been incorporated into easy-
to-use CPT-based software (CPeT-IT and CLiq) that can be downloaded from 
https://geologismiki.gr/products/. 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                                                            Risk Based Site Characterization
 
 
2 
Risk Based Site Characterization 
 
Risk and uncertainty are characteristics of the ground and are never fully 
eliminated.  The appropriate level of sophistication for site characterization 
and analyses should be based on the following criteria:  
´éĚ Precedent and local experience 
´éĚ Design objectives 
´éĚ Level of geotechnical risk 
´éĚ Potential cost savings 
The evaluation of geotechnical risk is dependent on hazards, probability of 
occurrence and the consequences.  Risk is defined as the product of likelihood 
and consequences and, in basic terms, projects can be classified as either: low, 
moderate or high risk, depending on the above criteria.  Table 1 shows a 
generalized flow chart to illustrate the likely geotechnical ground investigation 
approach associated with risk. The level of sophistication in a site investigation 
is also a function of the project design objectives and the potential for cost 
savings.   
 
 
Table 1 Risk-based flowchart for site characterization
CPT Guide - 2022                                                                                         
  Role of the CPT 
                                                                                3 
Role of the CPT 
 
The objectives of any subsurface investigation are to determine the following: 
 
´éĚ   Nature and sequence of the subsurface strata (geologic regime) 
´éĚ   Groundwater conditions (hydrologic regime) 
´éĚ   Physical and mechanical properties of the subsurface strata. 
 
For geo-environmental site investigations where contaminants are possible, the 
above objectives have the additional requirement to determine: 
 
´éĚ Distribution and composition of contaminants. 
 
The above requirements are a function of the proposed project and the associated 
risks.  An ideal investigation program should include a mix of field and laboratory 
tests depending on the risk of the project. Geophysical testing is often an ideal 
complement to CPT (e.g., surface seismic using MASW). 
 
Table 2 presents a partial list of the major in-situ tests and their perceived 
applicability for use in different ground conditions. 
 
 
Table 2.  The applicability and usefulness of in-situ tests  
(Lunne, Robertson & Powell, 1997, updated by Robertson, 2012) 
CPT Guide - 2022                                           
       
    Role of the CPT 
 
4 
 
The Cone Penetration Test (CPT) and its enhanced versions such as the piezocone 
(CPTu) and seismic (SCPT), have extensive applications in a wide range of soils.  
Although the CPT was initially limited mainly to softer soils, with modern 
pushing equipment and more robust cones, the CPT can be performed in stiff to 
very stiff soils, and in some cases soft rock. 
 
Advantages of CPT: 
´éĚ Fast and continuous profiling 
´éĚ Repeatable and reliable data (independent of operator) 
´éĚ Economical and productive 
´éĚ Strong theoretical basis for interpretation 
´éĚ Significant number of case histories 
 
Disadvantage of CPT: 
´éĚ Relatively high capital investment 
´éĚ Requires somewhat skilled/trained operators 
´éĚ No soil sample, during a CPT 
´éĚ Penetration can be restricted in some gravel and /or cemented layers 
 
Although it is not possible to obtain a soil sample during a CPT, it is possible to 
obtain soil samples using CPT direct push equipment.  The continuous nature of 
CPT results provides a detailed stratigraphic profile to guide in selective sampling 
appropriate for the project.  The recommended approach is to first perform several 
CPT soundings to define the stratigraphic profile and to provide initial estimates 
of geotechnical parameters, then follow with selective sampling.  The type and 
amount of sampling will depend on the project requirements and geotechnical 
risks as well as the stratigraphic profile.  Typically, sampling will be focused in 
critical zones for the project, as defined by the CPT, and carried out adjacent to 
and immediately after a CPT. Testing and interpretation should always be done 
within a geologic framework. 
 
A variety of push-in discrete depth samplers are available.  Most are based on 
designs like the original Gouda or MOSTAP samplers from the Netherlands.  The 
samplers are pushed to the required depth in a closed position.  The Gouda type 
samplers have an inner cone tip that is retracted to the locked position leaving a 
hollow sampler with small diameter (typically 25mm/1 inch) stainless steel or 
brass sample tubes.  The hollow sampler is then pushed to collect a sample.   The 
filled sampler and push rods are then retrieved to the ground surface.   The 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                                                         
  Role of the CPT 
                                                                                5 
MOSTAP type samplers contain a wire to fix the position of the inner cone tip 
before pushing to obtain a sample.  Modifications have also been made to include 
a wireline system so that soil samples can be retrieved at multiple depths rather 
than retrieving and re-deploying the sampler and rods at each interval.  The 
wireline systems tend to work better in soft soils.  Figure 1 shows a schematic of 
typical (Gouda-type) CPT-based soil sampler.  The speed of sampling depends on 
the maximum speed of the pushing equipment but is not limited to the standard 
2cm/s used for the CPT. Some specialized CPT trucks can take samples at a rate 
of up to 40cm/s.  Hence, push-in soil sampling can be fast and efficient.  In very 
soft soils, special 800mm (32 in) long push-in piston samplers have been 
developed to obtain 63mm (2.5 in) diameter essentially undisturbed soil samples. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Schematic of simple direct-push (CPT-based) soil sampler 
(www.greggdrilling.com) 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
6 
Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
Introduction 
 
In the Cone Penetration Test (CPT), a cone on the end of a series of rods is pushed 
into the ground at a constant rate and near-continuous measurements are made of 
the resistance to penetration of the cone and of a surface sleeve.  Figure 2 
illustrates the main terminology regarding cone penetrometers. 
 
The total force acting on the cone, Qc, divided by the projected area of the cone, 
Ac, produces the cone resistance, qc.  The total force acting on the friction sleeve, 
Fs, divided by the surface area of the friction sleeve, As, produces the sleeve 
resistance, fs.   In a piezocone, pore pressure is also measured, typically behind 
the cone in the u2 location, as shown in Figure 2. If pore pressures are measured 
on the face of the cone, it is the u1 location. Some cones can measure both u1 and 
u2 pore pressures simultaneously. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Terminology for cone penetrometers 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                7 
History 
 
1932 
The first cone penetrometer tests were made using a 35 mm outside diameter gas 
pipe with a 15 mm steel inner push rod.  A cone tip with a 10 cm2 projected area 
and a 60o apex angle was attached to the steel inner push rods, as shown in Figure 
3.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Early Dutch mechanical cone (after Sanglerat, 1972) 
 
1935 
Delf Soil Mechanics Laboratory designed the first manually operated 10ton 
(100kN) cone penetration push machine, see Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Early Dutch mechanical cone (after Delft Geotechnics) 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
8 
1948 
The original Dutch mechanical cone was improved by adding a conical part just 
above the cone.  The purpose of the geometry was to prevent soil from entering 
the gap between the casing and inner rods.  The basic Dutch mechanical cones, 
shown in Figure 5, are still in use in some parts of the world. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Dutch mechanical cone penetrometer with conical mantle  
 
 
1953 
A friction sleeve (ÔÇśadhesion jacketÔÇÖ) was added behind the cone to include 
measurement of the local sleeve resistance (Begemann, 1953), see Figure 6.  
Measurements were made every 20 cm, (8 inches) and for the first time, friction 
ratio was used to classify soil type (see Figure 7). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Begemann type cone with friction sleeve 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                9 
 
 
Figure 7.  First CPT-based soil classification for Begemann mechanical cone 
 
1965 
Fugro developed an electric cone, of which the shape and dimensions formed the 
basis for the modern cones and the International Standard and ASTM procedure.  
The main improvements relative to the mechanical cone penetrometers were: 
 
´éĚ Elimination of incorrect readings due to friction between inner rods and 
outer rods and weight of inner rods. 
´éĚ Continuous testing with continuous rate of penetration without the need for 
alternate movements of different parts of the penetrometer and no 
undesirable soil movements influencing the cone resistance. 
´éĚ Simpler and more reliable electrical measurement of cone resistance and 
sleeve friction resistance. 
 
 
1974 
Cone penetrometers that could also measure pore pressure (piezocones) were 
introduced.  Early designs had various shapes and pore pressure filter locations.  
Gradually the practice has become more standardized so that the recommended 
position of the filter element is close behind the cone at the u2 location.  With the 
measurement of pore water pressure, it became apparent that it was necessary to 
correct the cone resistance for pore water pressure effects (qt), especially in soft 
clay. 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
10 
Test Equipment and Procedures 
 
There are several elements in a CPT ranging from the probe and sensing elements 
to the delivery and deployment systems. 
 
Cone Penetrometers 
 
Cone penetrometers come in a range of sizes with the 10 cm2 and 15 cm2 probes 
the most common and specified in most standards.  Figure 8 shows a range of 
cones from a mini cone at 2 cm2 to a large cone at 40 cm2.  The mini cones are 
used for shallow investigations, whereas the large cones can be used in gravely 
soils. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Range of CPT probes (from left: 2 cm2, 10 cm2, 15 cm2, 40 cm2) 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                11 
Additional Sensors/Modules 
 
Since the introduction of the electric cone in the early 1960ÔÇÖs, many additional 
sensors have been added to the cone, such as: 
 
´éĚ Temperature 
´éĚ Geophones/accelerometers (seismic wave velocities, Vs and Vp) 
´éĚ Pressuremeter (cone pressuremeter) 
´éĚ Camera (visible light) 
´éĚ Radioisotope (gamma/neutron) 
´éĚ Electrical resistivity/conductivity 
´éĚ Dielectric 
´éĚ pH 
´éĚ Oxygen exchange (redox) 
´éĚ Laser/ultraviolet induced fluorescence (LIF/UVOST) 
´éĚ Membrane interface probe (MIP) 
 
The latter items are primarily for geo-environmental applications. 
One of the more common additional sensors is a geophone or accelerometer to 
allow the measurement of seismic wave velocities.  A schematic of the seismic 
CPT (SCPT) procedure is shown in Figure 9. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Schematic of Seismic CPT (SCPT) test procedure 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
12 
Delivery systems 
 
The CPT equipment can reach a location using a wide range of delivery systems.  
 
On Land 
 
Delivery systems for land (onshore) applications generally consist of specially 
built units that are either wheeled or track mounted as well as a wide range of 
anchored systems.  Figures 10 to 13 show a range of on shore delivery systems. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Truck mounted 250kN (25 ton) CPT unit 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                13 
 
 
Figure 11.  Track mounted 200kN (20 ton) CPT unit  
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.   Small, anchored drill-rig unit
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Portable ramset for CPT inside buildings or limited access 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  Mini CPT system with coiled rod delivery attached to small track 
mounted auger rig 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                15 
Over Water 
 
There are a variety of delivery systems for over water investigations depending 
on the depth of water.  Floating or jack-up barges are common in shallow water 
(depth less than 30m/100 ft), see Figures 15 and 16. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15.   Mid-size jack-up boat 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.   Quinn Delta (Gregg) ship with spuds 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
16 
 
In deeper water offshore (>100m, 350ft) it is common to place the CPT delivery 
systems on the seafloor using specially designed underwater systems, such as 
shown in Figure 17.  Seabed systems can push full size cones (10 and 15cm2 
cones) and smaller systems for mini cones (2 and 5cm2 cones) using continuous 
pushing systems. Rods can be connected before lowering to the seafloor and 
supported via a tension system or support tower, or a coiled tubing system can be 
straightened and pushed into the soil as the cone is advanced into the subsurface. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  Seafloor CPT systems for 
pushing full size cones in deep water 
(ranging from 1500-4,000 msw) Clockwise 
from left: 1st Generation Gregg Marine 
Seabed CPT, a. p. van den berg ROSON 
system, 2nd Generation Gregg Marine 
coiled tubing CPT. 
 
 
It is also possible to push the CPT from the bottom of a borehole using down-hole 
equipment.  The advantage of down-hole CPT in a drilled borehole is that much 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                17 
deeper penetration can be achieved and hard layers can be drilled through.  Down-
hole methods can be applied both on-shore and off-shore.  Recently, remotely 
controlled seabed drill rigs have been developed that can drill and sample and 
push CPT in up to 4,000m (13,000 ft) of water (e.g., Lunne, 2010). 
 
Deployment Systems 
 
Deployment of the cone penetrometer into the ground is usually done using a 
hydraulic pushing system.  For onshore systems it is common that the push rods 
are 1m in length and are connected after each push by an operator.  This has 
traditionally meant that there is a short pause after each 1m push to add another 
rod.  Recently there are several systems designed to provide continuous pushing.  
One system is a trademarked ÔÇśSingleTwistÔÇÖ rod connection system that allows a 
coiled string of short rods to be stored and quickly assembled by robotics.  The 
rods require only a 1/6th turn to become rigidly connected for deployment.  An 
alternate system is a coiled tubing system where the rods are coiled and 
straightened when passing through the continuous pushing system.  
 
Robotic delivery and deployment systems also allow for unmanned remotely 
operated systems. 
 
 
Figure 18.  GreggÔÇÖs Bumblebee remotely controlled, un-manned CPT system 
with 5cm2 cone and coiled tubing 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
18 
Depth of Penetration 
 
CPTÔÇÖs can be performed to depths exceeding 100m (300ft) in soft soils and with 
large capacity pushing equipment.  To improve the depth of penetration, the 
friction along the push rods should be reduced.  This can be done using an 
expanded coupling (i.e., friction reducer) a short distance, typically 0.5m (1.5ft), 
behind the cone. Penetration will be limited if very hard soils, gravel layers or 
rock are encountered.  It is common in North America to use 15cm2 cones to 
increase penetration depth, since 15cm2 cones are more robust and have a slightly 
larger diameter than the standard 10cm2 push rods, hence there is no need for an 
additional friction reducer. The push rods can also be lubricated with drilling mud 
to remove rod friction for deep soundings.  Depth of penetration can also be 
increased using down-hole techniques with a drill rig including wire-line CPT 
systems.  
 
CPT systems have also been added to sonic drill rigs so that standard CPT can be 
performed using the drill rig.  If hard layers are encountered, vibrations from the 
sonic drill head can be activated to aid penetration through the hard layer.  After 
penetration through the hard layer, standard (no vibrations) CPT can be resumed. 
For CPT using sonic rigs, the basic cones are more robust to withstand the high 
acceleration from the high frequency vibrations.  
 
Test Procedures 
 
Pre-drilling 
For penetration through coarse-grained fill or hard soil, it may be necessary to 
pre-drill to avoid damaging the cone.  Pre-drilling, in certain cases, may be 
replaced by first pre-punching a hole through the upper problem material with a 
solid steel ÔÇśdummyÔÇÖ probe with a diameter slightly larger than the cone. It is also 
common to hand auger the first 1.5m (5ft) in urban areas to avoid underground 
utilities. 
 
Verticality 
The thrust machine should be set up to obtain a thrust direction as near as possible 
to vertical.  The deviation of the initial thrust direction from vertical should not 
exceed 2 degrees and push rods should be checked for straightness.  Modern 
cones have simple slope sensors incorporated to enable a measure of the non-
verticality of the sounding.  This is useful to avoid damage to equipment and 
breaking of push rods.  For depths less than 15m (50ft), significant non-verticality 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                19 
is unusual, provided the initial thrust direction is vertical. Non-vertical CPTs have 
also been carried out for special projects (e.g., inside tunnels). 
 
Reference Measurements 
Modern cones have the potential for a high degree of accuracy and repeatability 
(~0.1% of full-scale output, FSO).  Tests have shown that the output of the sensors 
at zero load can be sensitive to changes in temperature, although most cones now 
include some temperature compensation.  It is common practice to record zero 
load readings of all sensors to track these changes.  Zero load readings should be 
monitored and recorded (in engineering units) at the start and end of each CPT 
and is required practice in most standards. 
 
Rate of Penetration 
The standard rate of penetration is 2cm/s (approximately 0.8in/s).  Hence, a 20m 
(60ft) sounding can be completed (start to finish) in about 30 minutes.  In coarse-
grained soils, such as sand, the standard cone penetration is essentially fully 
drained and in fine-grained soils, such as clay, the penetration is essentially fully 
undrained. Hence, the measurements are generally not sensitive to slight 
variations in rate of penetration. However, in some soils, such as silt, the standard 
penetration may occur under partially drained conditions. 
 
Interval of readings 
Electric cones produce continuous analogue data.  However, most systems 
convert the data to digital form at selected intervals.  Most standards require the 
interval to be no more than 200mm (8in).  In general, most systems collect data 
at intervals of between 10 to 50mm, with 20 mm (~1in) becoming the most 
common.  
 
Dissipation Tests 
During a pause in penetration, any excess pore pressure generated around the cone 
will start to dissipate.  The rate of dissipation depends upon the coefficient of 
consolidation, which in turn, depends on the compressibility and permeability of 
the soil.  The rate of dissipation also depends on the diameter of the probe.  A 
dissipation test can be performed at any required depth by stopping the penetration 
and measuring the change of pore pressure with time.  It is common to record the 
time to reach 50% dissipation (t50), as illustrated in Figure 19.   
 
If the equilibrium pore pressure (uo) is required, the dissipation test should 
continue until no further dissipation is observed, as shown in Figure 19.  This can 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
20 
occur rapidly in sands, but may take many hours in plastic clays. Dissipation rate 
also increases as probe size decreases. 
 
In soft, contractive clay, it is common to record large positive penetration pore 
pressures that decay with time toward the equilibrium pressure (uo).  In very stiff 
clay and dense silty sand, the penetration pore pressures can be negative of uo due 
to the dilative nature of the soil and pore pressures will increase toward 
equilibrium during a dissipation test. At shallow depth, it is possible to measure 
penetration pore pressures that are below zero, where the shear induced pore 
pressures due to dilation exceed uo and negative pore pressures are recorded up to 
a maximum of -1 atmosphere (~-100kPa or -15psi).  Penetration pore pressures 
approaching -1 atmosphere can result in cavitation of the sensor fluid (i.e., small 
air bubbles) for onshore CPT causing the sensor to become unsaturated.  During 
the dissipation test any small air bubbles caused by cavitation can go back into 
solution to regain full saturation of the sensor. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19.    Example dissipation test to determine t50 and uo 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                21 
Calibration and Maintenance 
Calibrations should be carried out at intervals based on the stability of the zero 
load readings.  Typically, if the zero load readings remain stable, the load cells do 
not require a check calibration. For major projects, check calibrations may be 
carried out before and after the field work, with functional checks during the work.  
Functional checks should include recording and evaluating the zero load 
measurements (baseline readings).   
 
With careful design, calibration, and maintenance, strain gauge load cells and 
pressure transducers can have an accuracy and repeatability of better than +/- 
0.1% of full-scale output (FSO). 
 
Table 3 shows a summary of checks and recalibrations for the CPT. 
 
Maintenance 
Start 
of 
Project
Start of 
Test 
End of 
Test 
End of 
Day 
Once a 
Month 
Every 3 
months* 
Wear 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
 
O-ring seals 
x 
 
 
x 
 
 
Push-rods 
 
x 
 
 
x 
 
Pore 
pressure-filter 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
Calibration 
 
 
 
 
 
x* 
Computer 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
Cone 
 
 
 
 
x 
 
Zero-load 
 
x 
x 
 
 
 
Cables 
x 
 
 
 
x 
 
 
Table 3 Summary of checks and recalibrations for the CPT 
 
*Note: recalibrations are normally carried out only when the zero-load readings drift outside manufactures 
recommended range 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
22 
 
Cone Design 
 
Penetrometers use strain gauge load cells to measure the resistance to penetration.   
Basic cone designs use either separate load cells or subtraction load cells to 
measure the tip resistance (qc) and sleeve resistance (fs).  In subtraction cones the 
sleeve friction is derived by ÔÇśsubtractingÔÇÖ the tip load from the tip + friction load.  
Figure 20 illustrates the general principle behind load cell designs using either 
separated load cells or subtraction load cells.  
 
 
Figure 20. Designs for cone penetrometers (a) tip and sleeve load cells in 
compression, (b) tip load cell in compression and sleeve load cell in 
tension, (c) subtraction type load cell design (modified from Lunne et al., 
1997) 
 
 
In the 1980ÔÇÖs subtraction cones became popular because of improved overall 
robustness of the penetrometer.   However, in soft soils, subtraction cone designs 
suffer from a lack of accuracy in the determination of sleeve resistance due 
primarily to variable zero load stability of the two load cells.  In subtraction cone 
designs, different zero load errors for each load cell can produce cumulative errors 
in the derived sleeve resistance values.  For accurate sleeve resistance 
measurements in soft sediments, it is recommended that cones have separate 
(compression) load cells. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                23 
With good design (separate load cells, equal end area friction sleeve) and quality 
control (zero load measurements, tolerances, and surface roughness) it is possible 
to obtain very repeatable tip and sleeve resistance measurements.  However, fs 
measurements, in general, will be less accurate than tip resistance, qc, especially 
in soft sensitive fine-grained soils, where the sleeve resistance values can be 
smaller than the accuracy of some cones (e.g., fs < 5kPa).  In soft soils, cones with 
smaller capacity (i.e., smaller FSO) can be used for improved accuracy. 
 
Pore pressure (water) effects 
Due to the inner geometry of the cone the ambient water pressure acts on the 
shoulder behind the cone and on the ends of the friction sleeve.   This effect is 
often referred to as the unequal end area effect (Campanella et al., 1982).  Figure 
21 illustrates the key features for water pressure acting behind the cone and on the 
end areas of the friction sleeve.   In soft clays and silts and in over water work, the 
measured qc must be corrected for pore water pressures acting on the cone 
geometry, thus obtaining the corrected cone resistance, qt: 
 
qt = qc + u2 (1 ÔÇô a) 
 
Where ÔÇśaÔÇÖ is the net area ratio determined from laboratory calibration with a 
typical value between 0.70 and 0.85.  In sandy soils qc = qt due to higher values 
of qc and smaller values of u2. 
 
 
Figure 21. Unequal end area effects on cone tip and friction sleeve 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
24 
 
A similar correction should be applied to the sleeve resistance.  
 
ft = fs ÔÇô (u2Asb ÔÇô u3Ast)/As 
 
where: 
fs = measured sleeve resistance 
u2 = water pressure at base of sleeve 
u3 = water pressure at top of sleeve 
As = surface area of sleeve 
Asb = cross-section area of sleeve at base 
Ast = cross-sectional area of sleeve at top 
 
However, most standards requires that cones have an equal end area friction 
sleeve (i.e., Ast = Asb) that reduces the need for such a correction.  For 15cm2 
cones, where As is large compared to Asb and Ast, (and Ast = Asb) the correction is 
generally very small.  All cones should have equal end area friction sleeves to 
minimize the effect of water pressure on the sleeve resistance measurements. 
Careful monitoring of the zero load readings is also required. 
 
For deeper overwater CPTs, it is common to record the zero load readings at the 
mudline line (soil surface) since the effective stress at the mudline is always zero.  
For some shallow over water work the zero load readings are sometimes taken at 
the water surface.  In this case, the cone will record readings through the water 
which can be helpful to identify when soil is encountered. In some cases, there 
can be a transition from heavy mud to a soil boundary. When interpreting 
overwater CPT data, it is importance to know where the zero load readings were 
made to ensure that the calculated effective stress is zero at the mudline. 
 
In the offshore industry, where CPT can be carried out in very deep water (> 
1,000m), cones are sometimes compensated (filled with oil) so that the pressure 
inside the cone is equal to the hydrostatic water pressure outside the cone.  For 
compensated cones the correction for cone geometry to obtain qt is slightly 
different than shown above, since the cone can automatically record zero qc at the 
mudline. 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                25 
CPT Interpretation 
 
Numerous semi-empirical correlations have been developed to estimate 
geotechnical parameters from the CPT for a wide range of soils.  Most correlations 
have some theoretical framework but remain semi-empirical due to the complex 
behavior of most natural soils.  These correlations vary in their reliability and 
applicability.  Because the CPT has additional sensors (e.g., pore pressure, CPTu 
and seismic, SCPT), the applicability to estimate soil parameters varies.  Since 
CPT with pore pressure measurements (CPTu) is commonly available, Table 4 
shows an estimate of the perceived applicability of the CPTu to estimate soil 
parameters.  If seismic (Vs) is added, the ability to estimate soil stiffness (E, G & 
Go) is further improved. 
 
 
 
Soil Type 
 
 
Dr 
´Çá
´üÖ´Çá
 
Ko 
 
OCR 
 
St 
 
su 
´Çá
´üŽ'´Çá
 
E, G* 
 
M 
 
G0* 
 
k 
 
ch 
 
Coarse-
gained 
(sand-like) 
 
2-3 
 
2-3
 
5 
 
5 
 
 
 
2-3 
 
2-3 
 
2-3 
 
2-3 
 
3-4 
 
3-4 
 
Fine-
grained 
(clay-like) 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
1 
 
2 
 
1-2 
 
4 
 
2-4 
 
2-3 
 
2-4 
 
2-3 
 
2-3 
 
Table 4   Perceived applicability of CPTu for deriving soil parameters 
1=high, 2=high to moderate, 3=moderate, 4=moderate to low, 5=low reliability, Blank=no applicability, * 
improved with SCPT 
 
Where: 
Dr  
Relative density 
 
 
´üŽ' 
Peak friction angle 
´üÖ 
State Parameter 
 
 
K0 
In-situ stress ratio 
E, G YoungÔÇÖs and Shear moduli 
G0 
Small strain shear moduli 
OCR Over consolidation ratio  
M 
1-D Compressibility 
su 
Undrained shear strength  
St 
Sensitivity  
 
 
ch 
Coefficient of consolidation       k 
Permeability 
 
Most semi-empirical correlations apply primarily to young, uncemented, 
predominately silica-based soils that have little to no microstructure.   
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
26 
A major advantage of using the SCPTu is that it can make 6 to 7 measurements 
in one sounding (qt, fs, u2, Vs (Vp), t50, uo). These multiple measurements provide 
an improved understanding of the soil behavior and groundwater conditions. 
There is no other in-situ test that can provide this level of information in a near-
continuous and cost-effective manner.  
 
Groundwater Conditions and Piezometric Profile 
Soil behavior is controlled by the in-situ effective stresses and knowledge of the 
groundwater conditions is important to determine the correct in-situ effective 
stresses.  The CPTu provides detailed information on soil behavior including the 
pore pressure (piezometric) profile.  If dissipation tests are performed, the 
resulting equilibrium pore pressure (uo) measurements provide an opportunity to 
define the piezometric profile at the time of the CPT. 
 
It is often assumed that groundwater conditions are hydrostatic.  However, this is 
not always the case, especially in sloping ground or close to an embankment, 
where downward (lateral) flow is common, as well as near lakes and rivers, where 
upward flow is common.  In conditions of downward flow, the piezometric profile 
will be less than hydrostatic and in conditions of upward flow, the piezometric 
profile will be greater than hydrostatic and can result in artesian conditions. When 
piezometric conditions are non-hydrostatic it is important to perform multiple 
dissipation tests to better define the piezometric profile. Since dissipation to 
equilibrium (uo) can be time consuming in some fine-grained clay layers, it is 
preferred, if possible, to perform dissipation tests in coarse-grained sand and silt 
layers, where possible, since uo can be obtained quickly.  However, frequent 
dissipation tests can also influence the penetration (dynamic) pore pressures that 
can then influence interpretation.  In low permeability clay layers the CPT 
penetration pore pressures (u2) can respond rapidly and penetration will be 
undrained early in the penetration.  However, in more permeable silt layers, it can 
take some penetration depth (e.g., up to 1m) to achieve full undrained conditions 
and frequent dissipation tests may reduce the ability to achieve these undrained 
conditions during cone penetration. Ideally, under these conditions, it is preferred 
to perform a standard CPTu with no dissipations (and with rapid rod additions if 
using incremental 1m push rods) followed by an adjacent CPTu where frequent 
dissipation tests are performed to determine the correct piezometric profile. If the 
2nd sounding includes seismic measurements (SCPT) then frequent stops/pauses 
are required to make the seismic measurements and it can be helpful to also record 
the dissipation data during these stops/pauses.  It is more common to perform a 
single CPTu sounding with a small number (e.g., 3 or 4) dissipation tests, as a 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                27 
compromise between achieving undrained conditions where appropriate and 
determining the approximate piezometric profile. 
 
There can be conditions, such as in mine tailings, where there is ongoing 
deposition of tailings and water at the surface, combined with strong downward 
flow. It is possible that any fine tailings, with high air entry values, are saturated, 
but dissipation tests indicate little or no equilibrium pressures (i.e., uo ~ 0) due to 
the strong downward flow. In this case, it is incorrect to assume that the tailings 
are unsaturated with no groundwater. It is more correct to assume that the phreatic 
surface is at the ground surface (consistent with observed surface water from 
ongoing tailings deposition) but with strong downward flow such that uo ~ 0.  
Likewise, it is possible that interlayered tailings (alternate sand and silt layers) 
can indicate that the sand tailings maybe essentially unsaturated (due to a small 
air entry value), with slightly negative CPT penetration pore pressures (u2 < 0) but 
the finer silt tailings are either saturated or close to saturated with large positive 
penetration positive CPT pore pressures (u2 > 0).  Near saturated fine-grained soils 
can be expected to behave similar to saturated soils in undrained shear.  Fine 
grained soils have high air entry values and can remain essentially saturated 
(saturation > 85%) even under conditions when uo is close to zero. 
 
 
Soil Profiling and Soil Classification 
One of the major applications of the CPT is for soil profiling and soil 
classification. Typically, the cone resistance, (qt) is high in sands and low in clays, 
and the friction ratio (Rf = fs/qt) is low in sands and high in clays (see Figure 7). 
Traditional soil classification systems (e.g., USCS) are based on laboratory 
determined physical characteristics, such as, grain size distribution and plasticity 
that are measured on remolded samples.  CPT measurements respond to in-situ 
mechanical behavior of the soil, such as, strength, stiffness, and compressibility. 
The CPT measurements provide a repeatable index of the aggregate behavior of 
the in-situ soil in the immediate area of the probe.  Hence, the prediction of soil 
type based on CPT measurements is referred to as the Soil Behavior Type (SBT).  
 
Non-Normalized SBT Charts 
The most used CPT soil behavior type (SBT) chart was suggested by Robertson 
et al. (1986), and the updated, dimensionless version (Robertson, 2010) is shown 
in Figure 22.  This chart uses the basic CPT parameters of cone resistance, qt and 
friction ratio, Rf = (fs/qt)100%. The chart is global in nature and can provide 
reasonable predictions of SBT for CPT soundings up to about 20m (60ft) in depth.  
Overlap in some zones should be expected and the zones can be modified 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
28 
somewhat based on local experience.  The non-normalized SBT chart (Fig. 22) is 
often used real-time during the CPT to identify the basic soil types, since it uses 
measured qc and fs. 
 
Normalized SBTn Charts 
Since both the penetration resistance (qc) and sleeve resistance (fs) increase with 
depth due to the increase in effective overburden stress, the CPT data requires 
normalization for overburden stress to remove the influence of depth.   
 
A popular CPT soil behavior chart based on normalized CPT data is that first 
proposed by Robertson (1990) and shown in Figure 23. The linear normalization 
suggested by Wroth (1984) was used: 
 
Qt or Qt1 = (qt - ´ü│vo) / ´ü│ÔÇÖvo 
 
Fr   = 100 (fs / (qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo)) % 
 
As a reference, included on the SBT chart are lines of normalized friction 
resistance (fs/´ü│ÔÇÖvo). The line for fs/´ü│ÔÇÖvo= 0.01 represents the approximate lower 
limit of accuracy for most cones and the line for fs/´ü│ÔÇÖvo = 10 represents the 
approximate upper limit of capacity for most cones. Most CPT data in normally 
to lightly overconsolidated soils with little or no microstructure plot in the central 
region between 0.1 < fs/´ü│ÔÇÖvo < 1.0. The chart is also global in nature and provides 
only a guide to soil behavior type (SBT).  Overlap in some zones should be 
expected and the zones can be modified somewhat based on local experience.   
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                29 
 
 
Zone 
Soil Behavior Type 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
Sensitive, fine grained 
Organic soils - clay 
Clay ÔÇô silty clay to clay 
Silt mixtures ÔÇô clayey silt to silty clay 
Sand mixtures ÔÇô silty sand to sandy silt
Sands ÔÇô clean sand to silty sand 
Gravelly sand to dense sand 
Very stiff sand to clayey sand* 
Very stiff fine grained*
 
* Heavily overconsolidated or cemented
 
Pa = atmospheric pressure = 100 kPa = 1 tsf 
 
Figure 22.   Non-normalized CPT Soil Behavior Type (SBT) chart 
 (Robertson et al., 1986, updated by Robertson, 2010). 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
30 
 
 
   
Zone 
Soil Behavior Type 
Ic 
1
Sensitive, fine grained
N/A
2
Organic soils  ÔÇô clay
> 3.6
3
Clays ÔÇô silty clay to clay
2.95 ÔÇô 3.6
4 
Silt mixtures ÔÇô clayey silt to silty clay 
2.60 ÔÇô 2.95 
5 
Sand mixtures ÔÇô silty sand to sandy silt
2.05 ÔÇô 2.6 
6
Sands ÔÇô clean sand to silty sand
1.31 ÔÇô 2.05
7
Gravelly sand to dense sand
< 1.31
8
Very stiff sand to clayey sand*
N/A
9
Very stiff, fine grained*
N/A
 
* Heavily overconsolidated or cemented 
 
Figure 23.   Normalized CPT Soil Behavior Type (SBTn) chart, Qt - Fr that 
include contours of SBTn Index, Ic 
 (Modified from Robertson, 1990 and Robertson, 2009). 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                31 
 
The full normalized SBTn charts suggested by Robertson (1990) also included an 
additional chart based on normalized pore pressure parameter, Bq, as shown on 
Figure 24, where: 
 
Bq = ´üäu / qn 
 
and 
excess pore pressure, ´üäu = u2 ÔÇô u0 
 
net cone resistance, qn = qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo 
 
The Qt ÔÇô Bq chart can aid in the identification of soft, saturated fine-grained soils 
where excess CPT penetration pore pressures can be large.  In general, the Qt - Bq 
chart is not always used for onshore CPT due to the sometimes lack of 
repeatability of the pore pressure results (e.g., poor saturation or loss of saturation 
of the filter element, etc.). 
 
 
 
Figure 24.   Normalized CPT Soil Behavior Type (SBTn) charts 
Qt ÔÇô Fr and Qt - Bq (after Robertson, 1990). 
  
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
32 
If no prior CPT experience exists in a geologic environment, it is advisable to 
obtain samples from appropriate locations to verify the soil type.  However, keep 
in mind that traditional classification systems based on samples are not the same 
as the CPT-based SBT and difference can occur. If significant CPT experience, 
within a geology environment, is available and the charts have been evaluated 
based on this experience, frequent sampling may not be required.   
 
Soil behavior type can be improved if pore pressure measurements are also 
collected, as shown on Figure 24.  In soft clays and silts the penetration pore 
pressures can be very large, whereas, in stiff heavily over-consolidated clays or 
dense silts and silty sands the penetration pore pressures (u2) can be small and 
sometimes negative relative to the equilibrium pore pressures (u0).  The rate of 
pore pressure dissipation during a pause in penetration can also guide in the soil 
type.  In sand and silt soils any excess CPT pore pressures will dissipate very 
quickly (t50 < 60s), whereas, in clay the rate of dissipation can be very slow (t50 > 
600s). 
 
To simplify the application of the CPT-based SBTn chart shown in Figure 23, the 
normalized cone parameters Qt and Fr can be combined into a Soil Behavior Type 
index, Ic, where Ic is the radius of the essentially concentric circles that represent 
the boundaries between each SBTn zone.  Ic can be defined as follows: 
 
Ic = ((3.47 - log Qt)2 + (log Fr + 1.22)2)0.5 
 
where: 
Qt =   normalized cone penetration resistance (dimensionless) 
   =   (qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo)/´ü│'vo 
Fr    =   normalized friction ratio, in % 
   =   (fs/(qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo)) x 100% 
 
The term Qt represents the simple normalization with a stress exponent (n) of 1.0, 
which applies well to clay-like soils.  Robertson (2009) suggested that the 
normalized SBTn charts shown in Figures 23 and 24 should be used with the 
normalized cone resistance (Qtn) calculated using a stress exponent (n) that varies 
with soil type via Ic (i.e., Qtn, see Figure 48 for full details). 
 
The approximate boundaries of soil behavior types are then given in terms of the 
SBTn index, Ic, as shown in Figure 23.  The soil behavior type index does not 
apply to zones 1, 8 and 9.  Profiles of Ic provide a simple guide to the continuous 
variation of soil behavior type in each soil profile based on CPT results.  
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                33 
Independent studies have shown that the normalized SBTn chart shown in Figure 
23 typically has greater than 80% reliability when compared with samples. 
Differences are often due to the presence of soil microstructure (such as aging and 
bonding). 
 
Schneider et al (2008) proposed a CPT-based soil type chart based on normalized 
cone resistance (Qt) and normalized excess pore pressure (U2 = ´üäu2/´ü│'vo).  
Application of the Schneider et al chart can be problematic for some onshore 
projects where the CPTu pore pressure results may not always be reliable, due to 
loss of saturation.  However, for offshore projects, where CPTu sensor saturation 
is more reliable, and onshore projects in soft fine-grained soils with high 
groundwater, the chart can be very helpful. The Schneider et al chart is focused 
primarily on contractive fine-grained soils where positive excess pore pressures 
are recorded, and Qt is often small. 
 
Robertson (2016) updated the SBTn charts to provide descriptions that are more 
behavior based as well as a method to estimate if soils have significant 
microstructure. The resulting charts are shown in Figure 25. The Qtn ÔÇô Fr chart 
(shown in more detail in Fig. 25b) includes a line that separates soils that are either 
dilative or contractive at large strains. This boundary applies to soils that have 
little or no microstructure (e.g., little or no aging and/or bonding). The pore 
pressure chart (´üäu2/´ü│'vo) is modified slightly from Schneider et al (2008) and also 
includes a region to identify if soils have significant microstructure.  An additional 
chart that uses IG = Go/qn requires shear wave velocity (Vs) measurements to 
obtain the small strain shear modulus Go that can be used to identify soils with 
significant microstructure. Full details are contained in Robertson (2016). 
Figure 25 (a). Updated Normalized CPT Soil Behavior Type (SBTn) charts  
(After Robertson, 2016) 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
34 
 
Figure 25 (b). Updated Normalized CPT Soil Behavior Type (SBTn)  
Qtn-Fr chart (After Robertson, 2016) 
 
The boundary between contractive and dilative behavior at large strains on the 
Qtn-Fr chart in Figure 25b, for soils with little or no microstructure, is defined by: 
 
CD = 70 = (Qtn ÔÇô 11) (1 + 0.06Fr)17 
 
Robertson (2016) also suggested a modified Soil Behavior Type Index, IB: 
 
IB = 100(Qtn + 10) / (70 + QtnFr) 
 
The modified SBT IB capture the SBT boundaries better than the original circular 
Ic.  Throughout this Guide use will be made of the normalized soil behavior type 
(SBT) chart using normalized CPT parameters (e.g., Figure 25b).  Hence, 
accuracy in both qt and fs are important, particularly in soft fine-grained soil.  
Accuracy in fs measurements requires that the CPT be carried out according to the 
standard (e.g., ASTM D5778) with particular attention to cone design (separate 
load cells and equal-end area friction sleeves), tolerances, and zero-load readings.   
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                35 
 
In recent years, the SBT charts have been color coded to aid in the visual 
presentation of SBT on a CPT profile.  An example CPTu profile is shown in 
Figure 26. The red line on the shear wave velocity plot (Fig. 26b) are the measured 
values of Vs and the black line shows the estimated values for a soil with little or 
no microstructure (Robertson, 2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 26(a) and (b).   Examples color plots of (a) CPTu (Venice Lagoon) and 
(b) SCPTu (San Francisco) 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
Figure 26(c) Color SBTn charts 
 
Figure 26c shows the color SBT charts.  When using the non-normalized SBT 
chart, the associated colors are used and when using the normalized SBTn chart, 
the alternate colors apply. This provides a visual presentation of estimated SBT 
type on the CPT profile, either color added under the cone resistance plot or on 
the Ic or IB plot. 
 
Equivalent SPT N60 Profiles 
 
The Standard Penetration Test (SPT) was one of the most common in-situ tests in 
many parts of the world, especially in North and South America.  Despite 
continued efforts to standardize the SPT procedure and equipment there are still 
problems associated with its repeatability and reliability.  However, some 
geotechnical engineers have developed considerable experience with design 
methods based on local SPT correlations.  When these engineers are first 
introduced to the CPT, they initially prefer to see CPT results in the form of 
equivalent SPT N-values.  Hence, there is a need for reliable CPT/SPT 
correlations so that CPT data can be used in existing SPT-based design 
approaches.   
 
There are many factors affecting the SPT results, such as borehole preparation 
and size, sampler details, rod length and energy efficiency of the hammer-anvil-
operator system.  One of the most significant factors is the energy efficiency of 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                37 
the SPT system.  This is normally expressed in terms of the rod energy ratio (ERr).  
An energy ratio of about 60% has generally been accepted as the reference value 
that represents the approximate historical average SPT energy. 
 
Several studies have been presented over the years to relate the SPT N value to 
the CPT cone penetration resistance, qc.  Robertson et al. (1983) reviewed these 
correlations and presented the relationship shown in Figure 27 relating the ratio 
(qc/pa)/N60 with mean grain size, D50 (varying between 0.001mm to 1mm).  Values 
of qc are made dimensionless when dividing by the atmospheric pressure (pa) in 
the same units as qc.  It is observed that the ratio increases with increasing grain 
size.  The values of N used correspond to an average energy ratio of about 60%.  
Hence, the ratio applies to N60, as shown on Figure 27.  Other studies have linked 
the ratio between the CPT and SPT with fines content for sandy soils. 
 
 
 
Figure 27.  CPT-SPT correlations with mean grain size  
(Robertson et al., 1983) 
 
The above correlations require the soil grain size information to determine the 
mean grain size (or fines content).  Grain characteristics can be estimated directly 
from CPT results using soil behavior type (SBT) charts.  The CPT SBT charts 
show a clear trend of increasing friction ratio with increasing fines content and 
decreasing grain size.  Robertson et al. (1986) suggested (qc/pa)/N60 ratios for each 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
38 
soil behavior type zone using the non-normalized CPT chart and the suggested 
(qc/pa)/N60 ratio for each soil behavior type is given in Table 5. 
 
These values provide a reasonable estimate of SPT N60 values from CPT data.  
For simplicity the above correlations are given in terms of qc.  For fine grained 
soft soils, the correlations should be applied to total cone resistance, qt.  Note that 
in sandy soils qc = qt. 
 
One disadvantage of this simplified approach is the somewhat discontinuous 
nature of the conversion. Often a soil will have CPT data that cover different SBT 
zones and hence produces discontinuous changes in predicted SPT N60 values.   
 
 
 
 
Zone 
Soil Behavior Type (SBT) 
60
a
c
N
p
q
)
/
(
 
1
Sensitive fine grained 
2.0
2
Organic soils  ÔÇô clay 
1.0
3
Clays: clay to silty clay
1.5
4
Silt mixtures: clayey silt & silty clay
2.0
5
Sand mixtures: silty sand to sandy silt
3.0
6
Sands: clean sands to silty sands
5.0
7
Dense sand to gravelly sand
6.0
8
Very stiff sand to clayey sand*
5.0
9
Very stiff fine-grained*
1.0
 
Table 5  Suggested (qc/pa)/N60 ratios 
 
Jefferies and Davies (1993) suggested the application of the soil behavior type 
index, Ic to link with the CPT-SPT correlation.   The soil behavior type index, Ic, 
can be combined with the CPT-SPT ratios to give the following simple and 
continuous relationship: 
60
a
t
N
)
/p
(q
 = 8.5 
´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ´Çş4.6
I
1
c
 
 
Robertson (2012) suggested an update of the above relationship that provides 
improved estimates of N60 for insensitive clays: 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                39 
60
a
t
N
)
/p
(q
 = 10(1.1268 ÔÇô 0.2817Ic) 
 
 
Jefferies and Davies (1993) suggested that the above approach can provide better 
estimates of the SPT N60-values than the actual SPT test due to the poor 
repeatability of the SPT.  In fine-grained soils with high sensitivity, the above 
relationship may overestimate the equivalent N60. 
 
In very loose soils with (N1)60 < 10, the weight of the rods and hammer can 
dominate the SPT penetration resistance and produce very low N-values, which 
can result in high (qt/pa)/N60 ratios due to the low SPT N-values measured. 
 
 
Soil Unit Weight (´üž) 
 
Soil total unit weights (´üž´Çę´Çáare best obtained by obtaining relatively undisturbed 
samples (e.g., thin-walled Shelby tubes; piston samples) and weighing a known 
volume of soil.  When this is not feasible, the total unit weight can be estimated 
from CPT results, such as Figure 28 and the following relationship (Robertson 
and Cabal, 2010): 
 
´üž´Ç»´üžw = [0.27 [log Rf] + 0.36 [log(qt/pa)] +1.236] Gs /2.65 
 
where  
Rf = friction ratio = (fs/qt)100 % 
 
 
´üžw = unit weight of water in same units as ´üž´Çá
pa = atmospheric pressure in same units as qt 
Gs = specific gravity of soil 
 
The above correlation attempts to adjust the correlation for soils with Gs values 
that are different than the typical about 2.65 for most silica-based soils. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
40 
 
 
Figure 28.  Dimensionless soil unit weight, ´üž/´üžw based on CPT  
(Gs ~ 2.65) 
 
Alternate methods to estimate soil unit weights from CPT data have been 
suggested (e.g., Mayne et al, 2010; Lengkeek et al, 2018) as well as methods 
based on machine learning. The method by Lengkeek et al (2018) was based 
primarily on soft organic soils in the Netherlands.   
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                41 
Undrained Shear Strength (su) 
 
No single value of undrained shear strength, su, exists, since the undrained 
response of soil depends on the direction of loading, soil anisotropy, strain rate, 
and stress history.  Typically, the undrained strength in tri-axial compression is 
larger than in simple shear that is larger than tri-axial extension (suTC > suSS > suTE) 
where the difference is larger in low plastic soils The value of su to be used in 
analysis therefore depends on the design problem.  In general, the simple shear 
direction of loading often represents the average undrained strength (suSS ~ su(ave)). 
Hence, there is always some uncertainty in estimating and apply undrained shear 
strength. 
 
Since anisotropy and strain rate will inevitably influence the results of all in-situ 
tests, their interpretation will necessarily require some empirical content to 
account for these factors, as well as possible effects of sample disturbance. 
 
Theoretical solutions have provided valuable insight into the form of the 
relationship between cone resistance and su.  Most theories result in a relationship 
between corrected cone resistance, qt, and su of the form: 
 
su   =  
kt
v
t
N
q
´ü│
´Çş
 
 
Typically, Nkt varies from 10 to 18, with 14 as an average for su(ave).  Nkt tends to 
increase with increasing plasticity and decrease with increasing soil sensitivity.  
Since Nkt is strongly influenced by sensitivity, Robertson (2012) suggested the 
following method to estimate Nkt from friction ratio, Fr using: 
 
Nkt = 10.5 + 7 log (Fr) 
 
Lunne et al., (1997) and Mayne and Peuchen (2022) showed that Nkt decreases as 
Bq increases. In very sensitive fine-grained soil, where Bq ~ 1.0, Nkt can be less 
than 10.  Mayne and Peuchen (2022) suggest the following relationship based on 
data from 70 clay deposits: 
 
Nkt = 10.5 ÔÇô 4.6 ln (Bq + 0.1) 
 
This approach requires reliable pore pressure data to determine Bq. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
42 
For deposits where little experience is available, estimate su using the corrected 
cone resistance (qt) and preliminary cone factor values (Nkt) from 14 to 16.  For a 
more conservative estimate, select a value close to the upper limit.   
 
In very soft clays, where there may be some uncertainty with the accuracy in qt, 
estimates of su can be made from the excess pore pressure (´üäu) measured behind 
the cone (u2) using the following: 
 
su    =   ´üäu
N´üäu
 
 
Where N´üäu varies from 2 to 10.  For a more conservative estimate, select a value 
close to the upper limit.  Note that N´üäu is linked to Nkt, via Bq, where: 
 
N´üäu = Bq Nkt 
 
Hence, N´üäu = Bq [10.5 ÔÇô 4.6 ln (Bq +0.1)] 
 
If previous experience is available in the same deposit, the values suggested above 
should be adjusted to reflect this experience. 
 
For larger, moderate to high-risk projects, where high quality field and laboratory 
data may be available, site-specific correlations should be developed based on 
appropriate and reliable values of su. 
 
 
Soil Sensitivity (St) 
 
The sensitivity (St) of clay is defined as the ratio of undisturbed peak undrained 
shear strength to totally remolded undrained shear strength. 
 
Based on experience, the remolded undrained shear strength, su(Rem), can be 
assumed equal to the sleeve resistance, fs (during undrained CPT penetration) 
since both occur at large strains under undrained conditions. Therefore, the 
sensitivity of a clay can be estimated by calculating the peak su from either site 
specific or general correlations with qt or ´üäu and su(Rem) from fs, and can be 
approximated using the following: 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                43 
St = 
(Rem)
u
u
s
s
 =  
kt
v
t
N
q
´ü│
´Çş
 (1 / fs) ~ 7 / Fr    (based on typical Nkt = 14) 
 
 
For relatively sensitive clays (St > 10), the value of fs can be very low with inherent 
difficulties in accuracy.  Hence, the estimate of sensitivity (and remolded strength) 
from the CPT should be used as a guide. 
 
 
Undrained Shear Strength Ratio (su/´ü│'vo) 
 
It is often useful to estimate the peak undrained shear strength ratio from the CPT, 
since this often relates directly to overconsolidation ratio (OCR).  Critical State 
Soil Mechanics presents a relationship between the peak undrained shear strength 
ratio for normally consolidated (NC) clays under different directions of loading 
and the effective stress friction angle, ´üŽ'.   Hence, a better estimate of undrained 
shear strength ratio can be obtained with knowledge of the friction angle [e.g., (su 
/´ü│'vo)NC increases with increasing ´üŽ'].  For normally consolidated clays (with little 
or no microstructure): 
 
(su /´ü│'vo)NC  ~  0.22 in direct simple shear (´üŽ' ~ 26o) 
 
From the CPT: 
 
(su /´ü│'vo) =  qt ´Çş´ü│vo
´ü│'vo
´âŽ
´âĘ
´âž
´âÂ
´âŞ
´âĚ (1/Nkt) = Qt / Nkt 
 
Since Nkt ~ 14  
                    (su /´ü│'vo) ~ Qt /14 
 
Hence, for a normally consolidated clay where (su /´ü│'vo)NC  ~ 0.22 the expected 
values of Qt are: 
 
Qt = 3 to 4  for NC insensitive clay (with no microstructure) 
 
Based on the assumption that the sleeve resistance, fs, is a direct measure of the 
remolded shear strength, su(Rem)  =  fs.  Therefore, the remolded undrained strength 
ratio (su(Rem) /´ü│'vo ) is: 
 
su(Rem) /´ü│'vo =   fs /´ü│'vo =  (F . Qt) / 100 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
44 
 
Hence, it is possible to represent (su(Rem)/´ü│'vo = fs /´ü│'vo) as linear contours on the 
normalized SBTn chart (Robertson, 2009 ÔÇô see Figure 23) when Ic > ~2.6.  
 
 
Overconsolidation Ratio (OCR) and Yield Stress (´ü│ÔÇÖy) 
 
Overconsolidation ratio (OCR) is often defined as the ratio of the maximum past 
effective consolidation stress and the present effective overburden stress: 
 
 
OCR = ´ü│'p
´ü│'vo
 
 
For mechanically overconsolidated soils where the only change has been the 
removal of overburden stress, this definition is appropriate.  However, for soils 
with some microstructure (e.g., cemented and/or aged soils) the OCR may 
represent the ratio of the yield stress (´ü│ÔÇÖy) and the present effective overburden 
stress (´ü│ÔÇÖvo) and is referred to as the Yield Stress Ratio (YSR). The YSR will also 
depend on the direction and type of loading.  For overconsolidated clays: 
 
(su /´ü│'vo)OC 
= (su /´ü│'vo)NC (OCR)0.8 
 
Based on this, Robertson (2009) suggested: 
 
OCR = 0.25 (Qt) 1.25 
 
This compares very closely to the form suggested by Karlsrud et al (2005) based 
on high quality block samples from Norway (when soil sensitivity, St < 15) and 
that resulting from CSSM: 
 
OCR = 0.25 (Qt)1.2 
 
Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) suggested a simpler method: 
 
OCR = k qt ´Çş´ü│vo
´ü│'vo
´âŽ
´âĘ
´âž
´âÂ
´âŞ
´âĚ= k Qt  
or  ´ü│'p = k (qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo) 
 
An average value of k = 0.33 can be assumed, with an expected range of 0.2 to 
0.5.  Higher values of k are recommended in aged, heavily overconsolidated clays.  
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                45 
If previous experience is available in the same deposit, the value of k should be 
adjusted to reflect this experience and to provide a more reliable profile of OCR.  
The simpler Kulhawy and Mayne approach is valid for Qt < 20. 
 
For larger, moderate to high-risk projects, where additional high-quality field and 
laboratory data may be available, site-specific correlations should be developed 
based on consistent and relevant values of OCR (or YSR). 
 
Agaiby and Mayne (2019) suggested an extension of this approach that can be 
applied to all soils based on the following:       
 
´ü│'p = 0.33(qt ÔÇô ´ü│vo)mÔÇÖ (pa/100)1-mÔÇÖ 
 
where m is a function of SBT Ic (mÔÇÖ ~ 0.72 in young, uncemented silica sand and 
mÔÇÖ ~ 1.0 in intact clay). 
 
YSR can be a useful method to define the in-situ state of a clay, like state 
parameter (´ü╣) is for sand.  For a clay-like soil, the boundary between contractive 
and dilative behavior at large strain is approximately YSR = 5, just like ´ü╣ = -0.05 
is the boundary for sand-like soils.  
 
A modification to the Agaiby and Mayne approach can provide a simplified 
method to link YSR and´Çá´ü╣, using the following: 
 
YSR = 0.33 (Qtn)mÔÇÖ 
 
Where Qtn was define by Robertson (2009) and mÔÇÖ is modified to become: 
 
mÔÇÖ = 1 ÔÇô [0.28 / (1+(Ic/2.6)15) 
 
When Ic > 2.8, mÔÇÖ = 1.0. 
 
The above simplified method can produce similar values of in-situ state (YSR) 
for both clay-like and sand-like soils, provided there is little or no microstructure.
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
46 
Consistency between values of k (for OCR) and Nkt (for su) 
 
Been et al (2010) correctly suggested that there should be some consistency 
between the factors used to estimate OCR (i.e., k) and su (i.e., Nkt).  
 
Based on the concept SHANSEP, Been et al (2010) suggested the following: 
 
(Qt)1-m = S Nkt (k)m 
 
Where: 
OCR = k (Qt) 
when Qt < 20 
su/´ü│ÔÇÖvo = Qt/Nkt  = S (OCR)m 
S = (su/´ü│ÔÇÖvo)OCR=1 
 
For most sedimentary clays, silts and organics fine-grained soil, S ~ 0.25 for 
average direction of loading and ´üŽÔÇÖ ~ 26, and m ~ 0.8.  Hence, the constant to 
estimate OCR can be automatically estimated based on CPT results using: 
 
k = [(Qt)0.2 / (0.25 (10.5+7 log Fr))]1.25 
 
Then, 
 
OCR = (2.625+ 1.75 log Fr)-1.25 (Qt)1.25 
 
This represents a method to automatically estimate the in-situ state (OCR) in 
fine-grained soils based on measured CPT results, in a consistent manner.  
 
This compares very closely to the form suggested by Karlsrud et al (2005) based 
on high quality block samples from Norway (when soil sensitivity, St < 15) and 
that resulting from CSSM: 
 
OCR = 0.25 (Qt)1.2 
 
When Fr ~2% the two approaches give essentially the same result. 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                47 
In-Situ Stress Ratio (Ko) 
 
There is no reliable method to determine Ko from CPT. However, an estimate can 
be made in fine-grained soils based on an estimate of OCR, as shown in Figure 
29.  Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) suggested a simpler approach, using: 
 
Ko = (1 ÔÇô sin´üŽÔÇÖ) (OCR) sin´üŽÔÇÖ 
 
That can be approximated (for low plastic fine-grained soils) to: 
 
Ko ~ 0.5 (OCR) 0.5 
 
These approaches are limited to mechanically overconsolidated, fine-grained soils 
(i.e., soils with little or no microstructure).  Considerable scatter exists in the 
database used for these correlations and therefore they must be considered only 
as a guide. 
 
 
Figure 29.  OCR and Ko from su/´ü│'vo and Plasticity Index, Ip 
 (after Andresen et al., 1979) 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
48 
Relative Density (Dr) 
For coarse-grained soils, the density, or more commonly, the relative density or 
density index, is often used as an intermediate soil parameter.  Relative density, 
Dr, or density index, ID, is defined as: 
 
ID = Dr = 
min
max
max
e
e
e
e
´Çş
´Çş
 
where: 
 
emax and emin are the maximum and minimum void ratios and e is the in-situ 
void ratio.   
 
The problems associated with the determination of emax and emin are well known.  
Also, research has shown that the stress strain and strength behavior of coarse-
grained soils is too complicated to be represented by only the relative density of 
the soil.  However, for many years relative density has been used by engineers as 
a parameter to describe the in-situ state of sand deposits. 
 
Research using large calibration chambers has provided numerous correlations 
between CPT penetration resistance and relative density for clean, predominantly 
quartz (silica-based) sands. The calibration chamber studies have shown that the 
CPT resistance is controlled by sand density, in-situ vertical and horizontal 
effective stresses, and sand compressibility. Sand compressibility is controlled by 
grain characteristics, such as grain size, shape, and mineralogy.  Angular sands 
tend to be more compressible than rounded sands as do sands with high mica 
and/or carbonate compared with clean quartz (silica) sands. More compressible 
sands give a lower penetration resistance for a given relative density than less 
compressible sands. 
 
Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) suggested a simple relationship for estimating 
relative density: 
Dr2 = 
A
OCR
C
cn
Q
Q
Q
305
Q
 
 
where: 
Qcn (or Qtn) is the normalized tip resistance, as defined above 
QC = Compressibility factor ranges from 0.90 (low compress.) to 1.10 (high 
compress.)  
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                49 
QOCR  = Overconsolidation factor = OCR0.18 
QA  
= Aging factor   = 1.2 + 0.05 log(t/100) 
 
A constant of 350 is reasonable for medium, clean, uncemented, unaged quartz 
sands that are about 1,000 years old (see Fig. 30).  The constant is close to 300 for 
finer and younger sands and can be closer to 400 for some coarse or older sands.  
The constant increases with age and increases significantly when age exceeds 
10,000 years.  The relationship can then be simplified for most young, 
uncemented clean sands (where Ic < 1.6) to: 
 
Dr2 = Qtn / 350 
 
The approach can be extended to silty sands (Ic < 2.6), where the CPT penetration 
process is drained, by using the normalized clean sand equivalent, Qtn,cs (see 
Figure 48 for details). 
 
Dr2 = Qtn,cs / 350 
  
 
Bray and Olaya (2022) suggested an updated simplified version based on non-
plastic silty sands: 
 
Dr2 = (Qtn Ic3.5) / 1500 
 
The above correlations apply only to soils that have little to no microstructure. 
 
Figure 30 shows data from the CANLEX research project (Fear et al., 2000) that 
illustrates the variation of the correlation with age.  The data points were from 
sites where high quality undisturbed frozen samples were obtained to determine 
Dr. 
 
Since the cone resistance is also influenced by the horizontal effective stress, 
research has shown that it would be better to normalize qt using the mean effective 
stress (pÔÇÖ). However, this requires knowledge of either the horizontal effective 
stress or Ko, which are rarely known with any accuracy. Hence, it has become 
common practice to normalize the cone resistance using the vertical effective 
stress, since this can be estimated with reasonable accuracy.  For most young 
sand-like soils with little stress history and little or no microstructure, the simple 
normalization using ´ü│ÔÇÖvo can be equally effective. For older soils and soils with 
some stress history (i.e., OCR > 1), any potential errors in the normalization are 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
50 
mostly compensated using semi-empirical correlations that are based on well-
documented case histories, where the in-situ Ko is incorporated within the 
correlation. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 30.  Effects of soil age on CPT penetration resistance in sands 
(note: qt1N = Qtn)  (After Fear et al. 2000) 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                51 
State Parameter (´ü╣) 
 
The state parameter (´ü╣) is defined as the difference between the current void ratio, 
e and the void ratio at critical state ecs, at the same mean effective stress for coarse-
grained (sandy) soils.  Since the Critical State Line is very flat, in terms of e ÔÇô log 
pÔÇÖ, at low to moderate effective stress (pÔÇÖ < 3 atm.), there is little difference 
between defining in-situ state using either Dr or ´ü╣. Using critical state concepts, 
Jefferies and Been (2006) provided a detailed description of the evaluation of soil 
state using the CPT. They describe in detail that the problem of evaluating state 
from CPT response is complex and depends on several soil parameters.  The main 
parameters are essentially the shear stiffness, shear strength, compressibility, and 
plastic hardening.  Jefferies and Been (2006) provided a description of how state 
can be evaluated using a combination of laboratory and in-situ tests.  They stress 
the importance of determining the in-situ horizontal effective stress and shear 
modulus using in-situ tests and determining the shear strength, compressibility, 
and plastic hardening parameters from laboratory testing on reconstituted 
samples.  They also show how the problem can be assisted using numerical 
modeling.   For high-risk projects a detailed interpretation of CPT results using 
laboratory results and numerical modeling may be appropriate (e.g., Shuttle and 
Cunning, 2007), although soil variability can complicate the interpretation 
procedure.  Some unresolved concerns with the Jefferies and Been (2006) 
approach relate to the stress normalization using n = 1.0 for all soils, and the 
influence of soil fabric in sands with high fines content. 
 
For low-risk projects and in the initial screening for high-risk projects there is a 
need for a simple estimate of in-situ soil state.  Plewes et al (1992) provided a 
means to estimate soil state using the normalized soil behavior type (SBTn) chart 
suggested by Jefferies and Davies (1991).  Jefferies and Been (2006) updated this 
approach using their normalized SBTn chart based on the parameter Qt (1-Bq) +1.  
Robertson (2009) expressed concerns about the accuracy and precision of the 
Jefferies and Been (2006) normalized parameter in soft soils, where Bq is close to 
1.0.  In sands, where Bq ~ 0, the normalization suggested by Jefferies and Been 
(2006) is essentially the same as that used by Robertson (1990).  
 
Based on the data presented by Jefferies and Been (2006) and Shuttle and Cunning 
(2007) as well the measurements from the CANLEX project (Wride et al, 2000) 
for predominantly, uncemented young (i.e., little or no microstructure) sands, 
combined with the link between OCR and state parameter in fine-grained soil, 
Robertson (2009) developed contours of state parameter (´ü╣) on the updated SBTn 
Qtn ÔÇô F chart for uncemented, Holocene-age soils.  The contours of ´ü╣, shown on 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
52 
Figure 31, are approximate since in-situ stress state and plastic hardening will also 
influence the estimate of in-situ soil state in the coarse-grained region of the chart 
(i.e., when Ic < 2.60) and soil sensitivity for fine-grained soils. Jefferies and Been 
(2006) suggested that soils with a state parameter less than -0.05 (i.e., ´ü╣  < -0.05) 
are dilative at large strains. 
 
 
 
Figure 31.  Contours of estimated state parameter, ´ü╣ (thick lines), on 
normalized SBTn Qtn ÔÇô Fr chart for uncemented Holocene-age soils  
(After Robertson, 2009) 
 
 
Robertson (2010) suggested a simplified and approximate relationship between ´ü╣ 
and the clean sand equivalent normalized cone resistance, Qtn,cs, as follows: 
 
´ü╣ = 0.56 ÔÇô 0.33 log Qtn,cs  
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                53 
The clean sand equivalent normalized cone resistance, Qtn,cs evolved from the 
study of liquefaction case histories and details are provided in a later section on 
ÔÇťLiquefactionÔÇŁ (see Figure 48). 
 
Peak Friction Angle (´üŽÔÇÖ) 
 
The shear strength of uncemented, coarse-grained soils is usually expressed in 
terms of a peak secant friction angle, ´üŽ'.   
 
Significant advances have been made in the development of theories to model the 
cone penetration process in sands (e.g., Yu and Mitchell, 1998). Cavity expansion 
models are popular since they are relatively simple and can incorporate many of 
the important features of soil response.  However, empirical correlations based on 
calibration chamber test results and field results are still the most used. 
 
Robertson and Campanella (1983) suggested a correlation to estimate the peak 
friction angle (´üŽ') for uncemented, unaged, moderately compressible, 
predominately quartz sands based on calibration chamber test results.  For sands 
of higher compressibility (i.e., carbonate sands or sands with high mica content), 
the method will tend to predict friction angles values that are too low. 
 
tan ´üŽ' = 
´â║´â╗
´â╣
´â¬´âź
´âę
´Çź
´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´ü│
29
.0
'
q
log
68
.2
1
vo
c
 
 
Kulhawy and Mayne (1990) suggested an alternate relationship for clean, 
rounded, uncemented quartz sands, and evaluated the relationship using high 
quality field data. 
 
´üŽ' = 17.6 + 11 log (Qtn) 
 
Jefferies and Been (2006) showed a strong link between state parameter (´ü╣´Çę and 
the peak friction angle (´üŽ') for a wide range of sands.  Using this link, it is possible 
to link Qtn,cs with ´üŽ', using: 
 
´üŽ' = ´üŽ'cv - 48 ´ü╣´Çá
´Çá
Where ´üŽ'cv = constant volume (or critical state) friction angle depending on 
mineralogy (Bolton, 1986), typically about 33 degrees for sub-rounded quartz 
sands but can be as high as 40 degrees for felspathic and carbonate sands.   
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
54 
 
Hence, the relationship between normalized clean sand equivalent cone 
resistance, Qtn,cs and ´üŽ' becomes: 
 
 
´üŽ' = ´üŽ'cv + 15.84 [log Qtn,cs] ÔÇô 26.88´Çá
´Çá
´Çá
´Çá
 
The above relationship produces estimates of peak friction angle for clean quartz 
sands that are like those by Kulhawy and Mayne (1990).  However, the above 
relationship based on state parameter has the advantage that it includes the 
importance of grain characteristics and mineralogy that are reflected in both 
´üŽ'cv´ÇČ´Çáas well as soil type through Qtn,cs.  The above relationship also tends to predict 
´üŽ' values closer to measured values in calcareous sands where the CPT tip 
resistance can be low for high values of ´üŽ', due to a high value for ´üŽ'cv´Ç« 
 
For fine-grained soils, the best means for defining the effective stress peak friction 
angle is from laboratory on high quality undisturbed samples.  An assumed value 
of ´üŽ' = 26┬░ for clays and 30┬░ for silts is often sufficient for many low-risk projects. 
Alternatively, an effective stress limit plasticity solution for undrained cone 
penetration developed at the Norwegian Institute of Technology (NTH: Senneset 
et al., 1989) allows the approximate evaluation of effective stress parameters (c' 
and ´üŽ') from piezocone (u2) measurements.  In a simplified approach for normally- 
to lightly-overconsolidated clays and silts (c' = 0), the NTH solution can be 
approximated for the following ranges of parameters:  20┬║ ÔëĄ ´üŽ' ÔëĄ 40┬║ and 0.1 ÔëĄ Bq 
ÔëĄ 1.0 (Mayne 2006): 
 
 
 
´üŽ' (deg) = 29.5┬║ ÔłÖBq0.121 [0.256 + 0.336ÔłÖBq + log Qt]  
 
          
 
 
For heavily overconsolidated soils, fissured geomaterials, and highly cemented or 
structured clays, the above will not provide reliable results and ´üŽ' should be 
determined by laboratory testing on high quality undisturbed samples.  The above 
approach is only valid when positive (u2) pore pressures are recorded (i.e., Bq > 
0.1). 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                55 
Stiffness and Modulus 
 
CPT data can be used to estimate modulus in soils for subsequent use in elastic or 
semi-empirical settlement prediction methods.  However, correlations between qc 
and YoungÔÇÖs moduli (E) are sensitive to stress and strain history, aging, soil 
mineralogy and microstructure. 
 
A useful guide for estimating Young's moduli for young, uncemented 
predominantly silica sands is given in Figure 32. The modulus has been defined 
as that mobilized at about 0.1% strain.  For more heavily loaded conditions (i.e., 
larger strain) the modulus would decrease (see ÔÇťApplicationsÔÇŁ section). 
  
 
 
 
Figure 32.  Evaluation of drained Young's modulus (at ~ 0.1% strain) from CPT 
 for young, uncemented silica sands, E = ´üíE (qt - ´ü│vo) 
where:  ´üíE = 0.015 [10 (0.55Ic + 1.68)] 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
56 
Modulus from Shear Wave Velocity 
 
A major advantage of the seismic CPT (SCPT) is the additional measurement of 
the shear wave velocity, Vs.  The shear wave velocity is measured using a 
downhole technique during pauses in the CPT resulting in a continuous profile of 
Vs.   Elastic theory states that the small strain shear modulus, Go can be determined 
from: 
 
Go = ´ü▓ Vs2 
 
Where: ´ü▓ is the mass density of the soil (´ü▓ = ´üž/g) and Go is the small strain shear 
modulus (shear strain, ´üž < 10-4 %).  Hence, the addition of shear wave velocity 
during the CPT provides a direct measure of small strain soil stiffness.   
 
The small strain shear modulus represents the elastic stiffness of the soil at shear 
strains (´üž´Çę less than 10-4 percent.  Elastic theory also states that the small strain 
YoungÔÇÖs modulus, Eo is linked to Go, as follows: 
 
Eo = 2(1 + ´üÁ) Go 
 
where: ´üÁ is PoissonÔÇÖs ratio, which ranges from 0.1 to 0.3 for most soils. 
 
Application to engineering problems requires that the small strain modulus be 
softened/reduced to the appropriate strain level.  For most well-designed 
structures, where the average shear strain is relatively small, the degree of 
softening is often close to a factor of about 2.5.  Hence, for many applications the 
equivalent YoungÔÇÖs modulus (EÔÇÖ) can be estimated from: 
 
EÔÇÖ  ~ ´ü▓ Vs2 
 
Further details regarding appropriate use of soil modulus for design is given in the 
section on Applications of CPT Results.  
 
Vs can also be used directly for the evaluation of liquefaction potential.  Hence, 
the SCPT can provide two independent methods to evaluate liquefaction potential 
in soils with little or no microstructure. 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                57 
Estimating Shear Wave Velocity (Vs) from CPT 
 
Shear wave velocity (Vs) can be correlated to CPT cone resistance as a function 
of soil type and SBT Ic.  However, shear wave velocity is sensitive to age and 
cementation, where older deposits of the same soil have higher Vs (i.e., higher 
stiffness) than younger deposits and likewise for cemented soils.  Based on 
extensive SCPT data (Robertson, 2009), Figure 33 shows a relationship between 
normalized CPT data (Qtn and Fr) and normalized shear wave velocity, Vs1, for 
uncemented Holocene and Pleistocene age soils, where: 
 
Vs1 = Vs (pa / ´ü│'vo)0.25 
 
Vs1 is in the same units as Vs (e.g., either m/s or ft/s). Younger Holocene age soils 
tend to plot toward the center and lower left of the SBTn chart whereas older 
Pleistocene age soil tend to plot toward the upper right part of the chart. 
 
 
 
Figure 33.   Evaluation of normalized shear wave velocity, Vs1, from CPT for 
uncemented Holocene and Pleistocene age soils (1m/s = 3.28 ft/sec) 
Vs = [´üívs  (qt ÔÇô ´ü│v)/pa]0.5   (m/s);   where ´üívs  = 10(0.55 Ic + 1.68)  
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
58 
Identification of soils with microstructure 
 
Almost all available empirical correlations to interpret in-situ tests assume that 
the soil is ÔÇśidealÔÇÖ with little or no microstructure, i.e., like soils in which the 
correlation was based.   The most common forms of microstructure are due to 
aging and bonding (e.g., cementation) but can also be caused by unusual 
mineralogy, stress history and suction hardening in unsaturated soils with clay 
minerals.  Most existing correlations apply to silica-based soils that are young and 
uncemented (i.e., no bonding).  Application of existing empirical correlations in 
soils that are older and/or bonded can produce incorrect interpretations.  Hence, it 
is important to be able to identify soils with ÔÇÖunusualÔÇÖ characteristics (i.e., soils 
with significant microstructure). The cone resistance (qt) is a measure of large 
strain soil strength, and the shear wave velocity (Vs) is a measure of small strain 
soil stiffness (Go).  Robertson (2016) showed that combining measured Vs with 
CPT data can be used to identify soils that have significant microstructure, as 
shown in Figure 34.  
 
 
Figure 34.   Chart to estimate if soils have significant microstructure 
(After Robertson 2016) 
Note: qn = (qt - ´ü│vo) 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                59 
The parameter K*G (i.e., Go/qn when Qtn = 1.0) can be defined as a normalized 
rigidity index: 
 
K*G = [Go/qt] Qtn0.75 
 
K*G can be used to estimate the magnitude of microstructure.  Experience 
suggests that when K*G < 330, empirical correlations that are based on soils with 
little or no microstructure tend to provide reasonable estimates of soil behavior.  
However, when K*G > 330 some correlations may require modification to account 
for microstructure.  
 
Microstructure covers a wide spectrum from none (e.g., freshly deposited soils 
such as mine tailings, where K*G can be close to 100) to extensive (heavily 
cemented soils such as soft rock, where K*G can be as high as 5,000).  The average 
value for uncemented Holocene age soils, that represent most liquefaction case 
histories, is approximately 200.   
 
K*G can also be used to estimate the amount of bonding, represented by a cohesion 
intercept, cÔÇÖ. 
 
The application of Figure 34 and K*G is a more reliable method to estimate the 
possibility of microstructure than comparing estimated Vs (using Figure 33) with 
measured Vs, since the databased used to develop Figure 33 contained older 
Pleistocene-age deposits that likely had some microstructure. 
 
The chart shown in Figure 34 can also be used to estimate Go, and hence Vs, for a 
range of soils with different microstructure (or age). 
 
For Holocene-age soils with no microstructure, where the average K*G = 200, 
then: 
 
(Vs)2 = 200 qn (g / ´üž´Çę / (Qtn)0.75 
 
Where qn, ´üž, and g are in consistent units (e.g., qn in kN/m2,´Çá´üž in kN/m3 and g in 
m/s2 to give Vs in m/s). 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
60 
Hydraulic Conductivity (k) 
 
An approximate estimate of soil hydraulic conductivity or coefficient of 
permeability, k, can be made from an estimate of soil behavior type using the CPT 
SBT charts.  Table 6 provides estimates based on the CPT-based SBT charts 
shown in Figures 23.  These estimates are approximate at best but can provide a 
guide to variations of possible permeability. 
 
 
 
SBT 
Zone
SBT 
Range of k  
(m/s)
SBTn Ic 
1
Sensitive fine-grained
3x10-10 to 3x10-8
NA
2
Organic soils - clay
1x10-10 to 1x10-8
Ic > 3.60
3
Clay
1x10-10 to 1x10-9
2.95 < Ic < 3.60
4
Silt mixture
3x10-9 to 1x10-7
2.60 < Ic < 2.95
5
Sand mixture
1x10-7 to 1x10-5
2.05 < Ic < 2.60
6
Sand
1x10-5 to 1x10-3
1.31 < Ic < 2.05
7
Dense sand to gravelly sand
1x10-3 to 1
Ic < 1.31
8
*Very dense/ stiff soil
1x10-8 to 1x10-3
NA
9
*Very stiff fine-grained soil
1x10-9 to 1x10-7
NA
*Overconsolidated and/or cemented 
 
Table 6   Estimated soil permeability (k) based on the CPT SBT chart by 
Robertson (2010) shown in Figures 23 
 
Robertson (2010) suggested that the average relationship between soil 
permeability (k) and SBTn Ic, shown in Table 6, can be represented by: 
 
When 1.0 < Ic ÔëĄ 3.27  
 
 
k = 10(0.952 ÔÇô 3.04 Ic)  
m/s 
 
When 3.27 < Ic < 4.0 
 
 
k = 10(-4.52 ÔÇô 1.37 Ic)  
m/s 
 
The above relationships can be used to provide an approximate estimate of soil 
permeability (k) and to show the likely variation of soil permeability with depth 
from a CPT sounding.  Since the normalized CPT parameters (Qtn and Fr) respond 
to the mechanical behavior of the soil and depend on many soil variables, the 
suggested relationship between k and Ic is approximate and should only be used 
as a guide. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                61 
Robertson et al. (1992) presented a summary of available data to estimate the 
horizontal coefficient of permeability (kh) from dissipation tests using t50.  Since 
the relationship is also a function of the soil stiffness, Robertson (2010) updated 
the relationship as shown in Figure 35.   
 
Jamiolkowski et al. (1985) suggested a range of possible values of kh/kv for soft 
clays as shown in Table 7. 
 
 
 
Nature of clay 
 
 
kh/kv 
 
No macrofabric, or only slightly developed 
macrofabric, essentially homogeneous deposits 
 
1 to 1.5 
 
From fairly well- to well-developed macrofabric, 
e.g. sedimentary clays with discontinuous lenses 
and layers of more permeable material 
 
2 to 4 
 
Varved clays and other deposits containing 
embedded and more or less continuous 
permeable layers 
 
3 to 10 
 
 
Table 7   Range of possible field values of kh/kv for soft clays  
(Modified from Jamiolkowski et al., 1985) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
62 
 
 
 
Figure 35.    Relationship between CPTu  t50 (in minutes), based on u2 pore 
pressure sensor location and 10cm2 cone, and soil permeability (kh) as a function 
of normalized cone resistance, Qtn  (after Robertson 2010) 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                63 
Consolidation Characteristics 
 
Flow and consolidation characteristics of a soil are normally expressed in terms 
of the coefficient of consolidation, c, and hydraulic conductivity, k.  They are 
inter-linked through the formula: 
 
c = 
w
k
´üž
M
 
 
Where: M is the 1-D constrained modulus relevant to the problem (i.e., unloading, 
reloading, virgin loading). 
 
The parameters c and k vary over many orders of magnitude and are some of the 
most difficult parameters to measure in geotechnical engineering.  It is often 
considered that an accuracy within one order of magnitude is acceptable.  Due to 
soil anisotropy, both c and k have different values in the horizontal (ch, kh) and 
vertical (cv, kv) direction.  The relevant design values depend on drainage and 
loading direction. 
 
Details on how to estimate k from CPT soil behavior type charts are given in the 
previous section. 
 
The coefficient of consolidation can be estimated by measuring the dissipation or 
rate of change of pore pressure with time after a stop in CPT penetration, as 
illustrated in Figure 19.  Many theoretical solutions have been developed for 
deriving the coefficient of consolidation from CPT pore pressure dissipation data.  
The coefficient of consolidation can be interpreted at 50% dissipation, using the 
following basic formula: 
 
c = 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
50
50
t
T
 ro2 (Ir)0.5 
where: 
 
 
T50 = theoretical time factor 
t50  
= measured time for 50% dissipation  
ro  
= penetrometer radius 
Ir   
=  soil rigidity index = G/su 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
64 
 
It is clear from this formula that the dissipation time is inversely proportional to 
the radius of the probe.  Hence, in soils of very low permeability, the time for 
dissipation can be decreased by using smaller diameter probes.  Robertson et al. 
(1992) reviewed dissipation data from around the world and compared the results 
with the leading theoretical solution by Teh and Houlsby (1991), as shown in 
Figure 36.  
 
 
Figure 36. Average laboratory ch values and CPTU results 
 (after Robertson et al., 1992, Teh and Houlsby theory shown as solid lines for Ir = 50 and 500). 
 
The review showed that the theoretical solution provided reasonable estimates of 
ch.  The solution and data shown in Figure 36 apply to a pore pressure sensor 
located just behind the cone tip (i.e., u2)  
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                65 
The Teh and Houlsby solution (with t50 in mins) can be approximated to (for Ir ~ 
200): 
 
 
 
The pore pressures around an advancing cone are complex and depend on soil 
stress history, sensitivity, anisotropy, dilatancy and structure, as illustrated in 
Figure 37. 
 
 
Figure 37. Example variation in pore pressures around an advancing cone 
(After Robertson et al., 1986) 
 
Figure 37 shows that in fine-grained soils (where the penetration process is 
undrained) that are dilative at large strains (e.g., overconsolidated clay with OCR 
> 5), the pore pressures at the u2 location can be negative of the equilibrium 
pressure (uo).  At shallow depths onshore, this can result in negative pore pressures 
up to a maximum of about -100kPa (-15psi), after which the pore pressure element 
will become unsaturated due to air bubbles caused by cavitation. The large 
difference between the pore pressures on the face of the cone (u1) and behind the 
cone (u2) can result in an initial increase in the u2 pore pressures during a 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
66 
dissipation test due to the local redistribution or pore pressures around the cone 
before radial dissipation dominates. Care is required to ensure that the dissipation 
is continued to the correct equilibrium (uo) and not stopped prematurely after the 
initial rise.   In these cases, the pore pressure sensor can be moved to the face of 
the cone (u1) or the t50 time can be estimated using the maximum pore pressure as 
the initial value.  
  
Based on available experience, the CPT dissipation method should provide 
estimates of ch to within +/ÔÇô half an order of magnitude.  However, the technique 
is repeatable and provides an accurate measure of changes in consolidation 
characteristics within a given soil profile. Rates of dissipation can also be 
influenced by adjacent soil layers of different permeability. 
 
An approximate estimate of the coefficient of consolidation in the vertical 
direction can be obtained using the ratios of permeability in the horizontal and 
vertical direction given in the section on hydraulic conductivity, since: 
 
cv = ch 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
h
v
k
k
 
 
Table 7 can be used to provide an estimate of the ratio of hydraulic conductivities. 
 
 
For relatively short dissipations, the dissipation results can be plotted on a square-
root time scale.  The gradient of the initial straight line is m, where: 
 
ch = (m/MT)2 r2 (Ir)0.5 
 
 
MT = 1.15 for u2 position and 10cm2 cone (i.e., r = 1.78 cm). 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                67 
Constrained Modulus 
 
Consolidation settlements can be estimated using the 1-D Constrained Modulus, 
M, where: 
 
M = 1/ mv = ´üĄ´ü│v / ´üĄ´üą´Çá´ÇŻ´Çá´Ç▓´Ç«´Ç│´Çá´ÇĘ´Ç▒´Çźe´Ç░´Çę´Çá´ü│'vo´Çá´Ç»´ÇáCc 
 
Where mv = equivalent oedometer coefficient of compressibility. 
 
Constrained modulus can be estimated from CPT results using the following 
empirical relationship: 
 
M = ´üíM (qt - ´ü│vo) 
 
Sangrelat (1970) suggested that ´üíM varies with soil plasticity and natural water 
content for a wide range of fine-grained soils and organic soils, although the data 
were based on qc.   Meigh (1987) suggested that ´üíM lies in the range 2 ÔÇô 8, whereas 
Mayne (2001) suggested a general value of 5.  Robertson (2009) suggested that 
´üíM varies with Qt, such that: 
 
When Ic > 2.2 (fine-grained soils) use: 
´üíM  = Qt 
      
when Qt < 14 
´üíM = 14 
 
when Qt > 14 
When Ic < 2.2 (coarse-grained soils) use: 
 
 
 
 
´üíM  = 0.0188 [10 (0.55Ic + 1.68)] 
 
 
Robertson (2009) suggested a factor ´üím = 0.03, but experience shows that a factor 
of 0.0188 provides a slightly more conservative estimate of M when Ic < 2.2 and 
is consistent with the observation by Mayne (2001) that M ~ Go in sands.  
Estimates of drained 1-D constrained modulus from undrained cone penetration 
will always be approximate.  Estimates can be improved with additional 
information about the soil, such as plasticity index, natural water content and 
shear wave velocity.  Also ´üíM can be lower in organic soils and soils with high 
water content. 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
68 
Applications of CPT Results 
 
The previous sections have described how CPT results can be used to estimate 
geotechnical parameters that can be used as input in analyses.  An alternate 
approach is to apply the in-situ test results directly to an engineering problem.  A 
typical example of this approach is the evaluation of pile capacity directly from 
CPT results without the need for soil parameters. 
 
As a guide, Table 8 shows a summary of the applicability of the CPT for direct 
design applications.  The ratings shown in the table have been assigned based on 
current experience and represent a qualitative evaluation of the confidence level 
assessed to each design problem and general soil type.  Details of ground 
conditions and project requirements can influence these ratings. 
 
In the following sections several direct applications of CPT/CPTu results are 
described.  These sections are not intended to provide full details of geotechnical 
design, since this is beyond the scope of this guide.  However, they do provide 
some guidelines on how the CPT can be applied to many geotechnical engineering 
applications.  A good reference for foundation design is the Canadian Foundation 
Engineering Manual (CFEM, 2006, https://www.karma-link.ca/shop). Dr. Bengt 
Fellenius also has a good book on Basics of Foundation Design that can be 
downloaded from https://www.fellenius.net/papers.html. 
 
 
 
 
Type of soil 
Pile 
design 
Bearing 
capacity 
Settlement* 
Compaction 
control 
Liquefaction
Sand 
1 ÔÇô 2
1 ÔÇô 2
2 ÔÇô 3
1 ÔÇô 2
1 ÔÇô 2
Clay 
1 ÔÇô 2
1 ÔÇô 2
2 ÔÇô 3
3 ÔÇô 4
1 ÔÇô 2
Intermediate soils 
1 ÔÇô 2
2 ÔÇô 3
2 ÔÇô 4
2 ÔÇô 3
1 ÔÇô 2
 
Reliability rating:  1=High; 2=High to moderate; 3=Moderate; 4=Moderate to low; 5=low 
*  improves with SCPT data 
 
 
Table 8   Perceived applicability of the CPT/CPTU for various direct design 
problems 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                69 
Shallow Foundation Design 
 
General Design Principles 
Typical Design Sequence: 
 
1. Select minimum depth to protect against: 
´éĚ external agents:  e.g., frost, erosion, trees 
´éĚ poor soil:  e.g., fill, organic soils, etc. 
 
2.  Define minimum area necessary to protect against soil failure: 
´éĚ perform bearing capacity analyses 
 
2.  Compute settlement and check if acceptable 
 
3.  Modify selected foundation if required. 
 
Typical Shallow Foundation Problems 
Study of 1200 cases of foundation problems in Europe showed that the problems 
could be attributed to the following causes: 
 
´éĚ 25% footings on recent fill (mainly poor engineering judgment) 
´éĚ 20% differential settlement (50% could have been avoided with good 
design) 
´éĚ 20% effect of groundwater 
´éĚ 10% failure in weak layer 
´éĚ 10% nearby work (excavations, tunnels, etc.) 
´éĚ 15% miscellaneous causes (earthquake, blasting, etc.) 
 
In design, settlement is generally the critical issue.  Bearing capacity is generally 
not of prime importance. 
 
Construction 
Construction details can significantly alter the conditions assumed in the design. 
 
 Examples are provided in the following list: 
 
´éĚ During Excavation 
o bottom heave 
o slaking, swelling, and softening of expansive clays or rock 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
70 
o piping in sands and silts 
o remolding of silts and sensitive clays 
o disturbance of granular soils 
´éĚ Adjacent construction activity 
o groundwater lowering 
o excavation 
o pile driving 
o blasting 
´éĚ Other effects during or following construction 
o reversal of bottom heave 
o scour, erosion, and flooding 
o frost action 
 
Shallow Foundation - Bearing Capacity 
 
General Principles 
 
Load-settlement relationships for typical footings (Vesic, 1972): 
 
1.  Approximate elastic response 
2.  Progressive development of local shear failure 
3.  General shear failure 
 
In dense coarse-grained soils failure typically occurs along a well-defined failure 
surface.  In loose coarse-grained soils, volumetric compression dominates and 
punching failures are common.  Increased depth of overburden can change a dense 
(dilative) sand to behave more like loose (contractive) sand.  In (homogeneous) 
fine-grained cohesive soils, failure occurs along an approximately circular 
surface.   
 
Significant parameters are: 
´éĚ nature of soils 
´éĚ density and resistance of soils 
´éĚ width and shape of footing 
´éĚ depth of footing 
´éĚ position of load. 
 
A given soil does not have a unique bearing capacity; the bearing capacity is a 
function of the footing shape, depth, and width as well as load eccentricity. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                71 
 
General Bearing Capacity Theory 
Initially developed by Terzaghi (1936); there are now over 30 theories with the 
same general form, as follows: 
 
Ultimate bearing capacity, (qf): 
 
qf = 0.5 ´üž´ÇáB N´üž´Çá´Çás´üž´Çái´üž + c Nc sc ic + ´üž´ÇáD Nq sq iq 
 
 
 
where: 
 
N´üž Nc Nq = bearing capacity coefficients (function of ´üŽ') 
s´üž´Çásc´Çá´Çásq 
=´Çáshape factors (function of B/L) 
i´üž´Çáic´Çáiq 
=´Çáload inclination factors 
B  
= width of footing 
D  
= depth of footing 
L  
= length of footing 
 
Complete rigorous solutions are impossible since stress fields are unknown.  All 
theories differ in simplifying assumptions made to write the equations of 
equilibrium. No single solution is correct for all cases.   
 
Shape Factors  
Shape factors are applied to account for 3-D effects.  Based on limited theoretical 
ideas and some model tests, recommended factors are as follows: 
 
sc = sq = 1 + 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
c
q
N
N
L
B
 
s´üž =  1 - 0.4 
´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
L
B  
 
Load Inclination Factors 
When load is inclined (´üĄ), the shape of a failure surface changes and reduces the 
area of failure, and hence, a reduced resistance.  At the limit of inclination, ´üĄ = ´üŽ,  
qf = 0, since slippage can occur along the footing-soil interface.   
 
In general: 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
72 
ic = iq = 
2
╬┐
90
1
´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´üĄ
´Çş
 
i´üž = 
2
1
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´üŽ
´üĄ
´Çş
 
 
For an eccentric load, Terzaghi proposed a simplified concept of an equivalent 
footing width, B'. 
B' = B - 2 e 
 
where ÔÇśeÔÇÖ is the eccentricity.  For combined inclined and eccentric load, use B' 
and relevant values of shape factors. For footings near a slope, use modified 
bearing capacity factors (e.g., Bowles, 1982).  They will be small for clay but 
large for granular soils. 
 
Effect of Groundwater 
The bearing capacity is based on effective stress analysis hence position of the 
groundwater table affects the value of the soil unit weight. 
 
´éĚ If depth to the water table, dw = 0, use ´üž' in both terms 
´éĚ If dw = D (depth of footing), use ´üž' in width term and ´üž in depth term. 
 
In general, install drainage to keep dw  > D. 
 
 
Indirect Methods Based on Soil Parameters 
 
Granular, coarse-grained soils 
Bearing capacity is generally not calculated, since settlements control, except for 
very narrow footings. 
 
Cohesive, fine-grained soils 
Short-term stability generally controls, hence application of undrained shear 
strength, su. 
 
qf   =  Nc su   +   ´üž D 
where: 
 
Nc = function of footing width and shape; for strip footings at the ground 
surface, Nc = (´ü░ + 2). 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                73 
su  = apply BjerrumÔÇÖs correction, based on past experience, to field vane shear 
strength or from CPT. 
 
Allowable bearing capacity:   
 
qall   =   (qf   -  ´Çá´üž D) / FS 
 
 
Hence,     qall  =  
FS
N c
us  
 
Where: FS is Factor of Safety, typically > 3.0.   
 
Use a high FS to account for limitations in theory, underestimation of loads, 
overestimation of soil strength, avoid local yield in soil and keep settlements 
small. 
 
Direct Approach to estimate Bearing Capacity (In-Situ Tests) 
 
Based on in-situ tests, theory, model tests and past foundation performance. 
 
SPT 
´éĚ Empirical direct methods 
´éĚ Limited to granular soils, however, sometimes applied to very stiff clays 
´éĚ Often linked to allowable settlement of 25mm (Terzaghi & Peck) 
´éĚ SPT of poor reliability, hence, empirical methods tend to be very 
conservative 
 
CPT 
Empirical direct methods: 
 
Granular, coarse-grained soils: 
 
qf  = K´üŽ´Çá qc (av) 
 
where:  
qc (av) = average CPT penetration resistance below depth of footing, z  = B 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
74 
Eslaamizaad & Robertson (1996) suggested K´Çá´üŽ = 0.16 to 0.30 depending on B/D 
and shape.  In general, assume K´Çá´üŽ = 0.16 for settlement ratio of s/B = 0.1. Lehane 
(2019) also suggested K´Çá´üŽ = 0.16 for assessing foundation capacity at s/B = 0.1 
(see Figure 38).  In general, settlement will control design. 
 
Cohesive, fine-grained soils: 
 
qf  = Ksu qc (av) + ´üž D 
 
 
Ksu = 0.30 to 0.60 depending on footing B/D and shape and soil OCR and 
sensitivity for s/B = 0.1 (Figure 38).   In general, assume Ksu= 0.30 in clay for a 
conservative estimate. 
 
 
 
Figure 38.  Field data for mobilized bearing stress vs settlement ratio (s/B) for 
footing on clay (Lehane (2017)  
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                75 
Shallow Foundation Design ÔÇô Settlement 
 
General Design Principles 
Requires: 
´éĚ magnitude of settlement 
´éĚ rate of settlement 
´éĚ compatibility with acceptable behavior of building 
 
For well-designed foundations, the magnitude of strains in the ground is generally 
very small (´üą < 10-1 %).  Hence, ground response is approximately elastic (non-
linear elastic). 
 
Granular coarse-grained soils 
Coarse-grained soils have high permeability, thus immediate settlements.  
However, long term settlements can occur due to submergence, change in water 
level, blasting, machine vibration or earthquake loading. 
 
Cohesive fine-grained soils  
Fine-grained soils have very low permeability, thus the need to consider 
magnitude and duration of settlement.   
 
In soft, normally to lightly overconsolidated clays, 80% to 90% of settlement is 
due to primary consolidation.  Secondary settlement also can be large.  In stiff, 
overconsolidated clays (OCR > 4), approximately 50% of settlement can be due 
to immediate distortion settlement and secondary settlement is generally small. 
 
Methods for granular coarse-grained soils 
Due to difficulty in sampling, most methods are based on in-situ tests, either direct 
or via estimate of equivalent elastic modulus (E').   
 
For most tests, the link between test result and modulus is empirical, since it 
depends on many variables, e.g., mineralogy, stress history, stress state, age, 
cementation, etc. 
 
CPT 
Meyerhof (1974) suggested that the total settlement, s, could be calculated using 
the following formula: 
s    =   
c(av)
2q
B
p
´üä
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
76 
where: 
´üäp  
= net footing pressure 
B    
= footing width 
qc (av)  
= average CPT penetration resistance below depth of footing, 
z  
=    B 
 
Schmertmann (1970) recommended using the following equation: 
 
s  =  C1 C2 ´üäp ´âą
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
E'
C
I
3
z
 ´üäz 
where: 
 
C1  =  correction for depth of footing 
 
= 
1 ÔÇô 0.5(´ü│'1/´üäp) 
C2 =  correction for creep and cyclic loading 
 
= 
1 + 0.2 log (10 tyr) 
  C3 =  correction for shape of footing 
 
= 
1.0 for circular footings 
 
= 
1.2 for square footings 
 
= 
1.75 for strip footings 
´ü│'1 =  effective overburden pressure at footing depth (see Figure 38) 
´üäp =  net footing pressure 
tyr =  time in years since load application 
 Iz  =  strain influence factor (see Figure 39) 
´üäz =  thickness of sublayer 
E' 
=´Çá´ÇáEquivalent Young's modulus ´ÇŻ´Çá´üí´üů qc  ´Çá
´üí´üů   =  function of degree of loading, soil density, stress history,  cementation, 
age, grain shape and mineralogy (e.g. Figure 40) 
 
=  2 to 4 for very young, normally consolidated sands;  
=  4 to 10 for aged (> 1,000years), normally consolidated sands;  
=  6 to 20 for overconsolidated sands 
qc 
=  average CPT resistance for sublayer 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                77 
 
 
Figure 39.  Strain influence method for footings on sand 
 (Schmertmann, 1970) 
 
In this method, the sand is divided into several layers, n, of thickness, ´üäz, down 
to a depth below the base of the footing equal to 2B for a square footing and 4B 
for a strip footing (length of footing, L > 10B).  A value of qc is assigned to each 
layer.   Note in sandy soils qc = qt.  The method by Schmertmann (1970) only 
applies to clean sands and is difficult to apply in interlayered deposits. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
78 
 
Figure 40.  Evaluation of drained Young's modulus from CPT 
 for uncemented sandy soils, E = ´üíE (qt - ´ü│vo) 
Where: ´üíE = 0.015 [10 (0.55Ic + 1.68)] 
 
Based on a review of 30 full-size footing tests on 12 different sands, Mayne and 
Illingsworth (2010) suggested the following simple relationship (see Figure 38): 
 
B
s
q
q
5
3
c
applied
´âŚ
´ÇŻ
 
 
where: 
 
qapplied = applied footing stress 
 
qc  
= average cone resistance within 1.5B below footing 
 
 
The method by Mayne and Illingsworth (2010) is simple to apply and provides a 
reasonable estimate of settlements of footings on sand, provide the sand has 
little or no microstructure. 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                79 
Seismic Shear Wave Velocity 
 
For soils that have microstructure, the settlement of footings can be made based 
on measured shear wave velocity (Vs), since this is a direct measure of soil 
stiffness.  Eslaamizaad and Robertson (1996) suggested using Vs to determine the 
small strain stiffness (Go) directly and applying it to settlement calculations, as 
follows: 
 
Go =  g
´üž (Vs)2 
 
The equivalent YoungÔÇÖs modulus (EÔÇÖ) can be estimated as follows: 
 
E' = 2(1 + ´üÁ)´ü╣´ÇáGo ´é╗ 2.6´ü╣´ÇáGo 
 
where: 
 
´üÖ = a function of the degree of loading and stress history (see Figure 41). 
 
Fahey, (1998) suggested that the variation of ´ü╣´Çácould be defined by: 
 
´ü╣´Çá´ÇŻ´ÇáG/Go = 1 ÔÇô f (q/qult)g 
 
Mayne (2005) suggested that values of f = 1 and g = 0.3 are appropriate for 
uncemented soils that are not highly structured, and these values agree well with 
the NC relationship shown in Figure 41. Hence, 
 
E' = 0.047 [1 ÔÇô (q/qult)0.3] [10 (0.55Ic + 1.68)] (qt - ´ü│vo) 
 
 
Since settlement is a function of degree of loading (q/qult), it is possible to 
calculate the load settlement curve, using a range of EÔÇÖ values as function of 
(q/qult): 
 
s  =  
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ´üä
E'
B
p
 ic 
 
where:  ic = influence coefficient 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
80 
 
 
In general, for most well designed shallow foundations, q/qult = 0.3  (i.e., FS > 
3), then ´üÖ ~ 0.3, hence, E'  ´é╗ ´ÇáGo. 
 
 
 
Figure 41.   Factor ´üÖ versus q/qult for sands with various densities and stress 
histories 
 
Shear wave velocity has the advantage of providing a direct measure of soil 
stiffness without an empirical correlation.  The only empiricism required is to 
adjust the small strain modulus for effects of stress level and strain level below 
the footing.  The shear wave velocity approach can also be applied to estimate 
settlements in very stiff clays where consolidation settlements are very small. 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                81 
Methods for cohesive fine-grained soils 
The key parameter is the preconsolidation pressure, ´ü│'p, or yield stress (´ü│ÔÇÖy). This 
can be measured in the laboratory on high quality samples.  However, OCR and 
´ü│'p profiles can be estimated from the CPT. It is useful to link results from high 
quality laboratory tests with continuous profiles of the CPT. 
 
In general, to keep settlements small, the applied stress must be < ´ü│'p.  In soft 
ground this may require some form of ground improvement. 
 
Components of settlement are: 
si  =  immediate (distortion) settlement 
sc  = consolidation settlement 
ss  = secondary time dependent (creep) settlement 
 
 
Immediate Settlements  
Based on elastic theory, Janbu (1963) proposed: 
 
si =  
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ´üä
u
E
B
p
 ´üşo ´üş1 
 
where: 
B  
= footing width 
´üäp 
= net pressure 
Eu  
= soil modulus (undrained)  
´üşo, ´üş1 = influence factors for depth of footing and thickness of compressible 
layer 
 
Undrained modulus can be estimated from undrained shear strength (su) from 
either field vane tests and/or the CPT but requires knowledge of soil plasticity. 
 
Eu = n. su 
 
Where: n varies from 40 to 1000, depending on degree of loading and plasticity 
of soil (see Figure 42). 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
82 
 
 
Figure 42.  Selection of soil stiffness ratio for clays 
 (after Ladd et al., 1977) 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                83 
Consolidation Settlements 
TerzaghiÔÇÖs 1-D theory of consolidation often applies, since 2- and 3-D effects are 
often small.  Settlement for a wide range of footings and soils can be calculated 
using the 1-D constrained modulus, M, using: 
 
´üąvol = (´üä´ü│'v / M) 
 
 
Hence,  
 
 
s  = (´üä´ü│'v / M ) H 
 
 
The 1-D Constrained Modulus (M) can be estimated from the CPT using: 
 
M = ´üíM (qt - ´ü│vo) 
 
 
      
When Ic > 2.2 (fine-grained soils) use: 
´üíM  = Qt 
      
when Qt < 14 
´üíM = 14 
 
when Qt > 14 
When Ic < 2.2 (coarse-grained soils) use: 
 
 
 
 
´üíM  = 0.0188 [10 (0.55Ic + 1.68)] 
 
 
The above approach can be applied to all soils, since M can be estimated for a 
wide range of soils.  The above approach is simpler than the Schmertmann (1970) 
approach that is limited to sands.  When using CPT results, the settlement can be 
calculated over each depth increment and the total settlement becomes the 
summation over the full depth.  The above approach, based on 1-D constrained 
modulus, M, is often suitable for many projects. Care is required when applying 
the above approach to lightly overconsolidated soils if loading will significantly 
exceed ´ü│'p. 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
84 
Rate of settlement is important, hence, the need for coefficient of consolidation, 
cv.  Experience shows that cv can be highly variable due to non-linearity of the 
stress-strain relationship as well as change in permeability as soils compress.  
Values of cv can be best estimated either: 
 
1. Separately from 1-D constrained modulus, M (or mv, since M = 1/mv) from 
oedometer tests on high quality samples and permeability, k from in-situ 
tests, using:  
 
cv = 
w
M
k 
´üž
 
or   
 
2.  Directly from CPTu dissipation tests. 
 
cv values vary by orders of magnitude, hence, accuracy of the calculation is 
generally very poor.  Drainage conditions play a major role yet are difficult to 
identify.  The CPTu can provide an excellent picture of the drainage conditions.  
Avoid a design that depends on the time-settlement relationship.  For settlement 
sensitive structures, try to minimize differential settlements (e.g., Osaka Airport - 
mechanical adjustments due to very large long-term settlements). 
 
Secondary Settlements 
Time dependent settlements depend on soil mineralogy and degree of loading.  
Organic soils can have high secondary settlement.  In general, avoid soils with 
high secondary settlements.  Mesri, (1994) suggested a simplified approach that 
links coefficient of secondary consolidation (C´üí) and compression index, Cc, for 
inorganic clays and silts, as follows: 
 
C´üí = 0.04 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´Çź
o
c
e
1
C
  ~  0.1 (´ü│'v /M) 
 
 
Long term secondary (creep) settlement, ss is then: 
 
ss = C´üí ´üäz log (t/tp) 
 
where tp is duration of primary consolidation. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                85 
Provided that the applied stress is less than 80% of ´ü│'p, secondary consolidation 
is generally small.  The 1D constrained modulus, M can be estimated from the 
CPT (see earlier section).  
 
Allowable Settlements 
Loads considered in settlement analyses depend on the nature of soil and time-
dependence of settlement. Differential settlements generally control. 
 
Sands  
´éĚ Load: maximum possible load due to immediate settlement 
´éĚ Differential settlement: can be up to 100% of maximum settlement due to 
natural variability of sand.  Typically, less than or equal to 25mm (1 inch) 
 
Clays 
´éĚ Load: dead load plus % of live load (LL) depending on duration of live load 
´éĚ 50% of LL for buildings 
´éĚ 30% of LL for bridges 
´éĚ 75% of LL for reservoirs 
´éĚ Settlements: are more uniform and can be larger than 25mm (1 inch) 
 
 
Typical Design Sequence 
1. Check for possible isolated footing design 
2. Check for possible raft foundation 
3. Ground improvement 
4. Deep foundations 
 
 
Raft Foundations 
Consider a raft when: 
 
´éĚ Area of footing > 50% of building area 
´éĚ Need to provide underground space in location of high groundwater 
´éĚ Need to reduce magnitude of total settlements (i.e. floating foundation) 
´éĚ Need to reduce differential settlements 
 
A raft is an inverted slab, designed to distribute structural loads from columns and 
walls, while keeping deformations within acceptable limits. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
86 
The structural characteristics of a raft foundation can be optimized by accounting 
for the interaction between the raft and supporting ground.   Structural engineers 
usually perform an elastic analysis using elastic (Winkler) springs.  Hence, they 
would like the spring constant, ks. 
 
ks = coefficient of subgrade reaction (kN/m3) 
 
ks = s
p  
 
where: 
 
p  = net applied stress 
s  = settlement resulting from applied stress, p 
 
The process is governed by the relative stiffness of the structure and the ground.  
The coefficient of subgrade reaction is not a soil parameter since it depends on 
the size of the footing and degree of loading.  Often estimates are made from 
global tables (e.g., Terzaghi; see Table 9). However, it is best to obtain estimates 
based on in-situ testing. 
 
 
Soil type 
Subgrade reaction 
(kN/m3) 
Loose sand
5,000 ÔÇô 16,000
Medium dense sand
10,000 ÔÇô 80,000
Dense sand
60,000 ÔÇô 125,000
Clayey sand
30,000 ÔÇô 80,000
Silty sand
20,000 ÔÇô 50,000
Clayey soil: 
su < 50 kPa
 
10,000 ÔÇô 20,000
50kPa < su < 100kPa
20,000 ÔÇô 50,000
100 kPa < su
>50,000
 
Table 9  Recommended coefficient of subgrade reaction (ks) for different soil 
types (Terzaghi, 1955) 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                87 
Plate Load Tests (PLT) 
Plate load tests can provide a direct measure of the relationship between p and s, 
but size effects can dominate results.  Terzaghi (1955) suggested a link between 
a 1-foot square plate (ks1) and the width of footing B, as follows: 
 
ks = ks1 
2
2B
1
B
´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´Çź
 
 
However, there is very large scatter in the results, due to variability in ground 
stiffness with depth. 
 
Shear Wave Velocity (Vs) 
Based on work by Vesic (1961) and elastic theory, the modulus of subgrade 
reaction is: 
 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´ü«
´ÇŻ
2
12
f
f
4
s
-
1
E
I
E
B
 
E
65
.0
k'
 
where: 
 
E  
= modulus of elasticity of soil 
Ef  
= modulus of elasticity of footing 
B   
= footing width  
If   
= moment of inertia 
´ü«  
= Poisson's ratio for soil 
k's  
=    modulus of subgrade reaction: 
 
k's = ks B 
 
For most values of Es and Ef, the expression simplifies to: 
 
k's ´é╗ 
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´ü«2
-
1
E
 
Bowles (1974) suggested: 
 
ks = 120 qall 
    
where qall is in kPa and ks is in kN/m3. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
88 
 
It is possible to estimate E from shear wave velocity, Vs.  The small strain shear 
modulus is given by the following: 
 
Go = g
´üž(Vs)2 
In addition: 
Geq = ´üÖ Go 
 
and 
 
 
E = 2(1 + ´üÁ) Geq 
Since ´ü« ´é╗´Çá0.2 to 0.3, 
 
k's = ks B ´é╗ 2.9 ´üÖ Go 
 
Hence: 
ks ´é╗ 2.9 ´üÖ 
´ÇĘ
´Çę
2
s
B
V
g
´üž
 
where: 
 
´üÖ´Çá´ÇŻ´Çáa function of the degree of loading and stress history (see Figure 40). 
 
Fahey, (1998) suggested that the variation of ´ü╣´Çácould be defined by: 
 
´ü╣´Çá´ÇŻ´ÇáG/Go = 1 ÔÇô f (q/qult)g 
 
Mayne (2005) suggested that values of f = 1 and g = 0.3 are appropriate for most 
uncemented soils that are not highly structured, and these values agree well with 
the NC relationship shown in Figure 41.  The value of g increases toward a value 
of 1.0 when the soil is overconsolidated or under increasing number of load 
cycles.  
 
For most well-designed foundations, q/qult = 0.3 (i.e., FS > 3) and hence, ´üÖ´Çá= 0.3, 
then:  
 
ks ´é╗´ÇáG´ü»´Çá´Ç»´Çá´üé´Çá´Çá
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                89 
Deep Foundation Design 
 
Piles 
Piles can be used to:  
 
´éĚ Transfer high surface loads, through soft layers down to stronger layers 
´éĚ Transfer loads by friction over significant length of soil 
´éĚ Resist lateral loads 
´éĚ Protect against scour, etc. 
´éĚ Protect against swelling soils, etc. 
 
Piles are generally much more expensive than shallow footings. 
 
Types of Piles 
Generally classified based on installation method (Weltman & Little, 1977): 
 
´éĚ Displacement 
 
o Preformed 
o Driven Cast-in-place 
o High pressure grouted 
 
´éĚ Non/low displacement 
 
o Mud bored 
o Cased bored  
o Cast-in-place screwed (auger) 
o Helical (screw)  
 
Contractors are developing new pile types and installation techniques constantly 
to achieve increased capacity and improved cost effectiveness for different ground 
conditions.  Hence, it is difficult to predict capacity and load-settlement response 
for all piles using simple analytical techniques, since the capacity and load 
response characteristics can be dominated by the method of installation. 
 
Selection of Pile Type 
 
1. Assess foundation loads 
2. Assess ground conditions 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
90 
3. Are piles necessary? 
4. Technical considerations: 
´éĚ Ground conditions 
´éĚ Loading conditions 
´éĚ Environmental considerations 
´éĚ Site and equipment constraints 
´éĚ Safety 
5. List all technically feasible pile types and rank in order of suitability based on 
technical considerations 
6. Assess cost of each suitable pile type and rank based on cost considerations 
7. Assess construction program for each suitable pile type and rank 
8. Make overall ranking based on technical, cost and program considerations 
 
General Design Principles 
 
Axial Capacity 
The total ultimate pile axial capacity, Qult, consists of two components: end 
bearing load (or point resistance), Qb, and side friction load (sometimes referred 
to as the shaft or skin friction), Qs, as follows: 
 
Qult = Qs + Qb 
 
In sands, the end bearing, Qb, tends to dominate, whereas in soft clays, the side 
friction, Qs, tends to dominate. The end bearing, Qb, is calculated as the product 
between the pile end area, Ap, and the unit end bearing, qp.  The friction load, Qs, 
is the product between the outer pile shaft area, As, by the unit side friction, fp.  
  
 
Qult =   fp As + qp Ap 
 
Obviously, different fp values are mobilized along different parts of the pile, so 
that, in practice, the calculation is performed as a summation of small 
components.  For open-ended piles, some consideration should be made regarding 
whether the pile is plugged or unplugged (de Ruiter and Beringen, 1979), but the 
procedure is essentially as outlined above.  In general, most pipe piles behave 
plugged (closed-ended) at working loads but become unplugged (open-ended) at 
failure.  The allowable or design pile load, Qall will be then given by the total 
ultimate axial capacity divided by a factor of safety. Sometimes separate factors 
of safety are applied to Qb and Qs.  
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                91 
Like shallow footings, capacity is a function of displacement.  For piles that derive 
significant end bearing, axial capacity is often unclear and depends on 
displacement. Factor of safety applied to an estimated axial capacity has often 
been used to limit displacements. Ideally deep foundations, like footing, should 
be designed based on allowable settlement, not capacity.   
 
However, basic approaches to estimate capacity are: 
 
´éĚ Static Methods 
´éĚ Pile Dynamics 
´éĚ Pile Load Tests 
 
 
 
Static Methods 
 
Pseudo-theoretical Approach 
Pseudo-theoretical methods are based on shear strength parameters.   
 
Like bearing capacity calculations for shallow foundations - there are over 20 
different bearing capacity theories. No single solution is applicable to all piles, 
and most cannot account for installation technique.  Hence, there has been 
extensive application of in-situ test techniques applied via empirical direct design 
methods.   
 
The most notable is the application of the CPT, since the CPT is a close model of 
the pile process.  Detailed analysis is generally limited to high-risk pile design, 
such as large offshore piles. 
 
 
Effective Stress Approach (´üó) 
The effective stress (´üó´Çę approach (Burland, 1973), has been very useful in 
providing insight of pile performance.  
 
 Unit side friction, fp = ´üó ´ü│vÔÇÖ 
 
 Unit end bearing, qp = Nt ´ü│bÔÇÖ 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
92 
Soil Type 
Cast-in-place 
Piles 
Driven 
Piles 
Silt
0.2 - 0.3
0.3 - 0.5
Loose sand
0.2 - 0.4
0.3 - 0.8
Medium sand
0.3 - 0.5
0.6 - 1.0
Dense sand
0.4 - 0.6
0.8 - 1.2
Gravel
0.4 - 0.7
0.8 - 1.5
 
Table 10  Range of ´üó coefficients: cohesionless soils 
 
 
Soil Type 
Cast-in-place 
Piles 
Driven 
Piles 
Silt
10 - 30
20 - 40
Loose sand
20 - 30
30 - 80
Medium sand
30 - 60
50 - 120
Dense sand
50 - 100
100 - 120
Gravel
80 - 150
150 - 300
 
Table 11  Range of Nt factors: cohesionless soils 
 
 
The above coefficients are approximate since they depend on ground 
characteristics and pile installation details.  In the absence of pile load tests assume 
FS = 3. 
 
Randolph and Wroth (1982) related ´üó to the overconsolidation ratio (OCR) for 
cohesive soils and produced tentative design charts. In general, for cohesive soils: 
 
´üó = 0.25 - 0.32, and Nt = 3 - 10  
 
Effective stress concepts may not radically change empirical based design rules 
but can increase confidence in these rules and allow extrapolation to new 
situations. 
 
Total Stress Approach (´üí) 
It has been common to design piles in cohesive soils based on total stress and 
undrained shear strength, su. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                93 
Unit side friction, fp = ´üí´Çásu 
 
Unit end bearing, qp = Nt su 
 
Where ´üí varies from 0.5 - 1.0 depending on OCR and Nt varies from 6 to 9 
depending on depth of embedment and pile size. 
 
 
Empirical Approach   
 
CPT Method 
Research has shown (Robertson et al., 1988; Briaud and Tucker, 1988; Tand and 
Funegard, 1989; Sharp et al., 1988) that CPT methods generally give superior 
predictions of axial pile capacity compared to most conventional methods. The 
main reason for this is that the CPT provides a continuous profile of soil response.  
Almost all CPT methods use reduction factors to measured CPT values. The need 
for such reduction factors is due to a combination of the following influences: 
scale effect, rate of loading effects, difference of insertion technique, position of 
the CPT friction sleeve and differences in horizontal soil displacements.  The early 
work by DeBeer (1963) identified the importance of scale effects. Despite these 
differences, the CPT is still the test that gives the closest simulation of a pile.  
Superiority of CPT methods over non-CPT methods has been confirmed in other 
studies (e.g., O'Neill, 1986). 
 
Many CPT-based pile design methods are available. Many are based on only one 
pile type (e.g., steel pipe piles) and do not apply to other pile types. Since there 
are many different pile types available, it is preferred to use a method that is based 
on full-scale pile load tests on a wide range of pile types and in a wide range of 
soil conditions.  The main CPT method by Bustamante and Gianeselli (1982 - 
LCPC Method) is outlined below.  The LCPC CPT method is recommended since 
it provides simple guidance to account for many different pile installation methods 
and generally provides good estimates of axial capacity of single piles. 
 
 
LCPC CPT Method (Bustamante and Gianeselli, 1982) 
 
The method by Bustamante and Gianeselli was based on the analysis of 197 pile 
load (and extraction) tests with a wide range of pile and soil types, which may 
partly explain the good results obtained with the method. The method, also known 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
94 
as the LCPC method, is summarized in Table 12 and Table 13.  The LCPC method 
was updated with small changes by Bustamante and Frank, (1997) 
 
 
 
 
Table 12  Bearing capacity factors, kc 
 (Bustamante and Gianeselli, 1982) 
 
 
The pile unit end bearing, qp, is calculated from the calculated equivalent average 
cone resistance, qca, multiplied by an end bearing coefficient, kc (Table 12).  The 
pile unit side friction, fp, is calculated from measured qc values divided by a 
friction coefficient, ´üíLCPC (Table 13).  
 
qp = kc qca 
 
fp = 
LCPC
c
q
´üí
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                95 
   
 
 
Maximum fp values are also recommended based on pile and soil type.  Only the 
measured CPT qc is used for the calculation of both side friction and pile end 
bearing resistance.  This is considered an advantage by many due to the difficulties 
associated in interpreting sleeve friction (fs) in CPT data. 
 
 
 
Table 13  Friction coefficient, ´üí´Çá
 (Bustamante and Gianeselli, 1982) 
 
The equivalent average cone resistance, qca, at the base of the pile used to compute 
the pile unit end bearing, qp, is the mean qc value measured along two fixed 
distances, a, (a = 1.5D, where D is the pile diameter) above (-a) and below (+a) 
the pile tip. The authors suggest that qca be calculated in three steps, as shown in 
Figure 43.  The first step is to calculate q'ca, the mean qc between -a and +a.  The 
second step is to eliminate values higher than 1.3q'ca along the length -a to +a, and 
the values lower than 0.7q'ca along the length -a, which generates the thick curve 
shown in Figure 43.  The third step is to calculate qca, the mean value of the thick 
curve. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
96 
 
Figure 43.  Calculation of equivalent average cone resistance 
 (Bustamante and Gianeselli, 1982). 
 
More recently, newer methods have been developed to estimate the axial capacity 
of piles (e.g., Niazi, F.S. and Mayne P.W., 2016 and Lehane et al., 2022).  
Fellenius (2022) describes a unified design approach based on designing 
foundations considering actual and acceptable settlements, as opposed to basing 
the design on a pile "capacity" reduced by various factors of safety or resistance 
factors. The unified method is a logical method because it considers actual loads, 
deformations, and movements, whereas the conventional design means 
calculating forces for an ultimate condition that hopefully will never develop. A 
complete description is beyond the scope of this Guide and the reader is 
encouraged to read Basics of Foundation Design (Fellenius, 2022): 
https://www.fellenius.net/papers.html 
 
 
Other Design Considerations 
 
Factor of Safety 
To obtain the design load, factors of safety are applied to the ultimate load and a 
deterministic approach is usually adopted to define these values.  The selection of 
an appropriate factor of safety depends on many factors, such as reliability and 
sufficiency of the site investigation data, confidence in the method of calculation, 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                97 
previous experience with similar piles in similar soils and whether pile load test 
results are available.   
 
Factors of safety are generally of the order of 2, although real values are 
sometimes greater, as partial factors of safety are sometimes applied during 
calculations (particularly to soil strengths) before arriving to the ultimate pile 
capacity.   
 
Recommended factors of safety for calculating the axial capacity of piles from the 
CPT are given in Table 14.  
 
 
Method 
Factor of safety (FS) 
Bustamante and 
Gianeselli (1982) 
2.0  (Qs) 
3.0  (Qb) 
de Ruiter and Beringen 
(1979) 
2.0 (static loads) 
1.5 (static + storm loads) 
 
Table 14  Recommended factors of safety for axial capacity of piles from CPT 
 
The design of high-capacity large diameter bored piles in stiff clay or dense sand 
can be difficult since settlement criteria usually control rather than capacity.  
Hence, high factors of safety are often applied to limit settlement. 
 
 
Pile Dynamics 
The objective of methods that rely on pile dynamics is to relate the dynamic pile 
behavior to the ultimate static pile resistance. Hence, pile dynamics can work well 
in drained soils (sands, gravels, etc.) but can be difficult in undrained soils (silts, 
clays, etc.). 
 
The early approach was to use simple pile driving equations (Hiley, Engineering 
News, etc.) based on equating the available energy of the hammer to the work 
performed by the pile.  However, these were based on a rigid pile concept, which 
is fundamentally incorrect. Current approaches are based on 1-D wave-equation 
analyses (Goble et al., 1970). This method considers the characteristics of the 
hammer, driving cap, pile, and soil.  The method is commonly applied using 
commercial software (i.e., WEAP).  This method is good to assist in selection of 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
98 
hammers and prediction of driving stresses and the choice of driving criteria.  It 
is also useful for dynamic monitoring during construction. 
 
Pile Load Tests 
Since there is much uncertainty in the prediction of pile capacity and response, it 
is common to perform pile load tests on major projects. 
 
For major projects, it is common to apply static methods (i.e., LCPC CPT method) 
to obtain a first estimate of capacity, apply pile dynamics if driven piles selected 
(aid in hammer selection, driving stresses, driving criteria) and perform a small 
number of pile load tests to evaluate pile response and to calibrate the static 
method.  Results from the pile load tests can be used to modify the static prediction 
(i.e., CPT prediction) of pile capacity and the modified method applied across the 
site.  For low-risk projects, pile load tests may not be warranted, and a slightly 
conservative prediction should be applied using the static (CPT) method. 
 
Group Capacity 
The capacity of a group of piles is influenced by the spacing, pile installation and 
ground conditions.  The group efficiency is defined as the ratio of the group 
capacity to the sum of the individual pile capacities. 
 
Driven piles in coarse-grained soils develop larger individual capacities when 
installed as a group since lateral earth pressures and soil density increase due to 
pile driving.  Hence, it is conservative to use the sum of the individual pile 
capacities. 
 
For bored pile groups, the individual capacity can reduce due to reduced lateral 
stresses.  Meyerhof (1976) suggested a reduction factor of 0.67. 
 
For piles in fine-grained soils the capacity of the pile group should be estimated 
based on the ÔÇśblockÔÇÖ of piles since the soil between the piles may move with the 
pile group. 
  
Design of Piles in Rock 
Piles can be placed on or socketed into rock to carry high loads.  The exact area 
of contact with rock, depth of penetration into rock and quality of rock are largely 
unknown, hence, there is much uncertainty.  The capacity is often confirmed 
based on driving or installation details, local experience, and test loading.  End 
bearing capacity can be based on pressuremeter test results or strength from rock 
cores.  Shaft resistance should be estimated with caution, due to possible poor 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                99 
contact between rock and pile, possible stress concentration and resulting 
progressive failure. 
 
Pile Settlement 
Although the installation of piles changes the deformation and compressibility 
characteristics of the soil mass governing the behavior of single piles under load, 
this influence usually extends only a few pile diameters below the pile base.  
Meyerhof (1976) suggested that the total settlement of a group of piles at working 
load can generally be estimated assuming an equivalent foundation.  For a group 
of predominately friction piles (i.e., Qs > Qb), the equivalent foundation is 
assumed to act on the soil at an effective depth of 2/3 of the pile embedment.  For 
a group of piles that are predominately end bearing (i.e., Qb > Qs), the equivalent 
foundation is taken at or close to the base of the piles.  The resulting settlement is 
calculated in a manner similar to that of shallow foundations. 
 
Sometimes large capacity piles are installed and used as single piles and the load 
settlement response of a single pile is required.  The load settlement response of 
a single pile is controlled by the combined behavior of the side resistance (Qs) and 
base resistance (Qb).  The side resistance is usually developed at a small settlement 
of about 0.5 percent of the shaft diameter and generally between 5 to 10mm.  In 
contrast to the side resistance, the base resistance requires much larger movements 
to develop fully, usually about 10 to 20 percent of the base diameter.  An estimate 
of the load settlement response of a single pile can be made by combining the two 
components of resistance according to the above guidelines.  In this way, a friction 
pile (i.e., Qs >> Qb), will show a clear plunging failure at a small settlement of 
about 0.5% of the pile diameter.  On the other hand, an end bearing pile (i.e., Qb 
>> Qs), will not show a clear plunging failure until very large settlements have 
taken place and usually settlement criteria control before failure can occur.  In 
both cases, the side friction is almost fully mobilized at working loads.  Hence, it 
is often important to correctly define the proportions of resistance (Qb/Qs). 
 
Methods have been developed to estimate the load-transfer (t-z) curves 
(Verbrugge, 1988, Lehane et al., 2022).  However, these methods are approximate 
and are strongly influenced by pile installation and soil type.  The recommended 
method for estimating load settlement response for single piles is to follow the 
general guidelines above regarding the development of each component of 
resistance. 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
100 
Negative Shaft Friction and Down Drag on Piles 
When the ground around a pile settles, the resulting downward movement can 
induce downward forces on the pile.   
 
The magnitude of the settlement can be very small to develop these downward 
forces.  For end bearing piles, the negative shaft friction plus the dead load can 
result in structural failure of the pile.  For friction piles, the negative shaft friction 
can result in greater settlements.  No pile subject to down drag will settle more 
than the surrounding ground. 
 
Lateral Response of Piles 
Vertical piles can resist lateral loads by deflecting and mobilizing resistance in 
the surrounding ground.  The response depends on the relative stiffness of the pile 
and the ground. In general, the response is controlled by the stiffness of the ground 
near the surface, since most long piles are relatively flexible. 
 
A common approach is to simulate the ground by a series of horizontal springs.  
The spring stiffness can be estimated based on a simple subgrade modulus 
approach (assumes the ground to be linear and homogeneous) or as non-linear 
springs (p-y curves) (Matlock, 1970).  The p-y curves can be estimated using 
empirical relationships based on lab results or in-situ tests (e.g., pressuremeter, 
DMT, SCPT) (Baguelin et al., 1978; Robertson et al., 1986).  The initial stiffness 
of the p-y curves is controlled by the small strain stiffness (Go) that can be 
determined by measuring (or estimating) the shear wave velocity (Vs) using the 
SCPT. 
 
Another approach is to simulate the ground as an elastic continuum.  Poulos and 
Davis, (1980) and Randolph, (1981) suggested design charts that require estimates 
of equivalent ground modulus for uniform homogeneous ground profiles. 
 
The above approaches apply to single piles.  When piles are installed in groups, 
interaction occurs, and lateral deformations can increase.  These can be estimated 
using simplified theoretical solutions (Poulos and Davis, 1980, Randolph, 1981). 
The direction of the applied load relative to the group is important for laterally 
loaded pile groups.  
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                101 
Ground Improvement Compaction Control 
 
Ground improvement can occur in many forms depending on soil type and project 
requirements.  For coarse-grained soils such as sands and silty sands, deep 
compaction is a common ground improvement technique.  Deep compaction can 
comprise: vibro-compaction, vibro-replacement (stone columns), dynamic 
compaction, compaction piles, and deep blasting. 
 
The CPT has been found to be one of the best methods to monitor and document 
the effect of deep compaction due to the continuous, reliable, and repeatable 
nature of the data.  Most deep compaction techniques involve cyclic shear stresses 
in the form of vibration to induce an increase in soil density.  Vibratory 
compaction is generally more effective in soil deposits with a friction ratio less 
than 1%.  When the friction ratio exceeds about 1.5% vibratory compaction is 
usually not effective.  These recommendations apply to average values in a soil 
deposit.  Local seams or thin layers with higher friction ratio values are often of 
little practical importance for the overall performance of a project and their effect 
should be carefully evaluated when compaction specifications are prepared. Soils 
with an initial cone resistance below about 3 MPa (30 tsf) can be compressible or 
contain organic matter, silt or clay and will generally not respond well to vibratory 
compaction.  Soils with a high initial cone resistance are normally dense and will 
not show significant compaction and generally do not need compaction.  It is also 
important to establish the level and variation of the groundwater table before 
compaction since some compaction methods are less effective in dry or partially 
saturated soils.  The CPTu provides the required information on groundwater 
conditions. 
 
Often the aim of deep compaction is for one or more of the following: 
 
´éĚ increase bearing capacity (i.e., increase shear strength) 
´éĚ reduce settlements (i.e., increase stiffness) 
´éĚ increase resistance to liquefaction (i.e., increase density). 
 
The need for deep compaction and geotechnical conditions will be project specific 
and it is important that design specifications take account of these site-specific 
requirements.  Cone resistance in coarse-grained soils is governed by many 
factors including soil density, in-situ stresses, stress history, and soil 
compressibility.  Changes in shear strength, stiffness and density can be 
documented with changes in measured cone resistance.  
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
102 
A common problem in many deep compaction projects is to specify a minimum 
value of qc for compaction over a large depth range.  This results in a variation of 
relative density with depth, with the required degree of compaction near the 
surface being much higher than at depth.  For certain projects, a high degree of 
compaction close to the ground surface may be justified but can be achieved using 
surface compaction methods.  However, this can be very difficult to obtain with 
certain deep compaction techniques and this decision should be based on 
engineering judgment related to the geotechnical project requirements.  It is 
generally preferred to specify a minimum normalized value of cone resistance 
corrected for overburden stress, Qtn.  Since, grain characteristics can vary rapidly 
in many sandy deposits, it is also preferred to specify an acceptance criterion 
based on normalized clean sand equivalent values of cone resistance (Qtn)cs, using 
the methodology shown in Figure 48, especially when compaction is performed 
to reduce the potential for liquefaction.  Specification using (Qtn)cs can reduce 
problems in silty zones, where traditional approaches have often resulted in 
excessive ground improvement to reach unrealistic criteria. 
 
It is relatively common to have the CPT soil behavior type index (Ic) decrease 
after compaction (e.g., vibro-compaction).  The cause for the decrease is likely 
due to changes in horizontal effective stresses due to ground improvement.  When 
this has occurred it has been common to use the pre-improvement values of Ic that 
are less influenced by complex changes in horizontal effective stresses and better 
represent the correct soil type. Any small change in Ic typically has little influence 
in the analysis for clean sands (where the initial Ic < 2.0). 
 
An important aspect of deep compaction that is not yet fully understood is the 
increase in cone resistance with time after compaction.  This time effect has been 
observed in different ground conditions and with different compaction methods.  
Often no measurable change in pore pressure has been observed and the increase 
takes place without visible ground settlements.  Charlie et al. (1992) studied 
several cases where cone resistance was measured with time after compaction.  A 
range of compaction techniques were used and the results are shown in Figure 44.  
The cases were representative of a wide range of climates and geologic conditions 
with average temperatures varying from -10oC (Beaufort Sea) to +27oC (Nigeria).  
Charlie et al. (1992) suggested that the time effect could be linked to the average 
air temperature.  The possibility of time effects should be evaluated for each 
project.  For very large projects, it may be necessary to perform field trials. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                103 
 
 
Figure 44 Influence of time after disturbance on CPT results 
 (after Charlie et al., 1992) 
 
For projects where deep compaction is recommended to either increase resistance 
to liquefaction or decrease future settlements for shallow foundations, the seismic 
CPT should be considered, since it provides both penetration resistance and shear 
wave velocity.  The combined values can improve interpretation, especially in 
silty sands and soils that have some microstructure before improvement. 
 
Ground improvement can also include many other techniques, such as grouting, 
soil mixing and stone columns as well as pre-loading.  The CPT can also be used 
to evaluate the effectiveness of these other techniques although this will depend 
on soil conditions and the ground improvement method.  The CPT has also found 
some limited use in monitoring surface compaction.  Since surface compaction is 
often carried out in thin layers with frequent quality control, the CPT has not 
found extensive application in this area. 
 
Another form of ground improvement is soil mixing, where compounds are mixed 
with soil to improve their behavior.  Sometimes quality control is defined in terms 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
104 
of a target unconfined compressive strength (qu).  The unconfined compressive 
strength (qu) is twice the undrained shear strength (su) that can be estimate directly 
from the CPT. An advantage of the CPT for quality control testing in soil mixing 
is that the CPT provides a continuous profile and can identify weak zones. 
 
Design of Wick or Sand Drains 
 
Pre-loading is a common form of ground improvement in fine-grained soils where 
the rate of consolidation is important.  Installation of sand drains or wick drains 
can significantly decrease the time for consolidation settlements.  Prior to 1975, 
vertical sand drains were common to aid consolidation with temporary pre-load.  
Since 1975, geosynthetics in the form of wick drains have dominated the market.  
Wick drains are usually fluted or corrugated plastic or cardboard cores within 
geotextile sheaths that completely encircle those cores.  They are usually 100mm 
wide by 2 to 6mm thick.  The wick drain is usually pushed or driven into the 
ground to the desired depth using a lance or mandrel.  The drain then remains in 
place when the lance or mandrel is removed.  Installation can be in the range of 1 
to 5 minutes depending on ground conditions, pushing equipment and depth of 
installation.  The design of wick drains is not standardized but most equate the 
diameter of the particular type of drain to an equivalent sand drain diameter.    
 
The method developed by Barron (1948) and Kjellman (1948), as mentioned by 
Hansbo (1970), is commonly used, and the relevant design equations are as 
follows: 
 
´üŤ
´üŁ
U
1
1
n
1
75
.0
)
d
/
D
ln(
c
8
D
t
h
2
´Çş
´Çş
´ÇŻ
 
 
Where: 
 
t   = consolidation 
ch = coefficient of consolidation for horizontal flow 
d  = equivalent diameter of the wick drain    ( ´Çş~ circumference/´ü░) 
D  = sphere of influence of the wick drain (for a triangular pattern 
use 1.05 times the spacing, for a square pattern use 1.13 
times the spacing). 
U  = average degree of consolidation 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                105 
The key input parameter for the soil is the coefficient of consolidation for 
horizontal flow, ch.  This parameter can be estimated from dissipation tests using 
the CPTu.  The value derived from the CPTu is particularly useful since, the cone 
represents a very similar model to the installation and drainage process around the 
wick drain.  Although there is some possible smearing and disturbance to the soil 
around the CPT, similar smearing and disturbance often exists around the wick, 
and hence, the calculated value of ch from the CPTU is usually representative of 
the soil for wick drain design. 
 
Details on estimation of ch from dissipation tests were given in the section on 
(geotechnical parameters) consolidation characteristics.  To provide a reasonable 
estimate of ch, a sufficient number of dissipation tests should be carried out 
through the zone of interest.  The dissipation tests should be carried out to at least 
50% dissipation.  Several dissipation tests should be carried out to full dissipation 
to provide an estimate of the equilibrium groundwater conditions prior to pre-
loading. 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
106 
Liquefaction 
 
Soil liquefaction is a major concern for structures constructed with or on sand or 
sandy soils.  The major earthquakes of Niigata (1964), Kobe (1995) and 
Christchurch (2010/11) have illustrated the significance and extent of damage 
caused by soil liquefaction.  Recent failures in mine tailings impoundments (e.g., 
Morgenstern et al., 2016, Robertson et al. 2019) have illustrated that soil 
liquefaction is also a major design problem for large sand structures such tailings 
and earth dams. 
 
To evaluate the potential for soil liquefaction, it is important to determine the soil 
stratigraphy and in-situ state of the deposits.  The CPT is an ideal in-situ test to 
evaluate the potential for soil liquefaction because of its repeatability, reliability, 
continuous measurements, and cost effectiveness.   
 
Liquefaction Definitions 
Several phenomena are described as soil liquefaction; hence, the following 
definitions are provided to aid in the understanding of the phenomena. 
 
Flow (static) Liquefaction 
 
´éĚ Applies only to strain softening soils in undrained shear (i.e., soils 
susceptible to strength loss/reduction in undrained shear). 
´éĚ Requires in-situ static shear stresses to be greater than the residual or 
minimum/liquefied undrained shear strength (e.g., sloping ground). 
´éĚ Either static or cyclic loading can trigger flow liquefaction. 
´éĚ For failure of a soil structure to occur, such as a slope, a sufficient 
volume of material must strain soften.  The resulting failure can be a 
slide or a flow depending on the material characteristics and ground 
geometry.  The resulting movements are due to internal causes and often 
occur after the trigger mechanism. 
´éĚ Can occur in any strain-softening saturated (or near-saturated) soil, such 
as very loose non-plastic soil, very sensitive fine-grained (low-plastic 
clay), and loose non-plastic silt. 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                107 
Cyclic (seismic) Liquefaction 
 
´éĚ Requires undrained cyclic loading during which shear stress reversal 
occurs. 
´éĚ Requires sufficient undrained cyclic loading to accumulate pore 
pressures such that the effective stresses essentially reach zero during 
cyclic loading. 
´éĚ Deformations during cyclic loading can accumulate to large values, but 
generally stabilize shortly after cyclic loading stops.  The resulting 
movements are due to external causes and occur mainly during the 
cyclic loading. 
´éĚ Can occur in almost all saturated non-plastic and low-plastic soil (sand, 
silt) provided that the cyclic loading is sufficiently large in magnitude 
and duration. 
´éĚ Plastic (clay) soils can experience some softening during cyclic loading 
when the applied cyclic shear stress is close to the undrained shear 
strength.  However, deformations are generally small due to the 
cohesive strength at low effective stress.  Rate effects (creep) often 
control deformations in cohesive soils. 
 
Note that strain softening soils can also experience cyclic liquefaction depending 
on ground geometry.  Figure 45 presents a flow chart to clarify the phenomena 
and definitions of soil liquefaction.   
 
If a soil is contractive at large strains and strain softening (i.e., can experience 
strength loss/reduction in undrained shear), flow liquefaction is possible if the soil 
can be triggered to strain-soften and if the gravitational shear stresses are larger 
than the minimum undrained shear strength.  The trigger can be either monotonic 
or cyclic.  Whether a slope or soil structure will fail, and slide will depend on the 
amount of strain softening soil relative to strain hardening soil within the 
structure, the brittleness of the strain softening soil and the geometry of the 
ground.  The resulting deformations of a soil structure with both strain softening 
and strain hardening soils will depend on many factors, such as distribution of 
soils, ground geometry, amount and type of trigger mechanism, brittleness of the 
strain softening soil and drainage conditions.  Examples of flow liquefaction 
failures are Aberfan flow slide (Bishop, 1973), Zealand submarine flow slides 
(Koppejan et al., 1948), and the recent tailings dam failures in Brazil 
(Morgenstern et al. 2016; Robertson et al. 2019).  In general, flow liquefaction 
failures are not common, however, when they occur, they typically take place 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
108 
quickly with little warning and usually have extreme consequences since the 
failed material can flow rapidly over significant distances.  Hence, the design 
against flow liquefaction should be carried out with caution. 
 
 
Figure 45. Flow chart to evaluate liquefaction of soils  
(After Robertson and Wride, 1998) 
 
 
If a soil is strain hardening in undrained shear, flow liquefaction will generally 
not occur.  However, cyclic liquefaction can occur due to cyclic undrained loading 
(e.g., earthquake loading).  The amount and extent of deformations during cyclic 
loading will depend on the state (density/OCR) of the soil, the magnitude and 
duration of the cyclic loading and the extent to which shear stress reversal occurs.  
If extensive shear stress reversal occurs and the magnitude and duration of cyclic 
loading are sufficiently large, it is possible for the effective stresses to essentially 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                109 
reach zero in sand-like soils, during the cyclic loading, resulting in large 
deformations.  Shear stress reversal is common in level and gently sloping ground 
during earthquakes where the static shear stresses are small compared to the 
imposed cyclic shear stresses.  Examples of cyclic liquefaction were common in 
the major earthquakes in Niigata (1964) and Christchurch (2010/11) and manifest 
in the form of sand boils, damaged lifelines (pipelines, etc.) lateral spreads, 
slumping of embankments, ground settlements, and ground surface cracks.   
 
If cyclic liquefaction occurs and drainage paths are restricted due to overlying less 
permeable layers, the sand immediately beneath the less permeable soil can 
become looser due to pore water redistribution during and after cyclic loading, 
resulting in possible subsequent flow liquefaction, given the right geometry (see 
flow chart in Figure 45).  In cases where drainage is restricted, caution is required 
to account for possible void redistribution. 
 
The evaluation of liquefaction (both flow and cyclic) depends on the risk of the 
project.  Risk is defined as the combination of likelihood and consequences as 
outlined briefly in Table 1.  In general, risk is often dominated by the potential 
consequences.  Since flow liquefaction failures are often very rapid and the failed 
material can flow considerable distance quickly, the consequences of failure are 
often extreme.  For high-risk projects (e.g., potential loss of life, environmental 
damages, etc.) it is often prudent to assume that flow liquefaction (i.e., strength 
loss) will be triggered at some time in the life of the project. Given the variables 
to evaluate liquefaction, it can be helpful to apply a risk-informed approach to 
design.  An example of risk-informed approach for mine tailings can be found at: 
https://www.icmm.com/en-gb/guidance/innovation/2021/tailings-management-
good-practice 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
110 
Cyclic Liquefaction (Level or Gently Sloping Ground Sites) 
(Refer to Robertson & Wride, 1998; Zhang et al., 2002 & 2004; Robertson, 2009 for details) 
 
Most of the existing work on cyclic liquefaction has been primarily for 
earthquakes.  The late Prof. H.B. Seed and his co-workers developed a 
comprehensive methodology to estimate the potential for cyclic liquefaction for 
level ground sites due to earthquake loading.  The methodology requires an 
estimate of the cyclic stress ratio (CSR) profile caused by the design earthquake 
and the cyclic resistance ratio (CRR) of the ground.  If the CSR is greater than the 
CRR cyclic liquefaction can occur.  The CRR of the soil is estimated based on 
past case history performance linked to penetration resistance. Alternate methods 
to estimate CRR based on a mechanics approach have been suggested, but the 
case history-based methods remain the most popular approach.  CSR is usually 
estimated based on a probability of occurrence for a given earthquake.  A site-
specific seismicity analysis can be carried out to determine the design CSR profile 
with depth.  A simplified method to estimate CSR was also developed by Seed 
and Idriss (1971) based on the peak ground surface acceleration (amax) at the site.  
The simplified approach can be summarized as follows: 
 
CSR = 
d
vo
vo
max
vo
av
r
'
g
a
65
.0
'
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´ü│
´ü│
´â║´â╗
´â╣
´â¬´âź
´âę
´ÇŻ
´ü│
´ü┤
 
 
where ´ü┤av is the average cyclic shear stress; amax is the maximum (peak) horizontal 
acceleration at the ground surface; g is the acceleration due to gravity; ´ü│vo and ´ü│'vo 
are the total and effective vertical overburden stresses at the time of the 
earthquake, respectively, and rd is a stress reduction factor which is dependent on 
depth.  The factor rd can be estimating using the following tri-linear function, 
which provides a good fit to the average of the suggested range in rd originally 
proposed by Seed and Idriss (1971): 
 
rd =   1.0 ÔÇô 0.00765z 
 
 
 
if z < 9.15 m 
 
 
 
=  1.174 ÔÇô 0.0267z 
 
 
 
if z = 9.15 to 23 m 
 
 
 
=  0.744 ÔÇô 0.008z 
 
 
 
if z = 23 to 30 m 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                111 
 
 
=   0.5 
 
 
 
if z > 30 m 
 
Where z is the depth in meters.  These formulae are approximate at best and 
represent only average values since rd shows considerable variation with depth.  
Idriss and Boulanger (2008) suggested alternate values for rd, but these are also 
associated with alternate values of CRR. 
 
The sequence to evaluate cyclic liquefaction for level or gently sloping ground 
sites is: 
 
1. Evaluate susceptibility of soil to cyclic liquefaction 
2. Evaluate triggering of cyclic liquefaction 
3. Evaluate post-earthquake deformations. 
 
An overview of the history of evaluation cyclic liquefaction is provided in the 
recording of the 2015 Seed Lecture by Robertson, that can be viewed at: 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2-tMdbMvNg). 
 
1.  Evaluate Susceptibility to Cyclic Liquefaction 
 
The response of soil to seismic loading varies with soil type and state (void ratio, 
effective confining stress, stress history, etc.).  Boulanger and Idriss (2004) 
distinguished between sand-like and clay-like behavior and showed that cyclic 
liquefaction occurs primarily in sand-like soils.  Following criteria can be used to 
identify soil behavior: 
 
Sand-like Behavior:  Sand-like soils are susceptible to cyclic liquefaction when 
their behavior is typically characterized by Plasticity Index (PI) < 10 and Liquid 
Limit (LL) < 37 and natural water content (wc) > 0.85 (LL).  More emphasis 
should be placed on PI, since both LL and wc tend to be less reliable. Sand-like 
soils generally have CPT-based SBT index Ic < 2.8 (or IB > 22). 
´éĚ Low risk projects:  Assume soils are susceptible to cyclic liquefaction 
based on above criteria unless previous local experience shows 
otherwise. 
´éĚ High risk projects:  Either assume soils are susceptible to cyclic 
liquefaction or obtain high quality samples and evaluate susceptibility 
based on appropriate laboratory testing, unless previous local 
experience exists. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
112 
Clay-like Behavior:  Clay-like soils are generally not susceptible to cyclic 
liquefaction when their behavior is characterized by PI > 18 but they can 
experience cyclic softening. Clay-like soils generally have CPT-based SBT index 
Ic > 2.8 (or IB < 22). 
´éĚ Low risk projects:  Assume soils are not susceptible to cyclic 
liquefaction based on above criteria unless previous local experience 
shows otherwise.  Check for cyclic softening. 
´éĚ High risk projects:  Obtain high quality samples and evaluate 
susceptibility to either cyclic liquefaction and/or cyclic softening based 
on appropriate laboratory testing, unless previous local experience 
exists. 
 
Figure 46 shows the index-based criteria suggested by Bray and Sancio (2006) 
that includes a transition from sand-like to clay-like behavior between 12 < PI < 
18.  A similar transition in behavior was suggested by Robertson (2016) based on 
modified SBT Index 22 < IB < 32. 
 
 
Figure 46.   Liquefaction susceptibility criteria (after Bray and Sancio, 2006) 
 
These criteria are generally conservative.  Boulanger and Idriss (2004) suggested 
that sand-like behavior is limited to PI < 7.  Use the criteria shown in Figure 46, 
unless local experience in the same geologic unit shows that a lower PI is more 
appropriate.  
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                113 
Fine-grained soils transition from a behavior that is more fundamentally like sands 
to behavior that is more fundamentally like clays over a range of Atterberg Limits 
and moisture contents, as shown in Figure 46.  The transition from more sand-like 
to more clay-like behavior has a direct correspondence to the types of engineering 
procedures that are best suited to evaluate their seismic behavior.  The transition 
from sand-like to clay-like behavior generally occurs when the modified SBTn   
22 < IB < 32 (approx. 2.5 < Ic < 2.8), as illustrated in Figures 23 and 25(b).  For 
soils that plot in or close to this transition region samples should be obtained to 
verify behavior. 
 
2.  Evaluate Triggering of Cyclic Liquefaction 
 
Sand-like Materials 
Seed et al., (1985) developed a method to estimate the cyclic resistance ratio 
(CRR) for clean sand with level ground conditions based on the Standard 
Penetration Test (SPT).  The CPT has become more popular to estimate CRR, due 
to the continuous, reliable, and repeatable nature of the data (Youd et al., 2001; 
Robertson, 2009) and now a larger cyclic liquefaction case history database.  
  
Apply the simplified (NCEER) approach as described by Youd et al (2001) using 
generally conservative assumptions.  The simplified approach should be used for 
low- to medium-risk projects and for preliminary screening for high-risk projects.  
For low-risk projects, where the simplified approach is the only method applied, 
conservative criteria should be used.  The recommended CPT trigger correlation 
for sand-like soils can be estimated using the following simplified equations 
suggested by Robertson and Wride, (1998): 
 
CRR7.5 = 
´ÇĘ
´Çę
08
.0
1000
93
3
,
´Çź
´â║´â╗
´â╣
´â¬´âź
´âę
cs
tn
Q
 
if 50 ´éú Qtn,cs ´éú 160 
 
CRR7.5 = 
´ÇĘ
´Çę
05
.0
1000
833
.0
,
´Çź
´â║´â╗
´â╣
´â¬´âź
´âę
cs
tn
Q
 
if  Qtn,cs < 50 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
114 
 
The field observations were based primarily on the following conditions: 
´éĚ Holocene-age, uncemented silica-based sand deposits with Ko < 0.7 
´éĚ Level or gently sloping ground 
´éĚ Cyclic stress ratio (CSR)7.5 adjusted to magnitude M = 7.5 earthquake 
´éĚ Depth ranges from 1 to 12 m (3 to 40 ft), 85% for depths < 10 m (30 ft) 
´éĚ Earthquakes with magnitude mostly between 6 < M < 8 
´éĚ Representative average CPT values for the layer considered to have 
experienced cyclic liquefaction. 
 
A summary of the CPT-based cyclic liquefaction database is shown in Figure 47. 
 
Caution should be exercised when extrapolating the CPT correlation to conditions 
outside the above range.  An important feature to recognize is that the correlation 
is based primarily on average values for the inferred liquefied layers.  However, 
the correlation is often applied to all measured CPT values, which include low 
values below the average.  Therefore, the correlation can be conservative in 
variable deposits where a small part of the CPT data can indicate possible 
liquefaction.  The data base is constantly expanding but is still dominated by 
similar earthquake and soil variables (e.g., predominately 6 < Mw < 8; 0.1 < amax 
< 0.6; 0.1 < CSR < 0.6; z < 10m; fines content (FC) < 40%; Ic < 2.6). Differences 
often occur when the design earthquake is outside of the database (e.g., M > 8 or 
CSR > 0.6). 
 
It has been recognized for some time that the correlation to estimate CRR7.5 for 
silty sands is different than that for clean sands.  Typically, a correction is made 
to determine an equivalent clean sand normalized penetration resistance (Qtn,cs) 
based on grain characteristics, such as fines content, although the corrections are 
due to more than just fines content and are influenced by the plasticity 
(mineralogy) of the fines. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                115 
 
 
Figure 47.  Summary of Cyclic Liquefaction case history database 
(Modified from Boulanger and Idriss, 2008) 
 
One reason for the continued use of the SPT has been the need to obtain a soil 
sample to determine the fines content of the soil.  However, this has been offset 
by the poor repeatability of the SPT data and the weak link between the physical 
characteristic of fines content to the in-situ mechanical behavior of the soil.  
Robertson and Wride (1998) suggested that it was better to estimate the in-situ 
mechanical behavior of the soil directly from the CPT by estimating Qtn,cs using 
the following direct approach: 
 
Qtn,cs = Kc Qtn 
 
Where Kc is a correction factor that is a function of behavior characteristics (e.g., 
compresibility) of the soil. 
 
Robertson and Wride (R&W, 1998) suggested estimating behavior characteristics 
using the normalized soil behavior chart (SBTn) by Robertson (1990) and the soil 
behavior type index, Ic, where: 
 
Ic  = ´ÇĘ
´Çę
´ÇĘ
´Çę
´üŤ
´üŁ
5.0
2
2
22
.1
log
log
47
.3
´Çź
´Çź
´Çş
F
Qtn
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
116 
 
and   
 
Qtn = 
n
vo
a
a
vo
t
P
P
q
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´âĚ´âĚ
´âŞ
´âÂ
´âž´âž
´âĘ
´âŽ
´Çş
'
2
´ü│
´ü│
 
 
Qtn is the normalized CPT penetration resistance (dimensionless); n = stress 
exponent; F = fs/[(qc - ´ü│vo)] x 100% is the normalized friction ratio (in percent); fs 
is the CPT sleeve friction stress; ´ü│vo and ´ü│'vo are the total effective overburden 
stresses respectively; Pa is a reference pressure in the same units as ´ü│'vo (i.e., Pa = 
100 kPa if ´ü│'vo is in kPa) and Pa2 is a reference pressure in the same units as qc and 
´ü│vo (i.e., Pa2 = 0.1 MPa if qc and ´ü│vo are in MPa).  Note, 1 tsf ~ 0.1 MPa. 
 
The soil behavior type chart by Robertson (1990) used a normalized cone 
penetration resistance (Qt) based on a simple linear stress exponent of n = 1.0, 
whereas the recommended chart for estimating CRR7.5 is based on a normalized 
cone penetration resistance (Qtn) based on a variable stress exponent.  Robertson 
(2009) updated the stress normalization to allow for a variation of the stress 
exponent with both SBTn Ic and effective overburden stress using: 
 
n = 0.381 (Ic) + 0.05 (´ü│'vo/pa) ÔÇô 0.15 
 
 
 
 
 
  
where n ÔëĄ 1.0 (see Figure 48 for flow chart). 
 
Robertson and Wride (1998) suggested a correction factor (Kc) to correct the 
measured normalized cone resistance (Qtn) to an equivalent normalized clean sand 
resistance (Qtn,cs) and Robertson (2021) updated the correction factor to the 
following simplified version: 
 
Kc = 1.0 
if Ic ´éú 1.7 
 
 
 
 
The correction factor, Kc, is approximate since the CPT responds to many factors 
such as soil plasticity, fines content, mineralogy, soil sensitivity, age, and stress 
history.  However, in general, these same factors influence the CRR7.5 in a similar 
manner.  Caution should be used when applying the relationship to sands that plot 
in the region defined by 1.64 < Ic < 2.36 and F < 0.5% so as not to confuse very 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                117 
loose clean sands with sands containing fines.  In this zone, it is sometimes useful 
to set Kc = 1.0.  Soils that fall into the (dilative) clay-like region of the CPT soil 
behavior chart (e.g., region CD, Figure 25b), in general, are not susceptible to 
cyclic liquefaction.  However, in this SBT region samples should be obtained, and 
liquefaction potential evaluated using other criteria based primarily on plasticity, 
e.g., soils with plasticity index greater than about 18 are likely not susceptible to 
liquefaction.  Soils that fall in the lower left region of the CPT SBT chart defined 
by region CCS (see Figure 25b) can be sensitive and hence, possibly susceptible 
to both cyclic and flow liquefaction.  A flow-chart to estimate CRR7.5 from the 
CPT is summarized in Figure 48. 
 
For low-risk projects and for preliminary screening in high-risk projects, soils in 
region CC and CD (Figure 25b) would have clay-like behavior and would likely 
not be susceptible to cyclic liquefaction.  Youd et al (2001) recommends that soils 
be sampled using simple push-in (disturbed) samplers when Ic > 2.4 (IB < 32) to 
verify the behavior type based on simple index testing (e.g., grain size 
distribution, Atterberg limits and water content) to confirm susceptibility to cyclic 
liquefaction using the criteria in Figure 46.  Selective soil sampling based on Ic 
(or IB) should be carried out adjacent to some CPT soundings.  Disturbed samples 
can be obtained using either direct push samplers (e.g., Figure 1) or conventional 
drilling/sampling techniques close to the CPT sounding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
118 
 
 
Figure 48.   Flow chart to evaluate cyclic resistance ratio (CRR7.5) from CPT   
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                119 
The factor of safely against cyclic liquefaction is defined as: 
 
Factor of Safety, FS  = CSR
CRR 5.7  MSF 
 
Where MSF is the Magnitude Scaling Factor to convert the CRR7.5 for M = 7.5 to 
the equivalent CRR for the design earthquake.   
 
The NCEER recommended MSF is given by: 
 
MSF = 
56
.2
M
174  
 
The above recommendations are based on the NCEER Workshops in 1996/97 
(Youd et al., 2001) and updated by Robertson (2009). 
 
Juang et al., (2006) and Ku et al (2012) related Factor of Safety (FS) to the 
probability of liquefaction (PL) for the R&W CPT-based method using: 
 
PL = 1 / (1 + (FS/0.9)6.3) 
 
After the NCEER workshops in 1996-97, there have been several alternate 
updated CPT-based methods to estimate the resistance to cyclic liquefaction (e.g., 
Moss et al. 2006; Idriss and Boulanger, 2008; Boulanger and Idriss, 2014).  Each 
method involves a re-evaluation and expansion of the case history database that 
includes alternate assessments of past case history CSR values and different 
methods to correct the measured cone resistance to obtain an equivalent 
normalized clean sand resistance. These alternate values of CSR and Qtn,cs (or 
qc1n,cs) result in alternate trigger relationships for estimating the CRR.  Hence, each 
method is a package in that the specified method to calculate CSR must be applied 
along with the specified method to calculate Qtn,cs (or qc1n,cs) to estimate CRR.  
This means that you should not mix methods (i.e., calculate CSR using one 
method and estimate CRR using another method).  This also applies to the various 
ÔÇścorrection factorsÔÇÖ used within each method.  
 
CRR7.5 can also be estimated using normalized shear wave velocity Vs1 (Kayen et 
al, 2013).  The combination of both CPT and Vs to evaluate the potential for soil 
liquefaction is very useful and can be accomplished in a cost-effective manner 
using the seismic CPT (SCPT). Vs is a small strain measurement of soil stiffness 
and is sensitive to the resistance to cyclic loading (CRR), as shown in Figure 49, 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
120 
but can be a useful addition to the CPT. Vs is also sensitive to microstructure (e.g., 
age, bonding). 
 
 
Figure 49. Regions of Liquefaction based on Vs1  
(After Ahmadi and Paydar, 2014) 
 
Ahmadi and Paydar (2014) suggested that because Vs is influenced by many 
factors (such as grain characteristics and microstructure) and small changes in Vs 
can result in large changes in CRR, it is best to apply Vs as a supplement to the 
CPT-based approach.   
 
The CPT provides near continuous profiles of cone resistance that capture the full 
detail of soil variability, but large corrections are required based on soil type 
(compressibility).  Vs is measured over a larger depth increment (typically every 
1m) and hence provides a more averaged measure but requires smaller corrections 
for soil type, since it is insensitive to soil compressibility. If the two approaches 
provide similar results, in terms of CRR7.5, there is more confidence in the results.  
If the two approaches provide different results, further investigation can be 
warranted to identify the cause (such as soil aging, bonding, etc.).  Sometimes the 
Vs-based approach may predict a higher CRR7.5 due to slight soil bonding.  In this 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                121 
case, the amount and cause of bonding should be studied to determine if the 
earthquake loading is sufficient to destroy the bonds. For example, for small 
earthquakes, the Vs approach may be correct, but for large earthquakes (that can 
destroy the benefits of bonding) the CPT approach may be correct. 
 
Stratigraphy ÔÇô transition zones 
Robertson and Campanella (1983) showed that the cone tip resistance is 
influenced by the soil ahead and behind the cone tip.  In strong/stiff soils the zone 
of influence is large (up to 15 cone diameters) whereas in soft soils the zone of 
influence is rather small (as small as 1 cone diameter).  Ahmadi and Robertson 
(2005) showed that the size of the zone of influence decreased with increasing 
stress (e.g., dense sands behave more like loose sand at high values of effective 
stress).    
 
The zone of influence ahead and behind a cone during penetration will influence 
the cone resistance at any interface (boundary) between two soil types of 
significantly different strength and stiffness.  Hence, it is often important to 
identify 
transitions 
between different 
soil 
types to 
avoid 
possible 
misinterpretation. This issue has become increasingly important with software 
that provides interpretation of every data point from the CPT. When CPT data are 
collected at close intervals (typically every 10 to 50mm) several data points are 
ÔÇśin transitionÔÇÖ when the cone passes an interface between two different soil types 
(e.g., from sand to clay and visa-versa).  The CPT data that is in the transition 
zone can be misleading and indicate the incorrect SBT.  It is possible to identify 
the transition from one soil type to another using the rate of change of Ic (or IB).  
When the CPT is in transition from sand to clay the SBT Ic will move from low 
values in the sand to higher values in the clay.  Robertson and Wride (1998) 
suggested that the approximate boundary between sand-like and clay-like 
behavior is around Ic = 2.60.  Hence, when the rate of change of Ic is rapid and is 
crossing the boundary defined by Ic = 2.60, the cone is likely in transition from a 
sand-like to clay-like soil or vise-versa.  Profiles of Ic can provide a simple means 
to identify and remove these transition zones.  
 
Software, such as CLiq (http://www.geologismiki.gr/Products/CLiq.html) 
includes a feature to identify and remove transition zones (see example in Figure 
53). 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
122 
Several methods have been suggested to correct for transition effects (e.g., 
Boulanger and DeJong, 2018) based on inversion methods.  However, these 
methods are often based on the assumption that the interface between the two soil 
types is sharp.  However, in some cases, the transition may be gradual.  
Application of these inversion methods to evaluate cyclic liquefaction have 
generally not been successful and do not match field performance observations. 
The removal of the transition zones can be considered an extreme case to bracket 
the likely behavior.  Performing analyses for the extreme conditions with and 
without transition zones can aid in understanding the range of possible soil profile 
response. Additional comments on liquefaction analyses are provided in a later 
section. 
 
Clay-like Materials 
Clay-like materials tend to develop pore pressures more slowly under undrained 
cyclic loading, compared to sand-like materials, and generally do not reach zero 
effective stress under cyclic loading.  Hence, clay-like materials are not 
susceptible to complete cyclic liquefaction (i.e., the condition of zero effective 
stress).  However, when the cyclic stress ratio (CSR) is large relative to the 
undrained shear strength ratio of clay-like materials, deformations and softening 
can develop.  Boulanger and Idriss (2007) used the term ÔÇścyclic softeningÔÇÖ to 
define this build-up of deformations under cyclic loading in clay-like soils and 
showed that the CRR for cyclic softening in clay-like materials is controlled by 
the undrained shear strength ratio, which is also controlled by stress history 
(OCR).  Boulanger and Idriss (2007) recommended the following expressions for 
CRR7.5 in natural deposits of clay-like soils: 
 
CRR7.5 = 0.8 (su/´ü│'vc) K´üí 
and  
CRR7.5 = 0.18 (OCR)0.8 K´üí 
 
Where: 
su/´ü│ÔÇÖvc is the undrained shear strength ratio for the appropriate direction of loading. 
 
K´üí is a correction factor to account to static shear stress.  For well-designed 
structures where the factor of safety for static loading is large, K´üí is generally 
close to 0.9.  For heavily loaded soils (e.g., close to foundations) and steeply 
sloping ground, K´üí can be significantly less than 1.0. For seismic loading where 
CSR < 0.6, cyclic softening is possible only in normally to lightly 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                123 
overconsolidated (OCR < 4) clay-like soils. For contractive sand-like soils with a 
static shear stress bias (e.g., steeply sloping ground), K´üí can be smaller than 1.0. 
 
Boulanger and Idriss (2007) recommended three approaches to determine CRR 
for clay-like materials, which are essentially: 
 
1. Estimate using empirical methods based on stress history. 
2. Measure su using in-situ tests (e.g., CPT and FVT). 
3. Measure CRR on high quality samples using appropriate cyclic laboratory 
testing. 
 
The third approach provides the highest level of insight and confidence, whereas 
the first and second approaches use empirical approximations to gain economy.  
For low-risk projects, the first and second approaches are often adequate.  Based 
on the work of Wijewickreme and Sanin (2007), the CRR7.5 for soft low plastic 
silts can also be estimated using the same approach based on either OCR or su 
(even though PI < 10) providing the tests (CPT or FVT) were carried out 
undrained.  
 
The CPT can be used to estimate both undrained shear strength ratio (su/´ü│'vc) and 
stress history (OCR).  The CPT has the advantage that the results are repeatable 
and provide a detailed continuous profile of OCR and hence CRR7.5.   
 
Robertson (2009) recommended the following CPT-based approach that can be 
applied to all soils (i.e., no Ic cut-off):  
 
When Ic ÔëĄ 2.50, assume soils are sand-like and CPT penetration is essentially 
drained: 
 
Use Robertson and Wride (1998) recommendation based on  
Qtn,cs = Kc Qtn,  
 
where Kc is a function of Ic (updated by Robertson, 2022, see Figure 48) 
 
When Ic > 2.70, assume soils are clay-like and CPT penetration is essentially 
undrained, where: 
 
CRR7.5 = 0.053 Qtn K´üí 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
124 
 
When 2.50 < Ic < 2.70, transition region: 
 
Use Robertson and Wride (1998) approach based on Qtn,cs 
 
where:  Kc = 6x10-7 (Ic)16.76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The recommendations where 2.50 < Ic < 2.70 represent a transition from 
essentially drained cone penetration to essentially undrained cone penetration 
where the soils transition from predominately sand-like to predominately clay-
like.   
 
Based on the above approach, the contour of CRR7.5 = 0.50 (for K´üí = 1.0) on the 
CPT SBTn chart is shown in Figure 50, compared to case history field 
observations.  For low-risk projects, the CRR7.5 for cyclic softening in clay-like 
soils can be estimated using generally conservative correlations from the CPT.  
For medium-risk projects, field vane tests (FVT) can also be used to provide site 
specific correlations with the CPT. For high-risk projects high quality undisturbed 
samples should be obtained and appropriate cyclic laboratory testing performed.  
Since sampling and laboratory testing can be slow and expensive, sample 
locations should be based on preliminary screening using the CPT. 
 
The approach described above (Robertson, 2009 for all soils) tends to work well 
in soil profiles that have well defined deposits of either sand-like or clay-like soils.  
However, the approach can be conservative in profiles where a significant volume 
of soil plots in the transition region where 2.5 < Ic < 2.7.  In these cases, samples 
should be obtained to clarify soil behavior.  It can be helpful to run analysis using 
both the NCEER/RW98 method for sand-like soils and Robertson (2009) method 
for all soils, to evaluate the sensitivity of results to soil type. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                125 
 
 
Figure 50.   Cyclic Resistance Ratio (CRR)M = 7.5 using CPT 
(After Robertson, 2009) 
 
 
3. Evaluate of Post-earthquake Deformations 
 
There have been several simplified indices developed to estimate the level of 
surface damage due to liquefaction. The first was the Liquefaction Potential Index 
(LPI) proposed by Iwasaki (1978) that provided a linear weighting to the 
calculated factor of safety against liquefaction (1-FSliq) in the upper 20m of soil 
and linked the LPI to the severity of surface damage.  
 
After the Christchurch, New Zealand earthquakes of 2010-11, Tonkin and Taylor 
(2013) developed a Liquefaction Severity Index (LSN) that uses depth weighted 
calculated volumetric strain within soil layers as a proxy for the severity of 
liquefaction damage likely at the ground surface. The strain calculation method 
considers strains that occur when soils have a calculated FSliq below 2.0. This 
means that the LSN begins to increase smoothly as FSliq decreases, rather than 
when the FSliq reaches 1.0. One other aspect of LSN is that strains self-limit based 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
126 
on the initial density as the FSliq decreases, so a given soil profile has a maximum 
LSN that it tends towards as the PGA increases. 
 
These simplified indices can be a helpful guide to expected surface damages based 
on past case history performance but ignore the potential post-shaking hydraulic 
mechanisms that may lead to incorrect estimation of liquefaction-induced ejecta. 
 
Vertical deformations  
The primary mechanisms of liquefaction-induced settlement of structures are 
volumetric-induced, shear-induced (from nearby foundations), and ejecta-induced 
deformations.   
 
Volumetric-induced 1D settlements are often the most dominate mechanism that 
produces surface settlements. For low to medium-risk projects and for preliminary 
estimates for high-risk projects, post-earthquake volumetric-induced 1D 
settlements can be estimated using various empirical methods to estimate post-
earthquake volumetric strains (e.g., Zhang et al., 2002).  The method by Zhang et 
al (2002) uses the FSliq from the Robertson and Wride (1998) method to provide 
a detailed vertical profile of estimated volumetric strains at each CPT location.  
The summation of these volumetric strains provides an estimate of the post-
earthquake surface settlements. Idriss and Boulanger (2008) suggested a method 
that is essentially the same approach but uses the FSliq determined from their 
method.  The calculated volumetric strains are also used to determine the LSN.  
 
The CPT-based 1D approach is generally conservative since it is typically applied 
to all CPT data often using either commercially available software (e.g., CLiq) or 
in-house software.  The CPT-based 1D approach captures low (minimum) cone 
values in soil layers and in transition zones at soil boundaries.  These low cone 
values in transition zones often result in accumulated volumetric strains that tend 
to increase the estimated settlement.  Engineering judgment should be used to 
remove excessive conservatism in highly inter-bedded deposits where there are 
frequent transition zones at soil boundaries.  Software can remove values in 
transition zones at soil boundaries (e.g., CLiq from http://www.geologismiki.gr/).   
 
Robertson and Shao (2010) suggested a simplified CPT-based method to estimate 
the seismic compression in unsaturated soils.  This method includes a factor of 2 
to account for multi-directional loading.  However, experience suggests that this 
added factor of 2 is overly conservative.  
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                127 
In clay-like soils the post-earthquake volumetric strains due to cyclic softening 
will be less than those experienced by sand-like soils due to cyclic liquefaction.  
A typical value of 0.5% or less is appropriate for most clay-like soils.  Robertson 
(2009) suggested a simplified approach to estimate the post-earthquake 
volumetric strains in clay-like soils based on CPT results. For high-risk projects, 
selected high quality sampling and appropriate laboratory testing may be 
necessary in critical zones identified by the simplified approach. 
 
Engineering judgment is required to evaluate the consequences of the calculated 
1D vertical settlements from volumetric-induced strains considering soil 
variability, depth of the liquefied layers, thickness of non-liquefied soils above 
liquefied soils and project details (see Zhang et al., 2002).  Displacement of 
buildings located above soils that experience liquefaction will depend on 
foundation details and depth, thickness, and lateral distribution of liquefied soils. 
In general, building movements result from a combination of shear-induced and 
volumetric strains plus possible loss of ground due to ejected soil (sand boils, 
etc.).   
 
Case histories have shown that shallow foundations with a shallow liquifiable 
layer can also undergo large shear-induced movements that cannot be estimated 
using available 1D procedures. Bray and Macedo (2017) suggested a simplified 
method to estimate the additional settlement that can occur from shear-induced 
movements below a building. Bray and Macedo (2017) showed that well designed 
shallow foundations (i.e., high factor of safety against bearing capacity failure) 
with deep liquefiable layer will largely undergo volumetric reconsolidation that 
can be estimated using 1D procedures. 
 
Hutabarat and Bray (2022) suggested a simplified method to estimate the severity 
of liquefaction ejecta-induced deformation. They showed that the severity was a 
function of the liquefaction demand (LD), caused by upward seepage pressures 
that can produce artesian flow from liquefaction induced excess pore pressures, 
and the crust layer resistance (CR) based on the strength and thickness of non-
liquefiable crust layer. Low LD values tend to be estimated at stratified soil sites, 
whereas high LD values are calculated at sites with thick liquefiable sand deposits. 
CR improves the reliability of the procedure by differentiating the performance of 
sites with or without a competent crust layer overlying a thick liquefiable layer 
with a high LD value. The Hutabrat and Bray (2022) chart is shown in Figure 51. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
128 
 
 
Figure 51.   Liquefaction-induced ejecta severity chart 
(After Hutabarat and Bray, 2022) 
 
Liquefaction-induced ejecta deformations tend to be higher at sites with thick 
liquefiable sand layers close to the ground surface combined with a thin weak 
non-liquifiable crust.  This is consistent with the observations made by Ishihara 
(1985) that linked liquefaction-induced surface damage to the thickness of the 
liquefiable sand layer and the thickness of overlying surface non-liquefiable crust. 
 
There are some cases in which the LD ÔÇô CR chart has been shown to be less reliable 
and these cases include: 
 
´éĚ A medium-to-dense thick sand may produce more ejecta due to post-
shaking upward seepage-induced secondary liquefaction, though 
liquefaction is only triggered in a limited layer resulting in potential 
underestimation. 
´éĚ A deep layer with a low FSliq may reduce the seismic demand at shallow 
depths, which simplified triggering procedures indicate will liquefy, 
resulting in potential overestimation.  Additionally, a partially stratified 
site with an intermediate low-permeable layer may not produce ejecta 
due to reduced upward seepage.  
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                129 
 
Lateral Deformations 
For low to medium-risk projects and for preliminary evaluation for high-risk 
projects, post-earthquake lateral deformation (lateral spreading) can be estimated 
using various empirical methods (Youd et al, 2002 and Zhang et al, 2004).  The 
method by Zhang et al (2004) has the advantage that it is based on CPT results 
and can provide a detailed vertical profile of strains at each CPT location. The 
Zhang et al (2004) method provides an index of lateral displacement (LDI) using 
a summation of estimated shear strains and then adjusts this (based on case history 
performance) to estimate the lateral displacement (LD) for the input ground 
geometry. Boulanger and Idriss (2008) suggested a similar approach but did not 
extend the approach beyond the LDI. Hence, it is not possible to compare the 
Zhang et al (2002) calculated LD with the Boulanger and Idriss (2008) LDI. 
 
The CPT-based approach is generally conservative since it is typically applied to 
all CPT data and captures low (minimum) cone values in soil layers and in 
transition zones at soil boundaries.  These low cone values in transition zones 
often result in accumulated shear strains that tend to increase the estimated lateral 
deformations.  Engineering judgment should be used to remove excessive 
conservatism in highly inter-bedded deposits where there are frequent transition 
zones at soil boundaries. Software can remove values in transition zones at soil 
boundaries (e.g., CLiq from http://www.geologismiki.gr/). 
  
Engineering judgment is required to evaluate the consequences of the calculated 
lateral displacements considering, soil variability, site geometry, depth of the 
liquefied layers and project details.  In general, assume that any liquefied layer 
located at a depth more than twice the depth of the free face will have little 
influence on the lateral deformations. However, engineering judgment is required 
based on specific site details.  
 
Sites with layered deposits (interbedded sands and clays) 
Cubrinovski et al (2019) showed that the performance of a site to earthquake 
loading and liquefaction is a system response controlled by the complete soil 
profile.  They showed that existing empirical CPT-based liquefaction methods 
provided generally good predictions of liquefaction and resulting deformations 
for sites composed mostly of sand-like deposits. However, at sites with 
interbedded sand-like and clay-like deposits, the existing empirical methods tend 
to over predict liquefaction and the resulting deformations. The frequent layers of 
clay-like soils tend to reduce the effects of liquefaction.  Cubrinovski et al (2019) 
and others have suggested that 1-D effective stress dynamic analyses should be 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
130 
used to evaluate the performance of sites with layered deposits.  For high-risk 
projects, this maybe an appropriate approach.  For low to medium-risk projects, 
the simplified approach can be used but it is important to recognize that the 
predicted liquefaction and resulting deformations will likely be conservative.  The 
method by Hutabarat and Bray (2022) includes a simplified approach to estimate 
the amount of earthquake induced pore pressures that can be helpful to understand 
the likely distribution of high pore pressures and how clay layers may limit the 
effects of these pore pressures on the overall performance of the site. 
 
When the calculated lateral deformations using the above empirical methods are 
very large (i.e., shear strains of more than 30%) the soils should also be evaluated 
for susceptibility for strength loss/reduction (see next section on flow liquefaction 
in sloping ground) and the overall stability against a flow slide evaluated.  
 
Where appropriate for high-risk projects, dynamic effective stress analyses (ESA) 
can be carried out to provide some insights, as described by Hutabarat and Bray 
(2021) and Cubrinovski et al. (2019). 
 
 
General comments on evaluation of Cyclic Liquefaction 
Robertson and Wride (1998) (and updated by Robertson, 2016) suggested zones 
in which soils are susceptible to liquefaction based on the normalized soil 
behavior chart.  An update of the chart is shown in Figure 52 along with general 
guidelines related to the evaluation of either cyclic or flow liquefaction.   
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                131 
 
Figure 52   Zones of potential liquefaction/softening based on the CPT 
(See Figure 25b for details) 
 
Sand-like soils (SD & SC, IB > 32) - Evaluate potential behavior using CPT-based case-history 
liquefaction correlations. 
SD      
 Cyclic liquefaction possible depending on level and duration of cyclic loading. 
SC           Cyclic liquefaction and (flow-liquefaction) strength loss possible depending on 
loading and ground geometry. 
 
Clay-like soils (CD & CC, IB < 22) ÔÇô Evaluate potential behavior based on in-situ and/or 
laboratory test measurements. 
CD       
 Cyclic softening possible depending on level and duration of cyclic loading. 
CC/CCS  Cyclic softening and (flow-liquefaction) strength loss possible depending on soil 
sensitivity and plasticity, loading and ground geometry. 
 
Transition soils (TD & TC, 32 > IB > 22) ÔÇô Evaluate potential behavior based on in-situ and/or 
laboratory test measurements. 
TD           Cyclic liquefaction possible depending on level and duration of cyclic loading. 
TC 
      Cyclic softening and (flow-liquefaction) strength loss possible depending on soil 
sensitivity and plasticity, loading and ground geometry. 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
132 
 
 
The evaluation of liquefaction can be somewhat complex due to the many 
variables involved. It is common to use commercial software to aid in the 
analyses. Ideally software, such as CPeT-IT should be used first to process the 
CPT data to ensure quality control and to gain insight into the ground profile and 
groundwater conditions. After processing using CPeT-IT, the CPT data file can 
be imported into CPT-based liquefaction software such as CLiq.  In the evaluation 
of cyclic liquefaction, the ÔÇścorrectÔÇÖ answer is typically not know since the design 
earthquake is probabilistic in nature with many variables, and most current CPT-
based methods are deterministic in nature, also with many variables.  However, 
software can be used to bracket the expected answer in terms of both liquefaction 
and the resulting deformations.  If the current CPT-based methods are applied as 
published, the results tend to be conservative.  CLiq allows the user to compare 
different methods in a simple and efficient manner.  Ideally, each method should 
produce somewhat similar results.  If the results differ significantly, they should 
be evaluated to determine the likely reasons for the differences. Typically, when 
a site is composed predominately of sand-like soils in the upper 12m and with a 
high ground water level (zw < 4m) and for a design earthquake with Mw < 8 (see 
database summary in Figure 47), the methods often provide similar results, since 
they were all based on similar database sites.  Differences occur when the site is 
composed of either interlayered soils (sands and clays) or with input values 
outside of the range obtained from the case histories. 
 
A detail to remember is that the CRR is based on the in-situ stresses (depth and 
groundwater conditions) at the time of the CPT to get the correct normalized Qtn,cs, 
but the CSR is based on the estimated in-situ stresses at the time of the earthquake 
(e.g., the depth and groundwater conditions may differ). It is important to apply 
comparable return periods for the earthquake and the assumed groundwater 
conditions at the time of the design earthquake to avoid excess conservatism. 
 
Sensitivity analyses should be carried out changing the major variables (e.g., 
earthquake loading (e.g., Mw and amax) and soil conditions (e.g., unit weights, 
groundwater, transition zones) to gain insight into the sensitivity of results.  
 
An example of a CPT-based method to evaluate cyclic liquefaction is shown on 
Figure 53 for a Moss Landing site that suffered cyclic liquefaction and lateral 
spreading during the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in California (Boulanger et al., 
1995).  Note that transitions zones are identified in red. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                133 
 
 
 
 
Figure 53. Example of CPT-based approach to evaluate cyclic liquefaction at 
Moss Landing Site showing (a) intermediate parameters (b) CRR, FS and post-
earthquake deformations using ÔÇśCLiqÔÇÖ software (http://www.geologismiki.gr/)  
 
CLiq provides option to compare results over a range of earthquake inputs (e.g., 
range of both M and amax, as shown in Figure 54. The example shows that if the 
earthquake was larger (e.g., higher amax) the resulting vertical settlements are not 
overly sensitive, since liquefaction has mostly been triggered.  However, if the 
earthquake was smaller the results become quite sensitive since less of the profile 
will be triggered and eventually, when amax is below around 0.1 (in this case), very 
little of the profile will experience liquefaction. 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
134 
 
 
 
Figure 54. Example of CPT-based sensitivity to earthquake variables (Mw and 
amax)  
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                135 
Flow (static) Liquefaction (Steeply Sloping Sites) 
 
Steeply sloping ground is defined as: 
1. Steeply sloping ground (slope angle > 5 degrees) 
2. Earth embankments (e.g., dams, tailings structures) 
 
Flow liquefaction can occur in any saturated or near saturated loose soil, such as 
very loose sands and silts as well as sensitive clays and is a major design issue for 
large soil structures such as mine tailings impoundments and earth dams.  For a 
slope to experience instability due to flow liquefaction the following conditions 
are required: 
 
´éĚ Loose saturated or near saturated soils that are contractive at large strains 
and can experience significant and rapid strength loss/reduction in 
undrained shear 
´éĚ High static shear stresses relative to the resulting large strain undrained 
shear strength (e.g., steeply sloping ground) 
´éĚ Event(s) that can trigger strength loss 
´éĚ Sufficient volume of loose saturated and near saturated soils for instability 
to manifest, and 
´éĚ Suitable geometry to enable instability. 
 
If a soil can strain soften in undrained shear and hence is susceptible to flow 
liquefaction, an estimate of the resulting large strain liquefied shear strength is 
required for stability analyses.  Many procedures have been published for 
estimating the residual or liquefied shear strength of soils.  Robertson (2010) 
outlined a method to evaluate both the susceptibility of soils to undrained strength 
loss that could result in flow liquefaction as well as a method to estimate the 
resulting liquefied undrained shear strength of predominately sand-like soils using 
cone penetration test (CPT) data. Robertson (2022) updated the method to extend 
the approach to all soils.  The CPT process is essentially drained in sand-like soils 
and any correlation to estimate both susceptibility and undrained shear strength 
requires a link to an intermediate parameter, such as state parameter (´ü╣), which 
was the general approach taken by Plewes et al (1992), Jefferies and Been (2016) 
and Robertson (2010).  In clay-like soils, the CPT process is essentially undrained, 
and the residual undrained shear strength can be estimated directly from the CPT 
sleeve resistance, fs, since fs ~ su(r). 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
136 
 
 
Sequence to evaluate flow liquefaction (i.e., strength loss/reduction) 
1. Evaluate susceptibility for strength loss/reduction in undrained 
shear 
2. Evaluate large strain (residual/liquefied) undrained shear strengths 
3. Evaluate stability using the large strain undrained shear strengths 
4. Evaluate if strength loss will be triggered 
 
Case histories have shown that when significant and rapid strength loss occurs in 
critical sections of a soil structure, the resulting failures are often very fast, occur 
with little warning and the resulting deformations are often very large (e.g., 
Morgenstern et al, 2016, Robertson et al, 2019).  Experience has also shown that 
the trigger events can be very small (Robertson et al, 2019). For structures where 
the consequences of failure are high (e.g., loss of life and/or significant 
environmental and reputational damage), it is prudent to assume that strength loss 
will be triggered since it is often impossible to design with confidence based on 
an assumption that strength loss will not be triggered at some time in the life of 
the structure. In seismic regions, even small earthquakes can trigger strength loss 
if the soils are susceptible and are under high static shear stresses. In general, the 
emphasis in design is primarily on the evaluation of susceptibility to strength loss 
and the resulting large strain undrained shear strength.   
 
1. Evaluate Susceptibility for Strength Loss in undrained shear 
 
The behavior of soils in shear prior to failure can be classified into two main 
groups; soils that dilate at large strains and soils that contract at large strains.  
Saturated (or near saturated) soils that contract at large strains have a shear 
strength in undrained shear that is lower than the strength in drained loading due 
to the resulting increase in pore pressure and decrease in effective confining stress. 
Saturated soils that dilate at large strains tend to have a shear strength in undrained 
loading that is either equal to or larger than in drained loading.  However, since 
the benefits from dilation cannot be relied upon in the long term, it is common to 
apply drained shear strength parameters for dilative soil. When saturated (and near 
saturated) soils contract at large strains they can experience strain softening 
(strength loss) in undrained shearing, although not all soils that contract at large 
strains have a strain softening response in undrained shear (Robertson, 2017).  The 
more contractive the soil, the larger the potential strength loss/reduction in 
undrained shear.   
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                137 
Robertson (2016) provided an updated CPT-based soil behavior type (SBT) chart 
that proposed a simplified boundary to identify if soils would be either contractive 
or dilative at large strains (Figure 52). The boundary was defined as follows, soils 
are contractive when CD < 70, where: 
 
CD = (Qtn ÔÇô 11) (1 + 0.06 Fr)17 
 
The relationship applies to soils with little or no microstructure, e.g., geologically 
young (i.e., less than 10,000 years) and/or unbonded soils (i.e., no cementation).   
  
The tendency for soils to change volume during shear covers a wide spectrum 
from highly contractive to highly dilative. Very loose soils tend to contract 
continuously toward critical state (CS), whereas moderately loose soils can 
initially contract then dilate somewhat before reaching critical state. In undrained 
shear, moderately loose saturated sand-like soils may experience some strain 
softening followed by strain hardening during strain-controlled triaxial 
compression testing. The strain hardening at large strains observed in moderately 
loose sand-like soils in strain-controlled laboratory triaxial compression tests may 
not be observed under load-controlled conditions in the field due to the inertia 
effects of the dead load (Castro, 1969).  Hence, the observed strain-hardening in 
the laboratory on moderately loose sand-like samples under strain-controlled 
loading may not be experienced in the field under gravity loads. For this reason, 
the suggested boundary to define contractive soils based on CPT data tends to be 
slightly conservative, as described by Robertson (2016). Some researchers 
(Yoshimine et al, 1999) have suggested that the critical state line (CSL) for design 
should be defined using the minimum strength values, sometimes referred to as 
quasi-steady state, from triaxial compression tests. 
 
If layers/zones of low permeability materials exist that could inhibit pore water 
redistribution after seismic loading and promote void redistribution, increase 
conservatism when evaluating susceptibility for strength loss. 
 
2.  Evaluate large strain (residual/liquefied) undrained shear strengths 
 
Sand-like and transitional soils (Ic < 3.0) 
In sand-like soils, with a soil behavior type index Ic < 2.60, where the CPT 
penetration process is predominately drained, Robertson (2010) suggested the 
normalized cone resistance (Qtn) can be linked to state parameter (´ü╣) using a clean 
sand equivalent normalized cone resistance (Qtn,cs) defined by: 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
138 
 
Qtn,cs = Qtn Kc 
 
Where, Qtn,cs is the clean sand equivalent normalized cone resistance and Kc is a 
correction factor to account for changing behavior with increasing fines content 
and compressibility.  
 
Robertson (2010) suggested a link between Qtn,cs and ´ü╣´Çáfor sand-like soils, as 
follows: 
 
´ü╣ = 0.56 ÔÇô 0.33 Log (Qtn,cs) 
 
A similar relationship was also suggested by Been et al (2012).  However, in 
transition soils with 2.6 < Ic < 3.0 (e.g., silty sands and sandy silts), the CPT 
penetration can be partially drained where small excess pore pressures can be 
measured. In these soils, the correlation to state parameter becomes somewhat less 
reliable. To account for partial drainage, Robertson (2022) suggested that the 
correction factor (Kc) to obtain Qtn,cs be modified for Ic < 3.0 is as follows: 
 
Kc = 1.8346 Ic5 ÔÇô 23.673 Ic4 + 124.02 Ic3 ÔÇô 320.616 Ic2 + 405.821 Ic ÔÇô 199.97 
  
or the simplified version: 
 
  
When Ic < 1.7, Kc = 1.0 (i.e., no correction in clean sands).  
 
The objective of the modification was to join the relationship in sand-like soils, 
based on drained CPT data, to those in clay-like soils, based on undrained CPT 
data. The modified Kc relationship should not be extended beyond Ic = 3.0, where 
undrained penetration occurs.  Robertson (2022) suggested that the modified Kc 
should also be used to evaluate cyclic liquefaction, since cyclic liquefaction is 
generally 
limited 
to 
sand-like 
soils 
with 
Ic 
< 
2.60.        
 
The correlation between Qtn,cs and the large strain liquefied undrained strength 
ratio (su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo), suggested by Robertson (2010) for predominately sand-like 
soils, has also been updated and simplified to allow the relationship to be extended 
to higher values of Qtn,cs, where the soils are dilative at large strains and where the 
design shear strength is controlled by the drained strength. The updated 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                139 
relationship, shown in Figure 55, has been extended to include transitional soils 
where Ic < 3.0 by using the modified Kc. Included in Figure 55, for reference, are 
the class A and B case history data points from Robertson (2010) but updated 
based on modified Qtn,cs values and with cases removed when Ic > 3.  Also included 
on Figure 55 are best estimate representative values for the coarse tailings (Ic < 
3.0) from the Fundao and Feijao case histories (Morgenstern et al, 2016; 
Robertson et al, 2019). A shaded region is also added to illustrate the likely range 
of uncertainty for the evaluation of large strain liquefied undrained strength ratio.  
Figure 55 also illustrates that when sand-like soils are contractive at large strains 
(i.e., Qtn,cs < 70) the undrained shear strength is less than the drained strength and 
when sand-like soils are strongly dilative at large strains (Qtn,cs > 80), the drained 
strength is less than the undrained shear strength. Between 70 < Qtn,cs < 80 the 
soils can be initially contractive but become progressively more dilative with 
increasing strains and the undrained shear strength ratio can be high but remains 
slightly less than the drained strength ratio, defined by tan´üŽÔÇÖ. 
 
The simplified and updated suggested correlation to estimate the large strain 
liquified undrained strength ratio, su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo for sand-like and transitional soils, 
when Ic < 3.0 is: 
 
su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo = 0.0007exp (0.084 Qtn,cs) + 0.3/Qtn,cs 
 
When Qtn,cs < 20, assume su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo = 0.02 but use su(liq) = 1kPa, as a lower bound 
when ´ü│ÔÇÖvo < 50kPa.  The minimum value of 1kPa represents the approximate 
undrained strength of clay-like soil when a semi-liquid (i.e., at the liquid limit) to 
avoid estimating lower values at low effective overburden stress.  Selection of 
values lower than 1kPa should be supported by data from good quality samples 
where in-situ water contents are greater than the liquid limit.  
 
This relationship applies when Qtn,cs < 80, after which the drained shear strength 
ratio will typically control (i.e., tan´üŽÔÇÖ), as illustrated on Figure 55.  The peak 
drained shear strength is influenced by the constant volume (critical state) friction 
angle (´üŽÔÇÖcv) and dilatancy, however, the large strain drained shear strength is 
controlled more by ´üŽ'cv.  Dilatancy is linked to state parameter for which Qtn,cs is 
a proxy when Ic < 3.0.  Robertson (2012) suggested a simplified method to 
estimate the peak drained friction angle (´üŽ') based on Qtn,cs, as follow: 
 
´üŽ' = ´üŽ'cv + 15.84 [log Qtn,cs] ÔÇô 26.88´Çá
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
140 
This requires an estimate of ´üŽÔÇÖcv, that can be made using either an empirical 
relationship based on grain characteristic (e.g., grain roundness using Cho et al, 
2006 ) or simple laboratory tests (e.g., measure angle of repose for very loose sand 
samples).  The equivalent drained shear strength ratio values, shown in Figure 55, 
start at Qtn,cs = 50 where ´ü╣´Çá= 0.  The sloping lines, shown in Figure 55 when Qtn,cs 
> 50, capture the peak strength due to added dilatancy, but the values shown at 
Qtn,cs = 50, for various ´üŽ'cv, better represent the large strain shear strength ratio.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 55.   Relationship between large-strain shear strength ratio and Qtn,cs 
when Ic < 3.0 (After, Robertson, 2022) 
 
 
The relationship to estimate su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo for sand-like and transitional soils and 
shown in Figure 55 is based primarily on case histories where the effective vertical 
overburden stress at failure (´ü│ÔÇÖvo) was less than 3 atmospheres (i.e., < 300kPa) 
with most cases less than 2 atmospheres.  Robertson (2017) showed that 
increasing effective overburden tends to make loose sand-like soils behave in a 
more ductile manner with less strength loss due to the curvature of the critical 
state line (CSL). The result is that su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo increases with increasing ´ü│ÔÇÖvo and 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                141 
moves toward a value of around 0.22 to 0.25, like the peak (yield) undrained 
strength ratio, at high overburden stresses.  The rate at which su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo increases 
is a function of the compressibility of the soil and the curvature of the CSL.  For 
design purposes, the relationship shown in Figure 55 can be applied to provide a 
reasonable estimate of su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo up to ´ü│ÔÇÖvo = 300kPa.  For higher stress levels the 
estimated values of su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo maybe conservatively low and advanced laboratory 
testing is required to guide any increase in su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo due to the curvature of the 
CSL. Robertson (2017) provided an approximate guide to estimate the effective 
overburden stress when the undrained behavior would become more ductile and 
su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo would approach a value closer to 0.25 based on the CPT friction ratio, 
as shown on Figure 56. 
 
 
Figure 56. Relationship between pre-failure vertical effective stress and CPT 
normalized friction ratio for flow liquefaction case histories and selected 
laboratory results (After Robertson, 2017) 
 
Olson and Stark (2003) proposed a relationship to estimate the peak (yield) 
undrained strength ratio for sands based on CPT data.  However, estimating the 
peak (yield) undrained shear strength ratio in sand-like soils is very approximate 
due to factors such as microstructure (e.g., age and bonding), anisotropic stress 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
142 
state and direction of loading. The Olson and Stark (2003) relationship used 
measured cone resistance, qc, in units of MPa. Since the relationship was 
suggested for clean sands, it is reasonable to also represent it in terms of the clean 
sand equivalent (Qtn,cs).  To illustrate the difference between the peak (yield) and 
liquefied undrained strength ratio values as a function of Qtn,cs a dashed line has 
also been added to Figure 55 to illustrate the approximate location of the average 
peak (yield) undrained strength ratio for sand-like soils with little or no 
microstructure (i.e., little or no bonding and/or aging).  Included on Figure 55 are 
the case history data from Olson and Stark (2003) using updated Qtn,cs values based 
on the data in Robertson (2010) to illustrate the range of uncertainty. This 
comparison illustrates the potentially large difference between any possible peak 
(yield) undrained strength and liquefied strength in loose sand-like soils.  Limit 
equilibrium methods using peak undrained shear strengths can be misleading 
when applied to soils that can experience significant strength loss/reduction 
(Robertson et al, 2019) which introduces added uncertainty when applying peak 
undrained shear strength values for design.  Hence, caution is needed before using 
peak (yield) undrained strength values to evaluate stability when there is a risk of 
significant and rapid strength loss/reduction.  In general, the large strain 
liquefied/remolded undrained shear strength should be applied to evaluate the 
likelihood of instability when there is a risk of significant strength loss/reduction. 
 
Clay-like soils (when Ic > 3.0) 
In clay-like soils the liquefied undrained strength (su(liq)) is essentially the same 
as the remolded undrained shear strength (su(r)) since both occur at large strains.  
Robertson and Campanella (1983), Lunne et al (1997) and others have shown 
that in clay-like soils, where the CPT process is essentially undrained, the 
remolded undrained shear strength is approximately equal to the measured CPT 
sleeve friction, fs, since both are occurring undrained and at large strains. Hence: 
 
su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo = fs/´ü│ÔÇÖvo  = Fr Qtn/100 
 
This relationship can be represented by diagonal straight lines on the Qtn-Fr soil 
behavior type (SBT) chart, as shown on Figure 57. Figure 57 shows the resulting 
complete contours for su(liq)/´ü│ÔÇÖvo on the SBT chart for a wide range of soil behavior 
types, based on combining equations 2, 4, 5 and 7. 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                143 
 
 
Figure 57.  CPT-based SBT chart showing contours of large strain su.liq/r =´Çá´ü│ÔÇÖvo 
 
 
To illustrate the application in a normally consolidated clay-like soil with no 
strength loss (sensitivity, St = 1.0) the normalized CPT parameters are typically 
around Qtn = 3.5 and Fr = 7%.  The contours shown on Figure 57 would correctly 
indicate that the estimated peak and remolded undrained shear strength ratio are 
the same at 0.25, where the peak undrained shear strength ratio is represented by 
Qtn/Nkt (where Nkt ~ 14). If the original Qtn,cs (i.e., state parameter) contours are 
extended into the clay-like region, the estimated liquefied/remolded shear strength 
ratio for the same clay would have been close to 0.10, which is inconsistent with 
the historical CPT database for clay-like soils.  For a normally consolidated clay-
like soil that has a remolded undrained shear strength ratio of around 0.10 (i.e., a 
sensitivity of more than 2.5) the friction ratio would be expected to be less than 
3% along with Qtn = 3.5 (Lunne et al, 1997). 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
144 
 
Jefferies and Been (2016) use a dimensionless cone resistance, Qt that is 
normalized by a stress exponent of 1.0.  In the clay-like region where Ic > 3.0, the 
normalization used by Robertson (2010a) is the same (i.e., Qtn = Qt), since both 
use a stress exponent of 1.0 in the clay-like region.  The approach taken by 
Jefferies and Been (2016) attempts to capture the influence of changing drainage 
conditions during the CPT by incorporating the measured pore pressure behind 
the cone (u2) to calculate an ÔÇśeffectiveÔÇÖ cone resistance.  However, the application 
of a single pore pressure measurement located behind the cone (u2) is unlikely to 
fully represent the effective stresses around the cone tip and Robertson (2009) 
provided a more detailed discussion on the limitations of using an ÔÇśeffectiveÔÇÖ cone 
resistance.  
 
The comprehensive book by Jefferies and Been (2016) outlines a modification to 
their suggested correlation between state parameter and liquefied undrained 
strength ratio for sand-like soils based on the slope of the critical state line (CSL), 
´üČ10.  Essentially, for a soil with a contractive state parameter (where ´ü╣ > -0.05) 
the liquefied undrained strength ratio increases as ´üČ10 increases (i.e., the steeper 
the CSL the smaller the strength loss for a given contractive state parameter).  
Previous publications (Plewes et al, 1992; Reid, 2015; Jefferies and Been, 2016) 
have shown that ´üČ10 increases with Ic. In the clay-like region where Ic > 3.0, the 
estimated value is ´üČ10 > 0.15 (Reid, 2015). Using the modified correlation 
suggested by Jefferies and Been (2016) for ´üČ10 > 0.15 the resulting liquefied 
undrained strength ratio values are like those shown in Figure 57 when Ic > 3.0.  
Hence, the suggested relationship shown in Figure 57 is consistent with the 
updated, but more complex, relationships suggested by Jefferies and Been (2016). 
 
Summary: 
´éĚ Evaluate if soils are contractive at large strain based on the simplified CPT-
based boundary suggested by Robertson (2016) using CD < 70. An 
alternate and complementary approach is to plot the CPT data directly onto 
the Qtn-Fr SBT chart shown in Figure 57. 
´éĚ If soils are contractive at large strains and predominately sand-like (Ic < 
3.0), estimate the large strain liquefied undrained strength ratio based on 
Qtn,cs. This applies to soils that have an in-situ ´ü│ÔÇÖvo < 300kPa and where Qtn,cs 
is calculated using the updated Kc correlation.  When ´ü│ÔÇÖvo, > 300 kPa 
laboratory testing is required to evaluate the curvature of the CSL that may 
result in modification of the suggested correlations, and Figure 56 can be 
used as a first estimate. Since the CSL is measured at large strains and is 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                145 
controlled by grain characteristics, it is generally appropriate to determine 
the CSL using representative reconstituted samples. In general, increasing 
effective overburden stresses tend to make soil behave move clay-like and 
where the CPT data tend to migrate into the clay-like region on the SBT 
chart. 
´éĚ If soils are contractive at large strain and predominately clay-like (Ic > 3.0), 
estimate the large strain liquefied/remolded undrained strength directly 
from fs since the CPT penetration process is also undrained. In clay-like 
soils additional supporting data can be obtained from appropriate field vane 
testing as well as high quality sampling and laboratory testing, where 
possible. 
´éĚ If soils are dilative at large strain and sand-like, the effective stress peak 
friction angle can be estimated using Qtn,cs and ´üŽÔÇÖcv.   
 
The measured penetration pore pressures (u2) during the CPT can also be used to 
evaluate and/or confirm drainage conditions during the CPT as well as 
dilative/contractive behavior at large strains.  If u2 is small relative to the cone 
resistance, qt, the penetration process is essentially drained.  The rate of 
dissipation during CPT dissipation tests can also be used to evaluate drainage 
conditions in more fine-grained soils. If the time for 50% dissipation (t50) is 
greater than about 50s the penetration process is essentially undrained (DeJong et 
al, 2012).  
 
3. Evaluate stability using large strain undrained shear strengths  
 
For soil structures where the consequences of failure are high (e.g., loss of life 
and/or significant environmental and reputational damage), it is prudent to assume 
that strength loss/reduction will be triggered, since it is often impossible to design 
with confidence based on an assumption that strength loss/reduction will not be 
triggered at some time in the life of the structure.  Hence, assume that strength 
loss/reduction will be triggered and evaluate the resulting stability using 
conventional limit equilibrium methods. 
 
If Factor of Safety (FS) > 1.1, assume stability is acceptable. For earthquake 
loading evaluate seismic deformations.  
 
For earthquake (seismic) loading, if layers/zones of low permeability exist that 
could inhibit pore water redistribution after seismic loading and promote void 
redistribution, increase conservatism when evaluating post-earthquake shear 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
    
 Cone Penetration Test 
 
 
146 
strengths.  For high-risk projects, the potential for void redistribution can be 
evaluated using more complex effective stress numerical models. 
 
For high-risk projects where the consequences of instability are very high (e.g., 
loss of life, significant environmental damages, and loss of reputation, etc.), if FS 
< 1.1 take mitigation measures to ensure stability and reduce possible 
consequences. In some cases, it may be appropriate to perform advanced 
numerical modelling to evaluate if performance is acceptable using appropriate 
constitutive models and large strain shear strength values.  However, overall 
design should be done within a risk-informed framework. 
 
In conditions where the FS ~ 1.0 using best estimate residual undrained strengths, 
the risk of a flow failure is likely relatively low, since the inertial forces will be 
small, and the result from any possible instability is more likely to be a slump type 
failure. 
 
4. Evaluate if strength loss will be triggered 
 
In general, assume that if soils are susceptible to strength loss/reduction (i.e., flow 
liquefaction) assume that strength loss/reduction will be triggered at some time in 
the life of the structure.   
 
The new Global Industry Standard for Tailings management (GISTM) and the 
supporting Good Practice Guide for Tailings Management, produced by 
International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), suggest a risk-informed 
decision-making approach in design. Risk-informed decision-making is 
underpinned by risk assessment, which comprises a series of steps: risk 
identification, risk analysis, and risk evaluation.  Risk-informed decision-making 
improves and informs risk management (risk reduction) activities. Risk 
management includes the implementation of risk reduction measures, surveillance 
and review, risk communication, and risk recording and reporting. 
 
For high-risk projects perform a risk assessment to aid in identifying risks and the 
corresponding consequences.   
 
The simplified method to evaluate if cyclic liquefaction will be triggered during 
seismic loading is based on case histories with level or gently sloping ground.  
Application of this approach to evaluate if strength loss/reduction will be triggered 
(i.e., flow liquefaction) in steeply sloping ground can be misleading and 
unconservative.  The simplified method includes a correction factor for static 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                  Cone Penetration Test (CPT) 
 
                                                                                147 
shear stresses, K´üí.  In steeply sloping ground the static shear stresses are generally 
high and when soils are contractive at large strain, K´üí is less than 1.0. Hence, K´üí 
can be generally significantly less than 1.0 in steeply sloping ground with 
contractive soils.  
 
 
 
 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
     
 
Software 
 
 
148 
Software 
 
In recent years, commercial software has become available to aid in CPT 
interpretation and geotechnical design using CPT results.  Robertson has been 
involved in the development of two programs: CPeT-IT (pron. C-petit) and CLiq 
(pron. slick).  Both programs are inexpensive and very user friendly and can be 
downloaded from http://www.geologismiki.gr/Products.html. 
 
CPeT-IT is an easy to use yet detailed software package for the interpretation of 
CPT and CPTu data. CPeT-IT takes CPT data and performs basic interpretation 
based on the methods contained in this Guide and supports output in both SI and 
Imperial units.  Overlay plots can be generated and all results are presented in 
tabular and graphical format.  The program also contains simple design tools for 
estimating bearing capacity for shallow foundations, 1-D settlement calculations 
and pile capacity versus depth.  It also contains a tool for interpretation of 
dissipation tests.  Example output from CPeT-IT is shown in Figures 58 to 60. 
CLiq provides users an easy-to-use graphical environment specifically tailored for 
liquefaction analysis using CPT and CPTu data.  The software addresses 
advanced issues such as cyclic softening in clay-like soils and transition zone 
detection.  CLiq provides results and plots for each calculation step, starting with 
the basic CPT data interpretation through to final plots of factor of safety, 
liquefaction potential index and post-earthquake displacements, both vertical and 
lateral displacements. CLiq provides consistent output results by applying the 
NCEER method (Youd et al, 2001; Robertson & Wride, 1998) along with the 
calibrated procedures for post-earthquake displacements by Zhang et al (2002 & 
2004).  It also includes the latest assessment procedure developed by Robertson 
(2010) that is applicable to all soil type combining a check for cyclic liquefaction 
(sands) and cyclic softening (clays).  It also includes the CPT-based liquefaction 
methods suggested by Moss et al (2006) and Boulanger and Idriss (2008/2014). 
A unique 2D feature provides a means of creating colorful contour maps of the 
overall liquefaction potential index (LPI) and post-earthquake settlements in plan 
view thus allowing the user to visualize the spatial variation of liquefaction 
potential and settlements across a site.  The variations of calculated post-
earthquake settlements across a site allow estimates of differential settlements for 
a given site and design earthquake. 
A parametric analysis feature allows the user to vary both the earthquake 
magnitude and surface acceleration to evaluate the sensitivity of both the overall 
CPT Guide - 2022                                                   
 
Software 
 
                                                                                149 
liquefaction potential index and post-earthquake settlements as a function of 
earthquake loading and results are presented in a 3D graphical form.  Example 
output from CLiq are shown in Figures 53 and 54. 
Webinars that demonstrate CPeT-IT and CLiq can be found at: 
https://www.greggdrilling.com/resources/webinars/ 
 
Figure 58.    Example CPTu plot from CPeT-IT 
 
Figure 59.  Example CPTu plot based on normalized parameters from CPeT-IT 
 
CPT Guide - 2022                           
 
 
                      
     
 
Software 
 
 
150 
 
Figure 60.  Example of estimated geotechnical parameters from CPeT-IT 
 
CPT Guide 2022                                                   
 
                        Main References 
                                                                                151 
Main References 
 
 
ASTM-D5778-07. 2007. Standard test method for performing electronic 
friction cone and piezocone penetration testing of soils. ASTM 
International, West Conshohocken, PA, www.astm.org. 
Ahmadi, M.M., and Robertson, P.K., 2005. Thin layer effects on the CPT qc 
measurement. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 42(9): 1302-1317. 
ASTM D5778-12 (2012). Standard Test Method for Performing Electronic 
Friction Cone and Piezocone Penetration Testing of Soils, ASTM 
International. www.astm.org. 
Baldi, G., Bellotti, R., Ghionna, V.N., Jamiolkowski, M., and Lo Presti, 
D.F.C., 1989. Modulus of sands from CPTs and DMTs. In Proceedings of 
the 12th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation 
Engineering. Rio de Janeiro. Balkema Pub., Rotterdam, Vol.1, pp. 165-
170. 
Boggess, R. and Robertson, P.K., 2010. CPT for soft sediments and 
deepwater investigations.  2nd International Symposium on Cone 
Penetration Testing, CPTÔÇÖ10.  Huntington Beach, CA, USA. 
www.cpt10.com 
Bolton, M.D., 1986. The strength and dilatancy of sands. Geotechnique, 
36(1): 65-78. 
Canadian Geotechnical Society 2006. Canadian Foundation Engineering 
Manual, 4th  Edition, BiTech Publishers, Vancouver, BC. 
Campanella, R.G., and Robertson, P.K., 1982. State of the art in In-situ 
testing of soils: developments since 1978. In Proceedings of Engineering 
Foundation Conference on Updating Subsurface Sampling of Soils and 
Rocks and Their In-situ Testing. Santa Barbara, California. January 1982, 
pp. 245-267. 
Campanella, R.G., Gillespie, D., and Robertson, P.K., 1982. Pore pressures 
during cone penetration testing. In Proceedings of the 2nd European 
Symposium on Penetration Testing, ESPOT II. Amsterdam. A.A. 
Balkema, pp. 507-512. 
Eslaamizaad, S., and Robertson, P.K., 1996a. Seismic cone penetration test to 
identify cemented sands. In Proceedings of the 49th Canadian 
Geotechnical Conference. St. JohnÔÇÖs, Newfoundland. September, pp. 352 
ÔÇô 360. 
Eslaamizaad, S., and Robertson, P.K. 1996b. Cone penetration test to 
evaluate bearing capacity of foundation in sands. In Proceedings of the 
CPT Guide - 2022    
 
Main References 
152 
49th Canadian Geotechnical Conference. St. JohnÔÇÖs, Newfoundland. 
September, pp. 429-438. 
Eslaamizaad, S. and Robertson, P.K., 1997. Evaluation of settlement of 
footings on sand from seismic in-sity tests. In Proceedings of the 50th 
Canadian Geotechnical Conference, Ottawa, Ontario, October 1997, 
Vol.2, pp. 755-764. 
Fahey, M. and Carter, J.P., 1993. A finite element study of the pressuremeter 
in sand using a nonlinear elastic plastic model. Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, 30(2): 348-362. 
Hight, D., and Leroueil, S., 2003. Characterization of soils for engineering 
purposes. Characterization and Engineering Properties of Natural Soils, 
Vol.1, Swets and Zeitlinger, Lisse, pp. 255-360. 
Idriss, I.M. and Boulanger, R.W., 2004.  Semi-empirical procedures for 
evaluating liquefaction potential during earthquakes. Proceedings 11th 
International Conference on Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering. 
Berkeley, 32-56.  
IRTP, 1999. International Reference Test Procedure for Cone Penetration 
Test (CPT).  Report of the ISSMFE Technical Committee on Penetration 
Testing of Soils, TC 16, Swedish Geotechnical Institute, Linkoping, 
Information, 7, 6-16. 
Janbu, N., 1963,  Soil Compressibility as determined by oedometer and 
triaxial tests.  Proceedings of the European Conference on Soil 
Mechanicxs and Foundation Engineering, Wiesbaden,  pp 19-25. 
Jamiolkowski, M., Ladd, C.C., Germaine, J.T., and Lancellotta, R., 1985. 
New developments in field and laboratory testing of soils. In Proceedings 
of the 11th International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation 
Engineering. San Francisco, California, August 1985, Vol.1 pp. 57-153. 
Jefferies, M.G., and Davies, M.O, 1991. Soil Classification by the cone 
penetration test: discussion.  Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 28(1): 173-
176. 
Jefferies, M.G., and Davies, M.P., 1993. Use of CPTU to estimate equivalent 
SPT N60. Geotechnical Testing Journal, ASTM, 16(4): 458-468. 
Jefferies, M.G. and Been, K., 2006. Soil Liquefaction ÔÇô A critical state 
approach.  Taylor & Francis, ISBN 0-419-16170-8 478 pages. 
Kayen, R., Moss, R.E.S., Thompson, E.M., Seed, R.B., Cetin, K.O., Der 
Kiureghian, A., Tanaka, Y., and Tokimatsu, K., 2013.  Shear-wave 
velocity-based probabilistic and deterministic assessment of seismic soil 
liquefaction potential, J. of Geotech. and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 
ASCE, 2013.139: 407-419. 
CPT Guide 2022                                                   
 
                        Main References 
                                                                                153 
Karlsrud, K., Lunne, T., Kort, D.A. & Strandvik, S. 2005. CPTU correlations 
for Clays. Proc. 16th ICSMGE, Osaka, September 2005 
Kulhawy, F.H., and Mayne, P.H., 1990. Manual on estimating soil properties 
for foundation design, Report EL-6800 Electric Power Research Institute, 
EPRI, August 1990. 
Ladd, C.C., and Foott, R. (1974). "New design procedure for stability of soft 
clays." J. of the Geotech. Eng. Div., 100(GT7), 763-786. 
Ladd, C.C. & DeGroot, D.J. 2003. Recommended practice for soft ground 
site characterization. Soil and Rock America, Vol. 1 (Proc.12th 
PanAmerican Conf., MIT), Verlag Gl├╝ckauf, Essen: 3-57. 
Lunne, T., Eidsmoen, T., Gillespie, D., and Howland, J.D., 1986.  Laboratory 
and field evaluation on cone penetrometers.  Proceedings of ASCE 
Specialty Conference In SituÔÇÖ86: Use of In Situ Tests in Geotechnical 
Engineering.  Blacksburg, ASCE, GSP 6 714-729 
Lunne, T., Robertson, P.K., and Powell, J.J.M., 1997. Cone penetration 
testing in geotechnical practice. Blackie Academic, EF Spon/Routledge 
Publ., New York, 1997, 312 pp. 
Lunne, T., and Andersen, K.H., 2007.  Soft clay shear strength parameters for 
deepwater geotechnical design.  Proceedings 6th International 
Conference, Society for Underwater Technology, Offshore Site 
Investigation and Geomechanics, London, 151-176. 
Mayne, P.W., 2000.  Enhanced Geotechnical Site Characterization by 
Seismic Piezocone Penetration Test.  Invited lecture, Fourth International 
Geotechnical Conference, Cairo University. pp 95-120. 
Mayne, P.W., 2005. Integrated Ground Behavior: In-Situ and Lab Tests, 
Deformation Characteristics of Geomaterials, Vol. 2 (Proc. Lyon), Taylor 
& Francis, London, pp. 155-177. 
Mayne, P.W., 2007.  NCHRP Synthesis ÔÇśCone Penetration Testing State-of-
PracticeÔÇÖ.  Transportation Research Board Report Project 20-05. 118 
pages. www.trb.org 
Mayne, P.W., 2008. Piezocone profiling of clays for maritime site 
investigations.  11th Baltic Sea Geotechnical Conference. Gdansk, 
Poland., 151- 178.  
Mayne, P.W., Coop, M.R., Springman, S.M., Huang, A.B, and Zornberg, 
J.G., 2009.  Geomaterail behaviour and testing.  State of the Art (SOA) 
paper, 17th ICSMGE Alexandria. 
Mitchell, J.K., Guzikowski, F. and Villet, W.C.B., 1978. The Measurement 
of Soil Properties In-Situ, Report prepared for US Department of Energy 
Contract W-7405-ENG-48, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA, 94720. 
CPT Guide - 2022    
 
Main References 
154 
Molle, J., 2005.  The accuracy of the interpretation of CPT-based soil 
classification methods in soft soils. MSc Thesis, Section for Engineering 
Geology, Department of Applied Earth Sciences, Delf University of 
Technology, Report No. 242, Report AES/IG/05-25, December 
Parez, L. and Faureil, R., 1988. Le pi├ęzoc├┤ne. Am├ęliorations apport├ęes ├á la 
reconnaissance de sols. Revue Fran├žaise de G├ęotech, Vol. 44, 13-27. 
Robertson, P.K., 1990. Soil classification using the cone penetration test. 
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 27(1): 151-158. 
Robertson, P.K., 1998. Risk-based site investigation. Geotechnical News: 45-
47, September 1998. 
Robertson, P.K., 2009a.  Interpretation of cone penetration tests ÔÇô a unified 
approach. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 46:1337-1355. 
Robertson, P.K., 2010a.  Soil behaviour type from the CPT: an update.  2nd 
International Symposium on Cone Penetration Testing, CPTÔÇÖ10, 
Huntington Beach, CA, USA.  www.cpt10.com 
Robertson, P.K., 2010b.  Estimating in-situ state parameter and friction angle 
in sandy soils from the CPT.  2nd International Symposium on Cone 
Penetration Testing, CPTÔÇÖ10, Huntington Beach, CA, USA.  
www.cpt10.com 
Robertson, P.K., 2010c.  Evaluation of Flow Liquefaction and Liquefied 
strength Using the Cone Penetration Test.  Journal of Geotechnical and 
Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, 136(6): 842-853 
Robertson, P.K., 2015, ÔÇťComparing CPT and Vs Liquefaction Triggering 
MethodsÔÇŁ. ASCE Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental 
Engineering, Vol. 141. 
Robertson, P.K., 2016. ÔÇťCPT-based Soil Behaviour Type (SBT) Classification 
System ÔÇô an updateÔÇŁ. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 53(12); pp 1910-
1927. 
Robertson, P.K., 2022. Evaluation of Flow Liquefaction and Liquefied 
Strength Using the Cone Penetration Test: an update. Canadian 
Geotechnical Journal. 
Robertson. P.K., Campanella, R.G., Gillespie, D., and Greig, J., 1986.  Use 
of Piezometer Cone data.  In-SituÔÇÖ86 Use of Ins-itu testing in 
Geotechnical Engineering, GSP 6 , ASCE, Reston, VA, Specialty 
Publication, SM 92, pp 1263-1280. 
Robertson, P.K., Sully, J.P., Woeller, D.J., Lunne, T., Powell, J.J.M. and 
Gillespie, D., 1992. Estimating coefficient of consolidation from 
piezocone tests. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Ottawa, 29(4): 539-550. 
CPT Guide 2022                                                   
 
                        Main References 
                                                                                155 
Robertson, P.K., and Campanella, R.G., 1983a. Interpretation of cone 
penetration tests ÔÇô Part I (sand). Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 20(4): 
718-733. 
Robertson, P.K., and Campanella, R.G. 1983b. Interpretation of cone 
penetration tests ÔÇô Part II (clay). Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 20(4): 
734-745. 
Robertson, P.K. and Wride, C.E., 1998. Evaluating cyclic liquefaction 
potential using the cone penetration test. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 
Ottawa, 35(3): 442-459. 
Robertson, P.K., Campanella, R.G., Gillespie, D., and Rice, A., 1986. 
Seismic CPT to measure in-situ shear wave velocity. Journal of 
Geotechnical Engineering Division, ASCE, 112(8): 791-803. 
Sanglerat, G., 1972. The Penetrometer and Soil Exploration. Elsevier Pub., 
Amsterdam, 488pp. 
Schnaid, F., 2005. Geocharacterization and Engineering properties of natural 
soils by in-situ tests. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference 
on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, Vol.1, Osaka, 
September, 2005, Millpress, Rotterdam, pp. 3-45. 
Schneider, J.A., Randolph, M.F., Mayne, P.W. & Ramsey, N.R. 2008. 
Analysis of factors influencing soil classification using normalized 
piezocone tip resistance and pore pressure parameters. Journal 
Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engrg. 134 (11): 1569-1586. 
Schmertmann, J.H. 1978. Guidelines for cone penetration tests performance 
and design. Federal Highways Administration, Washington, D.C., Report 
FHWA-TS-78-209. 
Teh, C.I., and Houlsby, G.T. 1991. An analytical study of the cone 
penetration test in clay. Geotechnique, 41 (1): 17-34. 
Wride, C.E., Robertson, P.K., Biggar, K.W., Campanella, R.G., Hofmann, 
B.A., Hughes, J.M.O., K├╝pper, A., and Woeller, D.J.  In-Situ testing 
program at the CANLEX test sites.  Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 
2000, Vol. 37, No. 3, June, pp. 505-529 
Wroth, C.P., 1984. The interpretation of in-situ soil tests. Rankine Lecture, 
Geotechnique(4). 
Youd, T.L., Idriss, I.M., Andrus, R.D., Arango, I., Castro, G., Christian, J.T., 
Dobry, R., Finn, W.D.L., Harder, L.F., Hynes, M.E., Ishihara, K., Koester, 
J., Liao, S., Marcuson III, W.F., Martin, G.R., Mitchell, J.K., Moriwaki, Y., 
Power, M.S., Robertson, P.K., Seed, R., and Stokoe, K.H., Liquefaction 
Resistance of Soils: Summary Report from the 1996 NCEER and 1998 
NCEER/NSF Workshop on Evaluation of Liquefaction Resistance of Soils, 
CPT Guide - 2022    
 
Main References 
156 
ASCE, Journal of Geotechnical & Geoenvironmental Engineering, Vol. 
127, October, pp 817-833 
Zhang, Z., and Tumay, M.T., 1999. Statistical to fuzzy approach toward CPT 
soil classification. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental 
Engineering, 125(3): 179-186. 
Zhang, G., Robertson, P.K. and Brachman, R.W.I., 2002, Estimating 
Liquefaction induced Ground Settlements From CPT for Level Ground, 
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 39(5): 1168-1180 
 
 
GREGG DRILLING LLC
Southern California (Corporate Headquarters)
2726 Walnut Ave.
Signal Hill, CA 90755
Tel: 562-427-6899
Northern California 
950 Howe Rd.
Martinez, CA 94553
Tel: 925-313-5800
Pitcher Services - Northern California 
218 Demeter St, 
East Palo Alto, CA 94303
Tel: (650) 328-8910
pitcherservicesllc.com
QUALITY  -  SAFETY  -  VALUE
info@greggdrilling.com
www.greggdrilling.com
