Eﬀect of clogging of stone column on drainage capacity during
soil liquefaction
Suravi Pal, Kousik Deb ⇑
Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India
Received 16 December 2017; received in revised form 18 September 2018; accepted 23 October 2018
Available online 4 January 2019
Abstract
Stone columns act as vertical drains, and due to their high permeability, allow for the quick dissipation of earthquake induced excess
pore water pressure. When water ﬂows through a loose sandy soil, it washes away ﬁne soil particles. The ﬁne sand particles get detached
when the hydrodynamic force applied on the soil particles breaks the inter particle bonds between soil grains. These detached soil par-
ticles are then migrated by the seepage water. Based on the concentration of the soil particles in the seepage water, these may be captured
at the pore constriction of gravels during the ﬂow of water through the stone column. Thus, the clogging of stone column initiates which
reduces of the permeability of column. The rate of dissipation of pore water pressure during earthquake is aﬀected due to the clogging of
column. In this paper, a mathematical model is proposed to determine the rate of dissipation of pore water pressure of stone column-
reinforced ground by considering the clogging eﬀect of column. The result obtained from the proposed model is veriﬁed with the avail-
able in-situ experimental data. A parametric study is also performed to investigate the eﬀect of diﬀerent parameters of the proposed
model on the clogging of stone column. It is observed that when the permeability ratio, compressibility ratio and area ratio decrease,
the possibility of clogging increases. The peak value of the excess pore water pressure ratio can increase up to around 50% due to
clogging.
 2019 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
Keywords: Liquefaction; Drainage capacity; Clogging; Stone column; Capture rate; Release rate
1. Introduction
Soil liquefaction is a major seismic hazard that results in
serious damage to infrastructure. A common method to
minimize the risk of liquefaction is to install stone columns
in the ground. Stone columns provide a drainage path
because of their high permeability. Hence, the excess pore
water pressure generated in the soil deposits during an
earthquake cannot reach objectionable values. As water
ﬂows through sandy soil, the ﬁne soil particles are detached
by hydrodynamic force and are carried away with seepage
water. The migration of these ﬁne sand particles from soil
to the pore of gravels causes the clogging in the stone col-
umns. The clogging of stone column results in a reduction
in the permeability of the columns. Thus, the eﬃciency of
stone columns as a drainage path is reduced, and the rate
of dissipation of pore water pressure is thus aﬀected.
Several approaches are proposed to determine the drai-
nage capacity of stone columns during liquefaction. Seed
and Booker (1977) assumed an inﬁnite permeability of
stone columns and constant permeability and compressibil-
ity of the surrounding soil for determining the drainage
capacity of the columns. On the basis of in-situ experimen-
tal results, Onoue et al. (1987) reported that well resistance
(limited permeability of column) has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on the drainage capacity of columns. Onoue (1988)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sandf.2018.10.005
0038-0806/ 2019 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
Peer review under responsibility of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail address: kousik@civil.iitkgp.ac.in (K. Deb).
www.elsevier.com/locate/sandf
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
H O S T E D  B Y
 
This is an open access article under CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
 
This is an open access article under CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
developed a mathematical model to determine the perfor-
mance of stone columns used as a technique for minimizing
the risk of liquefaction by including the well resistance of
columns. Priebe (1989) stated that stone columns can min-
imize the liquefaction potential by seismic shear stress
redistribution. Baez and Martin (1992) suggested that the
risk of liquefaction potential can be mitigated by regulating
the earthquake induced pore pressure within the soil and
by reducing the seismic shear stress experienced by soil dur-
ing an earthquake. A simple method is also proposed to
explain the drainage, stiﬀening and densiﬁcation eﬀect of
stone columns against liquefaction hazard. Elias et al.
(2001) stated that the susceptibility of soil liquefaction
can be minimized by introducing drainage and stiﬀness
eﬀect of stone columns. Han and Ye (2001, 2002) indicated
that the rate of dissipation of pore water pressure is inﬂu-
enced by the stiﬀness of the columns.
Baez and Martin (1993) suggested that the spacing
between stone columns can be increased by including the
reinforcement, densiﬁcation and drainage mechanism of
columns. Boulanger et al. (1998) recommended that the
installation of stone columns by either the vibroreplace-
ment or vibrocompaction methods stiﬀens the surrounding
soil. From ﬁeld observations, Sujatha (1998) proposed the
trends of variation of the stiﬀness of the reinforced soil with
distance from the stone columns. Murali Krishna and
Madhav (2008) and Ben Salem et al. (2016) analytically
determined the rate of generation and dissipation of the
pore pressure of the treated soil by adopting the densiﬁca-
tion eﬀect due to construction of stone columns. Pal and
Deb (2018) proposed a simpliﬁed solution to determine
the drainage capacity of stone columns during soil liquefac-
tion considering stiﬀness of the stone columns and it is
observed that the maximum pore water ratio decreases by
20–60% due to the stiﬀness eﬀect of the stone column.
Most of the available techniques have examined, either
analytically or experimentally, the performance of stone
columns along with smear and well resistance, stress con-
centration eﬀect. However, clogging in stone columns is
not considered when determining the rate of dissipation
of pore water pressure. Acharya and Dasgupta (2005) per-
formed a ﬁnite element program to analyse the rate of con-
solidation
of
stone
column
reinforced
ground
by
considering the clogging eﬀect of column. Indraratna
et al. (2013), Deb and Shiyamalaa (2016) and Tai et al.
(2017) also considered the clogging eﬀect in the analysis
of the consolidation of reinforced soil. Indraratna et al.
(2013) assumed that the permeability of the clogged zone
of column is initially reduced and it remains constant for
the
full
consolidation
period.
However,
Deb
and
Shiyamalaa (2016) considered that the clogged zone perme-
ability is a function of time. Tai et al. (2017) suggested that
the radius of clogged zone increases linearly or exponen-
tially with time. The mathematical models considering
the clogging eﬀect were developed for stone column-
improved soft clay to determine the rate of consolidation
of the improved ground. However, experimental studies
have also conﬁrmed that the clogging of stone columns
can occur during soil liquefaction. Based on an in-situ
experiment, Onoue et al. (1987) revealed that if the sand
is liqueﬁed during cyclic loading, the permeability of the
geosynthetic-encased stone columns decreases by 60%,
but in the case of stone columns without geosynthetic-
encasing, the permeability of the stone column is further
decreased by 60% due to clogging. Adalier and Elgamal
(2004) stated that when the pore water pressure ratio is
high, the clogging of stone columns is a serious problem.
Rollins et al. (2004) reported that during cyclic loading,
the rate of dissipation of pore pressure is slower after the
45th second, due to clogging of the stone columns. How-
ever, mathematical models have not been developed con-
sidering the possibility of clogging of stone columns
during soil liquefaction. Thus, the main objective of this
paper is to develop a mathematical model for evaluating
the pore water pressure generation and dissipation of the
stone column-reinforced ground during soil liquefaction
by considering the clogging eﬀect of columns. The inﬂuence
of the change in permeability of stone column with time
due to clogging is studied on drainage capacity during soil
liquefaction. The stiﬀness eﬀect of columns is also incorpo-
rated in the present study.
2. Mathematical formulation
The drainage capacity of stone columns is investigated
with unit cell axi-symmetric model. The model is used to
represent a stone column placed inside a large group of col-
umns. In the ﬁeld, a group of stone columns is installed
either in a triangular pattern or a square pattern. The inﬂu-
ence zone of each stone column can be approximated by an
equivalent circle (Balaam and Booker, 1981). The unit cell
model consists of a stone column and its equivalent circular
inﬂuence zone (as shown in Fig. 1). The assumptions made
in the present model are summarized as follows:
1. The vertical ﬂow within soil is ignored as the vertical
permeability of soil is much less than the horizontal per-
meability. Moreover, the spacing between stone col-
umns is shorter than the vertical distance that the
water has to travel before reaching the ground surface.
2. Equal strain approach is considered i.e., the stone col-
umn and the surrounding soil deform only in the vertical
direction due to the dissipation of pore water pressure,
and the strain is equal at every depth. The lateral defor-
mation of the soil and stone column is not considered in
the present study.
3. Most of the available formulations assumed that pore
water pressure will not develop in the stone column dur-
ing seismic loading. Murali Krishna and Madhav (2008)
considered the development of negative pore water pres-
sure during seismic loading due to the dilatancy eﬀect of
gravel under undrained condition. Evans and Zhou
(1995) stated that the positive pore water pressure may
be developed in the gravel during dynamic loading.
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
197
Thus, it is assumed that the positive pore water pressure
will develop in the stone column during seismic loading
(similar to loose soil) as incorporation of development
of positive pore water pressure within the stone column
may make the design safer.
4. The amount of water ﬂowing through the soil zone into
the stone column is equal to that expelled from the col-
umn. A similar assumption is considered by Han and Ye
(2002), Deb and Shiyamalaa (2016) for stone column-
improved ground.
5. Every earthquake leads to clogging of stone columns,
and this process may continue until the clogging reaches
an optimum value. However, in practical cases, it may
be that the pressure gradient across the blocked pathway
of the column is so high that some clogged portions of
the column are broken (Gruesbeck and Collin, 1982).
This phenomenon is referred to as ‘plug burst’. Due to
plug burst, the permeability of the clogged column
increases, but again new ﬁne deposits reduce permeabil-
ity (Gruesbeck and Collin, 1982). However, the plug
burst eﬀect is not considered in the proposed model.
Using Darcy’s law, the expression for the pore pressure
generation and dissipation of stone column-improved
ground can be expressed as (Seed and Booker, 1977):
ks
rcw
@u
@r þ ks
cw
@2u
@r2 ¼ @e
@t
ð1Þ
where u = excess pore water at a radial distance r from the
center of the column; cw = unit weight of water; e = volu-
metric strain of the soil; ks = coeﬃcient of permeability
of soil in the radial direction; t = time.
Using the eﬀective stress principle (r0s = rs  u), the rate
of change of volumetric strain with time can be expressed
as:
@e
@t ¼ mvs
@u
@t  @rs
@t


ð2Þ
where mvs = volumetric compressibility of soil.
Seed and Booker (1977) considered that the rate of
change of total stress (@rs/@t) is equal to the rate of pore
pressure generation i.e.,
@rs
@t ¼ @ug
@t ¼ @ug
@N
@N
@t
ð3Þ
where ug = excess pore water pressure generated by a num-
ber of seismic stress cycles N. The expression of ug can be
written as (De alba et al., 1976):
ug ¼ 2r0
0
p arcsin
N
N l

 1
2a
"
#
ð4Þ
where r00 = initial vertical eﬀective stress; Nl = number of
seismic stress cycles required for initial liquefaction of soil;
a = a constant whose value depends on the test condition
and types of soil. An average value of a is 0.7 (Seed
et al., 1975b).
The irregular cyclic loading generated by earthquake
can be written in terms of an equivalent cyclic number
Neq of uniform stress cycles occurring over the duration
of earthquake td as (Seed et al., 1975a):
@N
@t ¼ N eq
td
for 0 6 t 6 td
ð5Þ
@N
@t ¼ 0 for t > td
ð6Þ
Introducing
the
non-dimensional
terms,
U = u/r00,
Ug = ug/r00, R = r/b, and T = t/td, the equation for the gen-
eration and dissipation of excess pore water pressure within
stone column-improved ground towards the stone column
can be written as:
T ad
c2
b2
1
R
@U
@R þ @2U
@R2


¼ @U
@T  @U g
@N N eq
ð7Þ
where
Fig. 1. Unit cell model.
198
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
@U g
@N ¼
r0
0
apN l
1
sin2a1 p
2 U


cos p
2 U


ð8Þ
and
T ad ¼ ks
cw
td
mv;s
1
c2 ; T d ¼ ks
cw
td
mv;s
1
b2 ¼ T ad
c2
b2
ð9Þ
where c = radius of stone column, b = radius of the inﬂu-
ence zone of stone column and c/b = area ratio.
At the initial moment (T = 0), the excess pore water
pressure is equal to the average pore pressure developed
over the initial time period of dt. At the boundary of unit
cell model (R = b), the rate of change of pore water pres-
sure due to symmetry is zero. The boundary condition
can be written as @U/@R = 0. At the boundary of stone col-
umn (R = c), the excess pore water pressure is equal to the
maximum pore pressure generated within stone column at
any time t i.e., U = Uc,max.
To derive the pore water pressure within stone column
(Uc,max), it is assumed that the quantity of water entering
into the stone column is equal to that expelled from the col-
umn, i.e., at the boundary of column (r = c)
2pcdz ks
cw
@u
@r jr¼c ¼ pc2dz kc;avg
cw
@2uc
@z2
ð10Þ
where uc = pore pressure within stone column; z = vertical
distance below the ground surface. The permeability of
stone column is not uniform due to the clogging. Thus,
the permeability of the stone column is a function of time
and space and kc,avg = average permeability of the stone
column with respect to space.
The quantity of water ﬂowing through the soil zone into
the stone column is equal to the volume change within the
soil mass. i.e.,
2prdz ks
cw
@u
@r ¼ p b2  r2


dz @e
@t
ð11Þ
At the interface between stone column and soil (r = c),
the Eq. (11) can be written as:
2pcdz ks
cw
@u
@r ¼ p b2  c2


dz @e
@t
ð12Þ
From Eqs. (10) and (12) the following equation can be
obtained as:
@2uc
@z2
kc;avg
b2
c2  1


cw
¼ @e
@t
ð13Þ
Based on equal strain assumption, the following equa-
tion is obtained as:
@e
@t ¼ mvs
@r0
s
@t ¼ mvc
@r0
c
@t
ð14Þ
Based on assumption (3), the Eq. (14) can be written as:
@e
@t ¼ mvs
@u
@t  @ug
@t


¼ mvc
@uc
@t  @ug
@t


ð15Þ
wheremvc = volumetric compressibility of stone column.
Substituting Eq. (15) in Eq. (13), one can write
kc;avg
cw
b2
c2  1

 @2uc
@z2 ¼ mvc
@uc
@t  @ug
@t


ð16Þ
The ﬁnal form of Eq. (16) can be written as:
kc;avg
cw
b2
c2  1

 @2uc
@z2 ¼ mvc
@uc
@t  @ug
@N
N eq
td


ð17Þ
Introducing
nondimensional
terms,
Uc = uc/r00,
r00 = c0z, Z = z/h, Ug = ug/r00, and T = t/td, Eq. (17)
becomes
kc;avg
cwmvc
b2
c2  1

 td
h2
@2U c
@Z2 þ 2
Z
@U c
@Z


¼
@U c
@T  @U g
@N N eq


ð18Þ
T ad
1
b2
c2  1


1
L
  @2U c
@Z2 þ 2
Z
@U
@Z


¼
@U c
@T  @U g
@N N eq


ð19Þ
L ¼ ðks mvc h2Þ=ðkc;avg mvs c2Þ
ð20Þ
where mvs/mvc = compressibility or stiﬀness ratio
The volumetric compressibility of an elastic body can be
expressed as:
mv ¼ ð1 þ mÞð1  2mÞ
Eð1  mÞ
ð21Þ
where E = elastic modulus and m = Poisson ratio. Thus, the
compressibility ratio can be expressed as:
mvs
mvc
¼ Ec
Es
ð1 þ msÞð1  2msÞð1  mcÞ
1 þ mc
ð
Þð1  2mcÞð1  msÞ ¼ f Ec
Es
ð22Þ
where Ec and Es = elastic moduli of the stone column and
the surrounding soil, respectively. The typical elastic mod-
ulus ratio of the stone column to surrounding soil ranges
from 4 to 20 (Bowles, 1997). mc and ms = Poisson ratios of
the stone column and the surrounding soil, respectively,
and f = a is the Poisson ratio factor. At the ground surface
(Z = 0), the pore pressure is zero (i.e., Uc = 0) as the
ground surface is always free draining. At the bottom sur-
face of the stone column (Z = 1), the symmetry the rate of
variation of pore pressure is zero, i.e., @Uc/oZ = 0. The
maximum excess pore water pressure ratio (Umax) is deter-
mined by solving Eq. (7) with ﬁnite diﬀerence approach.
2.1. Clogging of stone column
Porous media such as soil, stone column contain void
space or pore space. The pore space can be geometrically
characterized by two parameters: pore bodies or pore
chambers and pore constrictions (Khilar and Fogler,
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
199
1998). Pore bodies and pore constrictions are the widest
segment and narrowest segment of pores, respectively (as
shown in Fig. 2). Fines are attached to the surface of pore
bodies through which seepage water ﬂows (here ﬁnes are
the loose ﬁne soil particles which present in the pore space).
Studies show that hydrodynamic or colloidal force is gen-
erally responsible for the detachment of ﬁnes from pore
chamber. The release mechanism of ﬁne soil particle
depends on the size of the ﬁnes and the ﬂow velocity. For
large size ﬁne particles (larger than 10 mm), such as ﬁne
sand or silt or for high ﬂow velocity (greater than 0.01–
0.1 m/s), hydrodynamic force is dominant (Frey et al.,
1999; Khilar and Fogler, 1998). Arulanandan et al.
(1975) carried out rotating cylinder test to ascertain the
release mechanism of ﬁne particles under hydrodynamic
force and concluded that the release of ﬁne particles initi-
ates when the shear stress induced by the hydrodynamic
force exceeds the critical shear stress of soil. The release
rate in porous media depends on the amount of loose ﬁne
particles present in the pore chamber and release coeﬃ-
cient. In the present study, it is assumed that the stone col-
umn is clean, that is, no ﬁne soil particles are present in the
pore chamber of column. Hence, in the case of stone col-
umn, the release coeﬃcient is zero.
Numerous studies have conﬁrmed that the eﬃciency of
the stone column as a drainage path may be aﬀected when
the ﬁne particles are captured at the pore constriction of
gravel (Acharya and Dasgupta, 2005; Indraratna et al.,
2013; Deb and Shiyamalaa, 2016; Onoue et al., 1987;
Rollins et al., 2004). The ﬁne particles are entrapped at
the pore constriction especially due to surface deposition
and multiparticle bridging. Khilar and Fogler (1998) stated
that the surface deposition type of entrapment reduces the
cross-sectional area of the pore constriction, while the mul-
tiparticle bridging results in blockage of the pore constric-
tion (as shown in Fig. 3). The capture rate of porous media
is proportional to the concentration of ﬁne particles pre-
sent in the seepage water and the capture coeﬃcient
(Khilar et al., 1985; Khilar and Fogler, 1998). However,
as the inlet concentration of ﬁne particles is zero at the
boundary of inﬂuence zone, the capture of ﬁne particles
throughout the soil zone is negligible for the brief duration.
Thus, the capture rate of soil is assumed to be zero
(Gruesbeck and Collin, 1982). Moreover, the emphasis in
this study is to ﬁnd out the maximum possibility of clog-
ging in stone column. Thus, it is adequate to consider only
erosion within the soil.
Khilar and Fogler (1998) proposed an approach to
determine the migration and capture mechanism of ﬁne
particles in porous media. Following this approach, the soil
zone and stone column are divided into equal n and m
number of segments, respectively (as shown in Fig. 4).
Fig. 2. Geometric structure of pore space (Khilar and Fogler, 1983).
Fig. 3. Capture mechanism of ﬁne particles at the pore constriction.
Fig. 4. The section of discretized stone column and soil zone.
200
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
The mass balance equation for the ﬁne particles in the ith
segment of porous media (soil and stone column) can be
expressed as (Khilar and Fogler, 1998):
v qCi1  qCi
ð
Þ þ RrA  RcV ¼ V @Ci
@t þ tV @Ci
@r
ð23Þ
where v = fraction of particles leaving the ith pore segment
with the ﬂow = 1 (Khilar and Fogler, 1983); q = the ﬂow
rate (cm3/s); Ci1 = concentration of ﬁne particles in the
eﬄuent of i  1th pore segment (g/cm3); Ci = concentra-
tion of ﬁne particles in the eﬄuent of ith segment (g/cm3);
V = pore volume (cm3); A = surface area of the pore seg-
ment (cm2), t = ﬂow velocity (cm/s); Rr = rate of release
(gm/cm2-s); Rc = rate of capture (g/cm3-s); In Eq. (23),
q = V/t, A = V/l, l = length of each pore segment. The sim-
pliﬁed form of Eq. (23) is
ðv=tÞ Ci1  Ci
ð
Þ þ ðRr=lÞ  Rc ¼ @Ci
@t þ t @Ci
@r
ð24Þ
In the case of stone column, the release rate is zero. In
the soil, the release rate of ﬁne particles due to hydrody-
namic force can be written as:
Rr ¼ jðsw  scÞ
ð25Þ
where sw = wall shear stress (dyne/cm2); sc = critical stress
(dyne/cm2); j = release coeﬃcient (g/dyne-s).
The shear stress is given as (Hillel, 1980):
s ¼ 1:414  ðqwgH 0Þ 
Ks
g

1
2
ð26Þ
where Ks = intrinsic permeability of soil (cm2); g = poros-
ity of soil; qw = density of water (g/cm3), g = acceleration
due to gravity (cm/s2).
For s ¼ sw; H 0 ¼ H
ð27Þ
For s ¼ sc; H 0 ¼ H c
ð28Þ
where H is the hydraulic gradient and Hc is the critical
hydraulic gradient. The release coeﬃcient j (g/dyne-min)
can be expressed by the following empirical equation as
(Arulanandan et al., 1975):
j¼3017:09sc þ4:02s2
c 0:43s3
c þ0:0175s4
c
ð29Þ
The capture rate of soil is zero. The rate of capture in
stone column can be written as:
Rc ¼ bCi
ð30Þ
where b = capture coeﬃcient (s1).
Ci is determined by solving Eq. (24) with ﬁnite diﬀerence
method. The concentration of ﬁne sand particles entrapped
at the pore constriction (r2) of gravel is given as:
dr2
dt ¼ bCi
ð31Þ
where r2 = concentration of ﬁne particles entrapped at the
pore constriction.
Thus, the change in permeability of the stone column
(kc) can be written as (Gruesbeck and Collin, 1982):
kc ¼ kc0  expðBr4
2Þ
ð32Þ
where kc0 = initial permeability of the stone column;
B = material constant. In the present study, the value of
B is taken as 1.
The average permeability of the stone column at a par-
ticular time can be written as:
kc;avg ¼ m
X 1
kci

1
ð33Þ
where m = number of segments.
2.2. Calculation procedure and parameter estimation
The concentration of ﬁne particles release from the soil
is determined by solving Eq. (24) (where, Rc = 0). The
boundary conditions are considered as: At T = 0, Csoil = 0
and At R = b, Csoil = 0. The mass balance equation for the
ﬁne particles in the ith segment of gravel (stone column) is
solved by Eq. (24) (where Rr = 0) with the boundary con-
ditions
as:
At
T = 0,
Ccolumn = 0
and
At
R = c,
Ccolumn = Csoil. The concentration of ﬁne sand particles
entrapped at the pore constriction (r2) of gravel is deter-
mined by Eq. (31). The change in permeability of the stone
column (kc) can be determined by Eq. (32). The average
permeability of the stone column (kc,avg) at a particular
time is determined by Eq. (33). The computed average per-
meability of stone column (kc,avg) is used to derive the max-
imum pore pressure within stone column. The maximum
pore water pressure within stone column (Uc,max) can be
determined by Eq. (19). The maximum pore water pressure
generated
within
the
stone
column-improved
ground
(Umax) due to an earthquake is determined using Eq. (7).
The maximum pore water pressure within the stone column
(Uc,max) is used to solve Eq. (7).
The major parameters related to the clogging of stone
columns are hydraulic gradient (H), critical hydraulic gra-
dient (Hc), capture coeﬃcient (b) and release coeﬃcient (j).
The hydraulic gradient varies from 0.1 to 1 during the ﬂow
of water through soil (Onoue et al., 1987). Thus, in the real
scale problems, the range of H can be taken in between 0.1
and 1 during wall shear stress calculation for diﬀerent
hydraulic gradients and the value of H may reach up to 1
during liquefaction.
The critical hydraulic gradient Hc depends on the types
of soil. Chugaev (1962) and Weijers and Sellmeijer (1993)
stated that the critical hydraulic gradient of ﬁne sandy soil
varies from 0.1 to 0.14 (see Okeke and Wang, 2016). Thus,
any value of the critical hydraulic gradient within the pre-
scribed range can be chosen to calculate the critical shear
stress as signiﬁcant variation of the pore water pressure
ratio is not observed due to the change in Hc value within
the prescribed range (see Section 4). Ahlinhan and Achmus
(2010) described the experimental method to determine the
critical hydraulic gradient of soil. A sample with cross sec-
tion of 10 cm  30 cm and length of 60 cm can be seeped
horizontally. The placement of sample can be carried out
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
201
by pluviation in deaired water. The sieve fabrics can be
placed at both ends of the soil sample. Fabrics can be so
chosen that the transport of the ﬁne soil particles is possi-
ble. The hydraulic gradients can be increased slowly and
gradually. The critical hydraulic gradient can be deter-
mined by noting the water discharge and mass of eroded
soil. At a particular hydraulic gradient a signiﬁcant change
in the permeability and an increase in the transported soil
mass can be observed, which can be recorded as critical
hydraulic gradient. Thus, the critical hydraulic gradient
can also be determined from the described experimental
method for the given soil. However, in the present study,
the value of critical hydraulic gradient is chosen as per
the range recommended by Chugaev (1962) and Weijers
and Sellmeijer (1993).
The capture coeﬃcient (b) of a particular porous med-
ium can be determined by the procedure described by
Gruesbeck and Collin (1982). An experiment can be carried
out on an unconsolidated stone column. The suspension of
ﬁne particles mixed with carrier ﬂuid can be passed through
the initially cleaned stone column. The ﬂow rate can be
changed in steps. The aliquots of eﬄuents can be collected
and measured with turbidimeter and coulter counter. The
average capture coeﬃcient of stone column for diﬀerent
ﬂow rates can be computed by using the equation proposed
by Gruesbeck and Collin in 1982 by knowing ﬁne concen-
tration in eﬄuent and inlet ﬂuid, cross sectional area of
stone core, and total length of stone pack as:
b ¼ q=Ac
gcLc
ln CE
CI
ð34Þ
where q = ﬂow rate, Ac = cross sectional area of stone
core, gc = porosity of stone, Lc = length of stone pack,
CE = ﬁne concentration in eﬄuent, and CI = ﬁne concen-
tration in inlet ﬂuid.
Empirical equation (Eq. (29)) proposed by Arulanandan
et al. (1975) can be used to determine the release coeﬃcient
(j) after putting the critical shear stress or critical hydraulic
gradient value.
3. Comparison between the present analytical results and
experimental results
The ﬁnal permeability of stone column obtained from
the present model is compared with the experimental
results obtained by Onoue et al. (1987)). For quantiﬁcation
of clogging, Onoue et al (1987) conducted in-situ test on
stone column without encasement. In the test, a steel pipe
of diameter (2b) 120 cm, length 12 m was driven in the
reclaimed sand deposits with a diesel pile hammer. The
central part inside the pipe was excavated with a donut
auger and the hole was ﬁlled with gravel. Cleaned, round
shaped gravels of size 2.5–13 mm were used as the stone
column material. The ground disturbance due to stone col-
umn construction was considered to be minor. The diame-
ter of stone column (2c) was 50 cm. Hence, the diameter of
column to inﬂuence zone ratio (c/b) was 0.417. The initial
permeability
of
column
and
soil
was
6 cm/s
and
0.0146 cm/s, respectively. The wet unit weight of the sandy
deposits, measured using the slide calliper method, was
found to be 18.8 kN/m3. To simulate the earthquake con-
dition, the ground was vibrated by ﬁxing a vibrohammer
to pipe. Vibration was applied at a power supply frequency
of 45 Hz by setting the eccentric moment of the vibroham-
mer to 1.47 kNm. The boundaries around the inﬂuence
zone and at the bottom of ground inside the cylindrical
pipe were impervious due to the presence of steel pipe
and silt layer, respectively. Pore pressure transducers were
installed in the stone column and sandy ground. The per-
meability of stone column after experiment was measured.
The same experiment was repeated four times. The average
value of the four experiments is calculated for comparison
purpose.
Fig. 5 shows that the ﬁnal permeability of stone column
after experiment was reduced due to clogging. Chugaev
(1962) and Weijers and Sellmeijer (1993) stated that the
critical hydraulic gradient of ﬁne sandy soil varies from
0.1 to 0.14 (see Okeke and Wang, 2016). In the parametric
study (Section 4), it is observed that the pore pressure ratio
due to clogging slightly changes as the critical hydraulic
gradient of soil changes from 0.1 to 0.14. The permeability
of the stone column also doesn’t change signiﬁcantly due
the change in critical hydraulic gradient within the range
after clogging. Thus, during the comparison, the critical
hydraulic gradient of ﬁne sand is taken as 0.13 (within
the range).
Khilar and Fogler (1998) and Acharya and Dasgupta
(2005) stated that the capture coeﬃcient is a function of
ﬂow velocity and increases with an increase in the ﬂow
velocity. Khilar and Fogler (1983) recommended that the
capture coeﬃcient varies from 0.0001 to 0.01 s1 for lower
ﬂuid velocities when the ﬁne particles are migrated due to
colloidal action. However, in the present case, the ﬁne par-
ticles are migrated due to hydrodynamic action. During
cyclic loading, the excess pore water pressure generates
Fig. 5. Comparison between analytical results and experimental results.
202
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
within the soil. The pore water pressure quickly dissipates
through stone column after the end of cyclic loading. Thus,
due to the higher velocity of ﬂuid within soil and stone col-
umn, a higher value of capture coeﬃcient has to be consid-
ered (as compared to the range proposed Khilar and
Fogler, 1983 for lower ﬂuid ﬂow velocity). In the present
study, a range from 0.04 s1 to 0.08 s1 is considered as
the suitable range for the capture coeﬃcient. From the
parametric
study
(Section
4),
it
was
observed
that
0.04 s1 is the lowest value of capture coeﬃcient at which
clogging of stone column starts aﬀecting the rate of dissipa-
tion of pore pressure and 0.08 s1 is considered as the
upper limit since the permeability of stone column becomes
less than the permeability of the surrounding soil due to
clogging once this is exceeded. In the present study, the per-
meability of the stone column is always considered to be
greater or equal to the permeability of the surrounding soil
even after clogging. Thus, during the comparison, the cap-
ture coeﬃcient values was considered to be 0.04 s1: that is,
the point at which clogging of stone column starts aﬀecting
the rate of dissipation of pore pressure. However, selecting
a higher value within the suitable range may reduce the per-
meability of the stone column further and for capture coef-
ﬁcient value of 0.08 s1, the permeability of the stone
column may reach the permeability of the surrounding soil.
As the measured permeability of the stone column after the
experiment is still much higher than the permeability of the
surrounding soil, a lower capture coeﬃcient value of
0.04 s1 (within the prescribed range) is considered during
the comparison. From Fig. 5, it is found that the predicted
permeability of stone column after earthquake is consistent
with experimental results. Thus, the present model is feasi-
ble for determining the clogging of stone columns.
4. Parametric study
The derived mathematical model indicates that the clog-
ging of stone columns is inﬂuenced by such parameters as
the permeability ratio, area ratio, compressibility ratio,
hydraulic gradient, critical hydraulic gradient, and capture
coeﬃcient. The parameter release coeﬃcient is not consid-
ered during the parametric study as it is a function of the
critical hydraulic gradient (see Eq. (29)). During the para-
metric study, the range of parameters of the model were
selected in such a way that the reduced permeability of
stone columns due to clogging was never less than the per-
meability of the surrounding soil.
Fig. 6 depicts the eﬀect of permeability ratio (kc0/ks) on
the variation of maximum excess pore pressure ratio (Umax)
with the clogging eﬀect of the column taken into account,
and also with it not taken into account. It can be observed
that the diﬀerence between the clogged and unclogged
curves increases as the permeability ratio decreases. This
is because the initial permeability of stone columns (kc0)
depends on the size of the interconnected pore spaces.
For lower permeability, the amount and area of the inter-
connected pore spaces in the stone columns are less. Hence,
the tendency to block the eﬀective pore spaces is higher
with the permeability ratio is low than it is when the perme-
ability ratio is high. When the clogging eﬀect is not consid-
ered, for permeability ratios of 100, 200 and 500, the pore
water pressure is fully dissipated at T = 2 and the rate of
dissipation of pore pressure is slower for lower permeabil-
ity ratio. However, pore water pressure is not fully dissi-
pated at T = 2 due to the clogging and the residual
excess pore pressures is more for lower permeability ratio.
Fig. 7 represents the eﬀect of area ratio (c/b) on the vari-
ation of maximum excess pore pressure ratio (Umax) with
and without considering the clogging eﬀect of column.
The decrease in the area ratio increases the drainage path
of the seepage water. As the drainage path of water
increases, the concentration of eroded ﬁne sand particles
in the seepage water also increases. The capture rate of col-
umn is proportional to the concentration of ﬁne sand par-
ticles in water. Thus, for lower area ratio, more quantities
of ﬁne sand particles are captured at the pore constrictions
of gravel. It can be observed that the rate of dissipation of
Fig. 6. Eﬀect of permeability ratio on on Umax with and without
considering the clogging eﬀect of stone column.
Fig. 7. Eﬀect of area ratio on on Umax with and without considering the
clogging eﬀect of stone column.
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
203
pore pressure is slower with lower area ratio. For lower
area ratio (c/b = 0.3, 0.2), the clogging of the column starts
during the cyclic loading, and with area ratio 0.3, the diﬀer-
ence between the peak value of the maximum excess pore
pressure ratio obtained from the clogged and unclogged
curve is 3%. At T = 2, with an area ratio of 0.3, the pore
water pressure is not fully dissipated due to clogging, and
with an area ratio of 0.2, the maximum excess pore water
pressure obtained from the clogged curve is 3 times Higher
than with an unclogged curve. However, at an area ratio
0.6, the full dissipation of pore pressure was found in both
the clogged and unclogged cases.
Fig. 8 reveals the eﬀect of the volumetric compressibility
ratio (mvs/mvc) on the variation of maximum excess pore
pressure ratio (Umax) when the clogging eﬀect of the col-
umn is taken into account and also when it is not taken
into account. The compressibility of the stone column
(mvc) varies from 1/3–1/15 times that of the compressibility
of sandy soil (mvs). It is observed that when the other
parameters are constant, the maximum excess pore pres-
sure ratio increases as the compressibility ratio decreases.
Consideration of the clogging eﬀect of the stone column
further increases the pore pressure within the soil. Thus,
for lower volumetric compressibility ratios, as the excess
pore pressure ratio is high, the clogging eﬀect is more likely
than when the volumetric compressibility ratio is higher. It
can be observed that the unclogged and clogged curve coin-
cide at a compressibility ratio of 15. However, for com-
pressibility a ratio of 3, the diﬀerence between the peak
value of the maximum excess pore pressure ratio obtained
from the clogged and unclogged curve is 2.1%. At T = 2,
with a compressibility ratio of 3, the full dissipation of pore
pressure is not observed due to clogging, whereas for a
higher compressibility ratio (mvs/mvc = 6, mvs/mvc = 15),
the full dissipation of the pore pressure is found in both
the clogged unclogged cases.
Fig. 9 presents the eﬀect of hydraulic gradient of soil (H)
on the variation of maximum excess pore pressure ratio
(Umax) with time. In the present study, the range of hydrau-
lic gradients was 0.3–0.9 (Onoue et al., 1987). It can be
observed that the unclogged and clogged curve coincide
at a hydraulic gradient of 0.3, whereas for the hydraulic
gradients 0.6 and 0.9, the diﬀerence between the peak val-
ues of the maximum excess pore pressure ratios obtained
from the clogged and unclogged curve is 2.1% and 20%,
respectively. This diﬀerence can be attributed the increase
in the ﬂow velocity due to the increase in the hydraulic gra-
dient of the soil. With an increase in velocity, the hydrody-
namic force applied to the ﬁne particles increases and a
large amount of erosion of ﬁne sand particles takes place.
It can also be observed that at T = 2, with hydraulic gradi-
ents of 0.6 and 0.9, the full dissipation of pore pressure
does not occur due to clogging, whereas for a hydraulic
gradient of 0.3, the pore water pressure is fully dissipated.
Fig. 10 examines the eﬀect of critical the hydraulic gradient
(Hc) of the soil on the variation of maximum excess pore
pressure ratio (Umax) with time. It is observed that the pore
pressure ratio due to clogging slightly changes as the criti-
cal hydraulic gradient of soil changes from 0.1 to 0.14 (the
range recommended by Chugaev, 1962; Weijers and
Sellmeijer, 1993). For a critical hydraulic gradient of 0.1,
Fig. 8. Eﬀect of compressibility ratio on on Umax with and without
considering the clogging eﬀect of stone column.
Fig. 9. Eﬀect of hydraulic gradient on the variations of Umax with time.
Fig. 10. Eﬀect of critical hydraulic gradient on the variations of Umax with
time.
204
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
the diﬀerence between the peak value of the maximum
excess pore pressure ratio obtained from the clogged and
unclogged curve is 2.8%. It can further be found that when
the clogging eﬀect is considered, the pore pressure is not
fully dissipated at T = 2 due to clogging.
Fig. 11 depicts the eﬀect of capture coeﬃcient (b) on the
variation of maximum excess pore pressure ratio (Umax)
with time. The range of capture coeﬃcient in the paramet-
ric study is taken as 0.04 s1 to 0.08 s1. It is observed that
at capture coeﬃcient 0.04 s1, the clogging of the stone col-
umn begins after seismic loading, i.e. when T > 1. How-
ever, for a capture coeﬃcients of 0.06 s1 and 0.08 s1,
the diﬀerence between the peak value of the maximum
excess pore pressure ratios obtained from the clogged and
unclogged curve is 2.1% and 6.7%, respectively. It can be
observed that the lower value of capture coeﬃcient reduces
the capture rate in the column, and the initiation of clog-
ging is delayed. Thus, the permeability of the stone column
is reduced and the rate becomes slower.
It has been observed that the clogging of the stone col-
umn begins during the end of the earthquake loading or
when the excess pore water pressure starts to dissipate.
Under the selected condition (c/b = 0.3, b = 0.08 s1,
H = 0.9,
Hc = 0.13,
kc0/ks = 200,
mvs/mvc = 3,
Neq/Nl = 2), the peak value of the excess pore water pres-
sure ratio can even increase up to around 50% due to clog-
ging (as shown in Fig. 12). It is to be noted that under the
selected conditions, more excess pore water pressure may
develop for c/b = 0.2 and full liquefaction may occur (as
shown in Fig. 7). Thus, the diﬀerence of peak pore water
pressure between the clogged and unclogged case cannot
be determined for c/b = 0.2 under the critical condition.
5. Clogging of stone column due to multiple earthquakes
Fig. 13 represents the eﬀect of clogging of the stone col-
umn on the excess pore pressure ratio due to the occurrence
of multiple earthquakes. It can be seen that for the ﬁrst
earthquake, the diﬀerence in the peak value of maximum
excess pore water pressure obtained from the clogged and
unclogged curve is 5.6%. In this case, the clogging of the
stone column begins when the excess pore water pressure
starts to dissipate, and at T = 2, due to the clogging of
the stone column, the pore water pressure is not fully dissi-
pated. During the second earthquake, the variation of
excess pore pressure ratio between unclogged and clogged
curve is found at the beginning of earthquake due to the
clogging of the stone column during ﬁrst earthquake. In
the case of the second earthquake, the diﬀerence between
the peak values of the excess pore water pressure ratio
obtained from the clogged and unclogged curve is 66%.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, a mathematical model is proposed based
on the unit cell approach to incorporate the eﬀect of the
clogging of stone columns on the performance of these col-
Fig. 11. Eﬀect of coeﬃcient of capture on the variations of Umax with
time.
Fig. 12. Eﬀect of clogging of stone column under critical condition.
Fig. 13. Eﬀect of clogging of stone column due to multiple earthquakes.
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
205
umns during liquefaction under seismic conditions. The
proposed model reveals that the clogging of stone columns
signiﬁcantly reduces the drainage capacity of these col-
umns. The validation indicates that the result of the pro-
posed model is in good agreement with the in-situ
experimental results. Parametric studies have been per-
formed to investigate the inﬂuence of model factors such
as permeability ratio, area ratio, compressibility ratio,
hydraulic gradient, critical hydraulic gradient and capture
coeﬃcient on the drainage capacity of columns. It is
observed that the clogging eﬀect is more likely for lower
volumetric compressibility ratios than for higher ratios.
The reduction of the permeability ratio, area ratio and crit-
ical hydraulic gradient of ﬁne sand particles increase the
likelihood that a stone column will become clogged. A
higher value of capture coeﬃcient increases the rate of cap-
ture of the stone column. From the parametric study, it can
be concluded that hydraulic gradient is the most inﬂuential
parameter in the clogging of the column, whereas the stiﬀ-
ness of the column is the least inﬂuential parameter. The
diﬀerence between the peak values of the maximum excess
pore
pressure
ratio
obtained
from
the
clogged
and
unclogged curve increases by 20% corresponding to an
increase when the hydraulic gradient is between 0.3 and
0.9. During the ﬁrst earthquake, the clogging of the stone
column starts towards the end of earthquake loading or
when the excess pore water pressure starts to dissipate.
However, during a second earthquake the variation of
the excess pore water pressure can start at the beginning
of the earthquake due to the clogging which occurred dur-
ing the ﬁrst earthquake. More time is required to dissipate
the excess pore water pressure after a seismic event due to
clogging. The peak value of the excess pore water pressure
ratio can increase up to around 50% due to clogging during
the ﬁrst earthquake and a greater diﬀerence between the
peak values of the excess pore water pressure ratio
obtained for clogged and unclogged case is observed due
to successive earthquakes until the clogging reaches an
optimum value. It has been observed that under the
selected conditions, the diﬀerence between the peak values
of the excess pore pressure ratio between the ﬁrst and sec-
ond earthquake is around 65%.
References
Acharya, B., Dasgupta, S.P., 2005. Consolidation of stone columned soil.
Electron. J. Geotech. Eng. 10 (E).
Adalier, K., Elgamal, A., 2004. Mitigation of liquefaction and associated
ground deformations by stone columns. Eng. Geol. 72 (3–4), 275–291.
Ahlinhan, M.F., Achmus, M., 2010. Experimental investigation of critical
hydraulic gradients for unstable soils. International Conference on
Scour and Erosion, San Francisco, pp. 599–608.
Arulanandan, K., Loganathan, P., Krone, R.B., 1975. Pore and eroding
ﬂuid inﬂuences on surface erosion of soil. J. Geotech. Geoenviron.
Eng., ASCE 100 (GT1), 51–56.
Baez, J.I., Martin, G.R., 1992. Quantitative evaluation of stone column
techniques for earthquake liquefaction mitigation. Proceedings of the
10th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Madrid, Spain,
pp. 1477–1483.
Baez, J.I., Martin, G.R., 1993. Advances in the design of vibro systems for
the improvement of liquefaction resistance. Proceedings of the 7th
Annual Symp. of Ground Improvement, Vancouver Geotechnical
Society, Vancouver, BC.
Balaam, N.P., Booker, J.R., 1981. Analysis of rigid rafts supported by
granular piles. Int. J. Numer. Anal. Meth. Geomech. 5 (4), 379–403.
Ben Salem, Z., Frikha, W., Bouassida, M., 2016. Eﬀect of granular
column installation on excess pore pressure variation during soil
liquefaction. Int. J. Geomech., ASCE 16 (2). https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0000516, 04015046.
Boulanger, R.W., Idriss, I.M., Stewart, D.P., Hashash, Y., Schmidt, B.,
1998. Drainage capacity of stone columns or gravel drains for
mitigating liquefaction. In: Dakoulas, P., Yegian, M., Holtz, R.D.
(Eds.), Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics III.
Geotechnical Special Publication. ASCE, Reston, VA, pp. 678–690.
Bowles, J.E., 1997. Foundation Analysis and Design, ﬁfth ed. McGraw-
Hill, Singapore.
Chugaev, R.R., 1962. Gru¨ndungsumriss von Wasserbauwerken. Moskau
Leningrad (in Russian).
De alba, P., Seed, H., Chan, C.K., 1976. Sand liquefaction in large scale
simple shear tests. J. Geotech. Eng. Div., ASCE 102 (9), 909–927.
Deb, K., Shiyamalaa, S., 2016. Eﬀect of clogging on rate of consolidation
of stone column-improved ground by considering particle migration.
Int. J. Geomech., ASCE 16 (1). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
GM.1943-5622.0000492, 04015017.
Elias, V., Welsh, J., Warren, J., Lukas, R., 2001. Ground Improvement
Technical Summaries. Vol – II, Publication No – FHWA-SA-98-086R.
Federal Highway Administration, Washington D.C..
Evans, M.D., Zhou, S., 1995. Liquefaction behavior of sand – gravel
composites. J. Geotech. Eng. Div., ASCE 121 (3), 287–298.
Frey, J.M., Schmitz, P., Dufreche, J., Gohr Pinhero, I., 1999. Particle
deposition in porous media: analysis of hydrodynamic and weak
inertial eﬀects. Transp. Porous Media 37, 25–54.
Gruesbeck, C., Collins, R.E., 1982. Entrainment and deposition of ﬁne
particles in porous media. Soc. Petrol. Eng. 22 (6), 847–856.
Han, J., Ye, S.L., 2001. Simpliﬁed method for consolidation rate of stone
column reinforced foundations. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., ASCE
127
(7),
597–603.
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2001)
127:7(597).
Han, J., Ye, S.L., 2002. A theoretical solution for consolidation rates of
stone column-reinforced foundations accounting for smear and well
resistance eﬀects. Int. J. Geomech., ASCE 2 (2), 135–151.
Hillel, D., 1980. Fundamentals of Soil Physics. Academic Press, Inc., San
Diego, CA.
Indraratna, B., Basack, S., Rujikiyatkamjorn, C., 2013. A numerical
solution of stone column improved soft soil considering arching,
clogging and smear eﬀects. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., ASCE 139
(3), 377–394.
Khilar, K.C., Fogler, H.S., 1983. Water sensitivity of sand stones. Soc.
Petrol. Eng. 23 (1), 55–64.
Khilar, K.C., Fogler, H.S., Gray, D.H., 1985. Model for piping-plugging
in earthen structures. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., ASCE 111 (7),
833–846.
Khilar, K.C., Fogler, H.S., 1998. Migration of Fines in Porous Media.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
Murali Krishna, A., Madhav, M.R., 2008. Densiﬁcation and dilation
eﬀects of granular piles in liquefaction mitigation. Indian Geotech. J.
38 (3), 295–316.
Okeke, A.C., Wang, F., 2016. Critical hydraulic gradients for seepage
induced failure of landslide dams. Geoenviron. Disast. 3 (9), 1–22.
Onoue, A., Mori, N., Takano, J.U.N., 1987. In-situ experiment and
analysis on well resistance of gravel drains. Soils Found. 27 (2), 42–60.
Onoue, A., 1988. Diagrams considering well resistance for designing
spacing ratio of gravel drains. Soils Found. 28 (3), 160–168.
Pal, S., Deb, K., 2018. Eﬀect of stiﬀness of stone column on drainage
capacity during soil liquefaction. Int. J. Geomech., ASCE 18 (3).
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0001108, 04018003.
206
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
Priebe, H.J., 1989. The prevention of liquefaction by vibro-replacement.
Proceeding of the Earthquake Resistance Construction and Design
Berlin, Germany.
Rollins, K., Anderson, J.K.S., Goughnour, R.R., Mccain, A.K., 2004.
Liquefaction hazard mitigation using vertical composite drains.
Proceedings of the 13th World Conference on Earthquake Engineer-
ing, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 1–6.
Seed, H.B., Booker, J.R., 1977. Stabilization of potentially liqueﬁable
sand deposits. J. Geotech. Eng. Div., ASCE 103 (7), 757–768.
Seed, H.B., Idriss, I.M., Makidisi, F., Banerjee, N., 1975a. Representation
of Irregular Stress Time Histories by Equivalent Uniform Stress Series
in Liquefaction Analyses. EERC 75–29. Univ. of California, Berkeley,
CA.
Seed, H.B., Martin, P.P., Lysmer, J., 1975b. The Generation and
Dissipation of Pore Water Pressures during Soil Liquefaction. EERC
75–26. Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA.
Sujatha, K.P., 1998. Analysis of reinforcement and densiﬁcation eﬀects in
improved ground M.Tech. Thesis. Indian Institute of Technology,
Kanpur, India.
Tai, P., Indraratna, B., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., 2017. Experimental simula-
tion and mathematical modelling of clogging in stone column. Can.
Geotech. J. https://doi.org/10.1139/cgj-2017-0271.
Weijers, J.B.A., Sellmeijer, J.B., 1993. A new model to deal with the piping
mechanism. In: Brauns, J.,
Heibaum, M., Schuler, U. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Filters in
Geotechnical and Hydraulic Engineering. Balkema, Rotterdam, pp.
345–355.
S. Pal, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 196–207
207
