First moment of area
The first moment of area is based on the mathematical construct moments in metric spaces. It is a measure of the spatial distribution of a shape in relation to an axis.
The first moment of area of a shape, about a certain axis, equals the sum over all the infinitesimal parts of the shape of the area of that part times its distance from the axis [Σad].
First moment of area is commonly used to determine the centroid of an area.
Given an area A of any shape and a division of that area into n very small elemental areas (dAᵢ), let xᵢ and yᵢ be the distances (coordinates) to each elemental area measured from a given x–y axis. The first moment of area in the x and y directions are respectively given by:
and
The SI unit for first moment of area is a cubic metre (m3). In the American Engineering and
Gravitational systems the unit is a cubic foot (ft3) or more commonly inch3.
The static or statical moment of area, usually denoted by the symbol Q, is a property of a shape that is used to predict its resistance to shear stress. By definition:
where
Qj,x – the first moment of area "j" about the neutral x axis of the entire body (not the neutral axis of the area "j"); dA – an elemental area of area "j"; y – the perpendicular distance to the centroid of element dA from the neutral axis x.
The equation for shear flow in a particular web section of the cross-section of a semi-monocoque structure is:
Definition
Shear stress in a semi-monocoque structure q – the shear flow through a particular web section of the cross-section
Vy – the shear force perpendicular to the neutral axis x through the entire cross-section
Sx – the first moment of area about the neutral axis x for a particular web section of the cross-section
Ix – the second moment of area about the neutral axis x for the entire cross-section
Shear stress may now be calculated using the following equation:
– the shear stress through a particular web section of the cross-section q – the shear flow through a particular web section of the cross-section t – the thickness of a particular web section of the cross-section at the point being measured[1]
Second moment of area
Polar moment of inertia
Section modulus
1. Shigley's Mechanical Engineering Design, 9th Ed. (Page 96)
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_moment_of_area&oldid=1332765243"
See also
References