IMPROVEMENT OF SLOPE STABILITY AS A RESULT
OF COMBINING DIVERSE REINFORCEMENT METHODS
Eugeniusz Koda, Piotr OsiĔski
Warsaw University of Life Sciences – SGGW
Abstract. The paper presents several methods of slopes reinforcement using anthropo-
genic materials, geosynthetics and bio-engineering methods. The case study to be presented 
proves that complex combination of slope engineering techniques inÀ uences the factor of 
safety of slopes signi¿ cantly. The reinforcing materials used consisted of tires mattresses, 
waste material from land¿ ll site, composition of geotextiles, geogrids and vegetation cover. 
The assessment of applied solution ef¿ ciency was conducted using numerical modeling and 
long term observations of the reinforced structures. The computation of factor of safety was 
conducted including all the geotechnical parameters of materials used. Furthermore, the 
research revealed that application of plants with geotextile and compost underlying signi¿ -
cantly improved the slope stability conditions. The results of numerical analysis and com-
prehensive observation con¿ rmed the correctness of combination of the methods applied. 
The computed factor of safety for bare slopes has signi¿ cantly increased, and basically, no 
signs of failures were noticed at the site.
Key words: land¿ ll, slope failure, geotextile, vegetation cover, recycled material
INTRODUCTION
A stability of slopes very often becomes one of main problems when considering em-
bankment type landfills. The reclamation of such sites gives a lot of opportunities for the 
application of several reinforcement methods including i.e. bio-engineering techniques, uti-
lization of reused materials or application of geotextiles. During the exploitation of a land-
fill and its reclamation quite commonly such anthropogenic materials as ballast waste and 
debris, used tiers mattresses, diluted leachate, fly ash and sewage sludge, all used for the 
slope stability improvement are utilized [Pisarczyk 2004, Drągowski 2010]. There are also 
many researches conducted on utilization of waste combustion and power plant by-prod-
ucts improving the stability of engineering structures [Katsumi et al. 2010, Koda 2012].
Architectura 11 (1) 2012, 3–14
Corresponding author – Adres do korespondencji: Eugeniusz Koda, Warsaw University of Life 
Sciences – SGGW, Department of Geotechnical Engineering, 159 Nowoursynowska St., 02-776 
Warsaw, e-mail: eugeniusz_koda@sggw.pl
4                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
The paper presents the slope stability improvement of Radiowo landfill located nearby 
Warsaw. Radiowo landfill is located in the north-western part of Warsaw. Since early 60’s 
to 1991 it was the place, where municipal waste from all around Warsaw was disposed. 
Currently, it covers ca. 15 ha area, and exceeds the height of 55 m. Since 1992 only non-
composted waste from Radiowo compostory plant have been disposed on the landfill. 
The non-composted waste consists mainly of: plastics, textiles, glass and debris. The 
organic matter content for this waste is ca. 4%. Central and southern parts of the landfill 
are filled with old municipal waste (15–40 years), while the upper layers in the north part 
are filled with fresh non-composted products.
The combination of above mentioned reinforcement techniques were used for the sta-
bility improvement of the Radiowo landfill site. The stability reinforcement methods on 
the landfill consist of berms (constructed with selected waste materials), geogrids and mat-
tresses made of used tires, and the utilization of slag as a backfill material was also con-
sidered for this purpose. The compost produced from mixed waste in the compostory plant 
could be utilized for the capping layer creation on the landfill’s surface, and also could be 
used as vital layer enhancing the establishment of plants [Gourc and Staub 2010].
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Determination of geotechnical parameters of Radiowo landfill
The subsoil of Radiowo landfill generally consists of cohesive soils. The groundwater 
level is at the depth of 0–1.0 m. On the basis of CPT and DMT tests, following shear 
strength parameters for stability analysis were proposed: ĳƍ = 27°, cƍ = 40 kPa (cohesive 
soils) and ĳƍ = 33° (non-cohesive soils). The investigation of the field’s capacity of waste, 
i.e. maximum water content without the leachate, was also carried out on Radiowo land-
fill. The test results were used in the analysis of the water balance for the waste body on 
the landfills. The in situ tests were conducted to determine the mechanical parameters of 
waste for stability analysis, settlement prediction and estimation of bearing capacity for 
road foundation. The shear strength parameters for stability analysis were determined on 
the basis of waste morphological tests, WST and CPT tests [Manassero et al. 1996] as 
well as slope failure tests on trial embankments and back analysis of landslides. 
The main purpose of these tests was to explore the existing landfill entirely, i.e. to 
determine shear parameters in order to assure safe slope inclination. The investigations 
consisting of displacement measurements, WST and CPT soundings [Jessberger 1993, 
Brandl 2008], back analysis (including slope failure tests) were carried out. In the case 
of Radiowo landfill, morphological composition of waste creates an additional factor 
influencing mechanical parameters. Organic matter content for non-composted waste is 
ca. 4%, while for fresh municipal waste it is 40–50% [Koda 2011].
The WST sounding was generally performed in the vicinity of the main road construct-
ed on the landfill. The tests have been repeated when 5 m thick layer of waste had been 
laid. The sounding results are used for the quality control of the road foundation compac-
tion. The average amount of N20 for fresh waste was approximately 10, but for old waste 
– locally of approximately 5. The amount of N20 increases twice, when disposed waste 
was separated with sand layers. The results of in situ tests are presented in Figure 1.
Improvement of slope stability as a result of combining diverse... 
5
Architectura 11 (1) 2012
The CPT soundings in Radiowo were carried out in the northern part of the landfill, 
to the depth of approximately 25 m (Fig. 2). The CPT tests interpretation procedures, 
widely used for the evaluation of shear parameters for soils, were adopted for waste. The 
effective internal friction angle for waste was reached within the range of ĳƍ = 25–45°, 
with local values ĳƍ = 20–25°. These values were received after having considered waste 
as non-cohesive soils. Test results confirm the existence of waste cohesion. The CPT 
test interpretation for waste, analogically to cohesive soils, gave total shear strength of 
Ĳfu = 80 kPa for non-composted and Ĳfu = 90 kPa for municipal wastes.
Cone resistance, qc [MPa]
Opór stożka
odpady niezagęszczone
odpady  stare
Depth [m]
Głębokość
grunt
Side friction resistance, fS [MPa]
Tarcie na tulei
Profile
Profiles
Fig. 2. 
The example of CPT test results for Radiowo land¿ ll
Rys. 2. 
Przykáad wyników sondowania CPT na skáadowisku Radiowo
a) layers
warstwy
b) fresh waste
    odpady świeże
c) old waste
    odpady stare
Depth [m]
Głębokość
waste/odpady (0.7 m)
sand/piasek (0.3 m)
N20
N20
N20
Fig. 1. 
The example of WST test results for different waste on the land¿ ll
Rys. 1. 
Przykáadowe wyniki sondowaĔ WST dla róĪnych odpadów na skáadowisku
6                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
The shear strength parameters of waste used in calculation were obtained from back 
analyses of previously occurred failures and from the trial loading of the experimental 
embankment (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. 
Trial loading of the experimental embankment constructed on Radiowo land¿ ll [Koda 
2011]
Rys. 3. 
ObciąĪenia próbne nasypu doĞwiadczalnego na skáadowisku Radiowo [Koda 2011]
Numerical stability analyses of Radiowo land¿ ll slopes
The back-stability analysis by the Bishop (GEO-SLOPE program) and FEM
(Z-SOIL program) methods were performed for three chosen cross-sections of Radi-
owo landfill and was applied for shear strength parameters verification (Fig. 4). The 
analysis for cross-section A-A, where the landslide occurred in 1991, is of particular 
importance. The failure surface was confirmed by the CPT tests. The results of calcula-
tion indicated that the surface of sliding was almost circle (Fig. 5). Slope inclination of 
the landfill just before the failure was 1:1.1, and its height was 46 m. Calculations with 
a classical method confirmed the results obtained by FEM Similar results achieved for 
stable slopes (Table 1).
Table 1. Stability factors from back-analysis of slopes on Radiowo land¿ ll
Tabela 1. Wspóáczynniki statecznoĞci skarp skáadowiska Radiowo metodą analizy wstecznej
Cross-section
Przekrój
F
Method
Metoda
Slope condition
Stan skarpy
A-A
0.989
1.03
Bishop
FEM
Landslide
Osuwisko
(in 1991)
B-B
1.029
1.08
Bishop
FEM
Slope with cracking
SpĊkania
C-C
1.142
1.19
Bishop
FEM
Stable slope
Skarpa stabilna
Improvement of slope stability as a result of combining diverse... 
7
Architectura 11 (1) 2012
Fig. 4. 
Cross-sections for the back – and stability analysis on Radiowo land¿ ll
Rys. 4. 
Przekroje wytypowane do analizy wstecznej skarp skáadowiska Radiowo
C
C
A
A
2
2
6
6
design bike path
ścieżka rowerowa 
cut-off wall
przesłona przeciwfiltracyjna
zone of retential capacity
strefa  pojemności polowej 
pomp station
pompownia 
CPT sounding
sondowania CPT 
WST sounding
sondowania WST 
cross section for slop analysis
przekroje do analizy
stateczności skarp  
B
LEGEND
8                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
In the case of Radiowo landfill, the morphological composition of waste creates an 
additional factor influencing mechanical parameters. The results of back-analysis con-
firmed the proper choice of shear waste parameters as well as the possibility of uses of 
both classical and FEM methods for stability landfill design. Next steps of calculation 
were carried out for the design of slope reinforcement and formation of the landfill sur-
face.
RESULTS
Land¿ ll slopes reinforcement with the use of anthropogenic materials
and bio-engineering method
It is highly recommended that the inclination of the landfill slope should fall in the 
range of 1 : 3 – 1.2.5. Such conditions assure the stability of slopes and allow efficient 
implementation of the vegetation cover on the surface [Koda et al. 2012].
In cases when the slope failure is very likely to occur, it is recommended to undertake 
activities improving the stability [Fang 1993, Santos et al. 2010]. Most commonly applied 
solutions in such cases are:
í decrease of slope inclination (if there is enough space at the embankment toe),
í retaining wall, gabions or berms,
í reinforcement materials such as geosynthetics, horizontal reinforcement.
Fig. 5. 
Back-analysis of landslide in Radiowo land¿ ll by Bishop method (Slope/W program)
Rys. 5. 
Analiza wsteczna osuwiska na skáadowisku Radiowo metodą Bishopa (program Slope/W)
przekrój przez 
skáadowisko 
odpady stare 
odpady stare 
Distance [m]
OdlegáoĞü
Elevation [m]
WysokoĞü
Improvement of slope stability as a result of combining diverse... 
9
Architectura 11 (1) 2012
The example of utilisation of waste materials, as a reinforcement solution is pre-
sented for the Radiowo landfill site. The site boarders with a railway siding at west, and 
additionally in the close vicinity of the slope’s toe there is also a gas pipeline installed. 
The initial inclination of 60 m high slope was 1 : 2.8, what made the slope potentially 
unstable. As the surrounding area was very limited, the reinforcement of the slope con-
sisted of berm, and the higher part was reinforced with PE geogrid, and additionally 
three layers of used tires mattresses were build in, the scheme of construction is pre-
sented in Figures 6 and 7. The computations assuring the effectiveness of such solution 
are presented in Figure 8. 
 
schem at  á ączenia opon
m at erace z opon
geosiat ka
odpady
podá oĪe
kom post
grunt  spoist y
t ory
droga t echn.
nasyp
dociąĪając y
Fig. 6. 
Cross-section of the analysed reinforced slope at Radiowo land¿ ll [Koda 2012]
Rys. 6. 
Przekrój przez wzmocnioną skarpĊ skáadowiska Radiowo [Koda 2012]
Fig. 7. 
Construction of the used tires mattresses layers on Radiowo land¿ ll [Koda 2012]
Rys. 7. 
Konstrukcja warstwy materacy ze zuĪytych opon na skáadowisku Radiowo [Koda 2012]
10                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
.
.
.
.
.
0.
20.
40.
60.
80.
100.
120.
140.
Z_SOIL v.4.23
PROJECT : rad-dr2a
DATE : 1999-02-26  h. 14:14:13
t-ref.=0.
t = 0.
Safety=1.41
DISPLACEMENT-ABS
 0
0.
 14.99e+001
 29.99e+001
 31.49e+002
 41.99e+002
 52.49e+002
 62.99e+002
 73.49e+002
 83.99e+002
 94.49e+002
104.99e+002
Fig. 8. 
Stability analysis of the western slope of Radiowo land¿ ll with FEM [Koda 2011]
Rys. 8. 
Analiza statecznoĞci zachodniej skarpy skáadowiska Radiowo metodą MES [Koda 2011]
The construction of berm (Fig. 9) allowed gaining additional space for the further waste 
disposal, which occurred to be a crucial advantage according to a huge problem of the 
waste management in Warsaw at the time. Within an actual construction plan of the land-
fill the amount of waste to be disposed at the site (ballast waste, slag, ash) is 450,000 Mg, 
and the waste to be reused (debris, ceramic waste, soil, compost, winning) is 300,000 Mg.
Fig. 9. 
The scheme of the berm construction with stability analysis
Rys. 9. 
Schemat konstrukcji nasypu dociąĪającego wraz z analizą statecznoĞci
compost
clay
waste
sand
sand
compacted
clay
Soil to be
removed
Scheme of berm construction
160
171
146
130
111.6
"A"
technological
plane
technological
plane
technological
plane
półka technologiczna
Konstrukcja nasypu dociążającego
Nasyp dociążający (odpady, grunt, gruz) 
Improvement of slope stability as a result of combining diverse... 
11
Architectura 11 (1) 2012
Beyond the technical activities for the slope stability improvement purpose on the 
Radiowo landfill, there were also bio-engineering techniques applied with additional use 
of geosythetics. By using the Slip4Ex spreadsheet [Greenwood 2006], it is possible to 
assess how the distribution and type of vegetation can influences the Factor of Safety. 
In the present study slopes, where the vegetation cover was applied, have been assessed 
to see whether implementation of plants affected the resulting stability significantly. In 
Slip4EX the Factor of Safety can be calculated by using several equations developed 
by Greenwood, however in this study the Greenwood General Method was used, as it 
presents similar characteristics to other methods used in this study. For the purpose of 
enhancing FOS, some parts of slopes where cover with trees, bushes, and grass. For those 
slopes additional computation have been conducted and the results presented in Table 2. 
The research proved that vegetation establishment has increased the factor of safety by as 
much as 20%. The overall scheme of FOS computation with the use of numerical mod-
eling is presented in Figure 10.
Fig. 10. The inÀ uence of the vegetation cover on slope stability [OsiĔski 2012]
Rys. 10. Wpáyw okrywy roĞlinnej na statecznoĞü skarpy [OsiĔski 2010]
okrywa roĞlinna
Distance [m]
OdlegáoĞü
Elevation [m]
WysokoĞü
For the confirmation of a reliability of the solutions presented in the paper Table 2 is 
provided, where the statement and comparison of factors of safety for landfill slopes be-
fore the introduction of reclamation activities and afterwards results are presented. Con-
struction of berms seems to be the most effective method of the stability improvement of 
old landfills, however it needs the extension of the landfill in its close vicinity. The tire 
mattresses seem to be a cheap and effective method of the slope stability reinforcement 
in the landfill conditions. The stability factors of slope obtained from FEM method are 
a little higher than from classical methods. In the case of classical methods, it should be 
considered whether circle surface of sliding is suitable for a real failure mechanism.
12                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
Table 2. The results of the stability analysis for the Radiowo site acc. to Bishop, FEM and Green-
wood methods
Tabela 2. Wyniki analizy statecznoĞci Radiowa metodami Bishopa, MES, Greenwood
Slope Cross-
Section
Przekrój 
skarpy
FOS without 
reinforcement
Wspóáczynnik 
statecznoĞci
bez wzmocnieĔ
Reinforcements
Wzmocnienia
FOS with
reinforcement
Wspóáczynnik 
statecznoĞü 
z wzmocnieniami
FOS
with plants
Wspóáczynnik 
statecznoĞü 
dla okrywy 
roĞlinnej
Bishop
FEM
Bishop
FEM
Greenwood
Western – I 
Zachodni
1.04
1.13
Berm (nasyp 
dociąĪający), 
tyre mattress 
(materac 
z opon),
geogrid 
(geosiatka)
1.40
1.42
1.52
Northern – III 
Pólnocny
1.03
1.11
Inclination 
change
(zmiana 
nachyleĔ),
geogrid
(geosiatka)
1.68
1.75
1.84
Ekstern – IV 
Wschodni
1.18
1.23
Berm
(nasyp 
dociąĪający)
1.57
1.62
1.78
CONCLUSIONS
The reclamation of old sanitary landfills is a long term process, and it often requires 
complex and unusual technical and biological activities to be applied. The solutions pre-
sented in the paper show the variety of techniques and materials that could be used for the 
purpose of slope stability improvement, which is a crucial element in reclamation process 
of embankment type landfills.
The most appropriate slope stability improvement method for landfills is berms con-
struction filled with ballast waste, debris and soil residues from a landfill. This kind of 
solution helps gaining additional space for the further waste storage and often becomes 
alternative for the waste management plan at the site. As the example showed utilisation 
of used tires mattresses could also be an effective method of the slope reinforcement. Fur-
thermore, other waste material like compost could be a great substitute of humus for the 
surface reclamation layer establishment. It is also very useful material when considering 
The bio-engineering method which was successfully used for the natural reinforcement 
of slopes which positively influences also the erosion control on slopes, a factor directly 
driving to stability failures. 
To sum up all the techniques combined together allowed achieving the required effect 
of the Radiowo landfill slopes stability improvement.
Improvement of slope stability as a result of combining diverse... 
13
Architectura 11 (1) 2012
REFERENCES
Brandl H., 2008. Environmental geotechnical engineering of land¿ lls and contaminated land. Proc. 
11th Baltic Sea Geotech. Conf. Geotech. Maritime Eng., GdaĔsk, 2, 803–826.
Drągowski A., 2010. Characteristics and classi¿ cation of anthropogenic soils. Przeg. Geolog. 58, 
9/2, 868–872 [in Polish].
Fang H.Y., 1993. Engineering behaviour of urban refuse, compaction and slope stability analysis 
of land¿ ll. General Report GREEN ’93. Proceedings of the International Symposium on 
Geotechnics Related to the Environment. Waste Disposal by Land¿ ll, Bolton, 47–72.
Gourc J.P., Staub M.J., 2010. Bio-hydro behavior of MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) and the im-
provement of land¿ ll environmental sustainability. Proceedings of the 6th International 
Congress on Environmental Geotechnics, New Delhi, 1, 24–39.
Grif¿ ths D.V., Lane P.A., 1999. Slope stability analysis by ¿ nite elements. Geotechnique 49, 3, 
387–403.
Jessberger H.J., 1993. Geotechnics of Land¿ lls Design and Remedial Works – Technical Recomen-
dations GLR. Ernst & Sohn, Berlin.
Katsumi T., Inui T., Kamon M., 2010. Sustainable geotechnics for reuse of by-products. Proc. 6th 
Inter. Congress Env. Geotech., 1, New Delhi, 302–317.
Koda E., 2011. Stability and pollutant transport from remediated land¿ lls with the use of Observa-
tional Method. Wydawnictwo SGGW, Warsaw [in Polish].
Koda E., 2012. Wykorzystanie materiaáów antropogenicznych do rekultywacji skáadowisk od-
padów. InĪ. Mor. Geotech. 4, 451–456.
Koda E., OsiĔski P., GáaĪewski M., 2012. Use of À y-ash and sewage sludge for the erosion control 
on sanitary land¿ ll slopes. Proc. GeoCongress 2012, State of the Art and Practice in Geo-
technical Engineering. ASCE 225, Oakland, 8828–8836.
Manassero M., Van Impe W.F., Bouazza A., 1996. Geotechnical properties of MSW. Proc. 2nd Inter. 
Congress Env. Geotech., Osaka III, 1425–1474.
Pisarczyk S., 2004. Anthropogenic soils. Geotechnical parameters and investigation. O¿ cyna Wy-
dawnicza Politechniki Warszawskiej, Warsaw [in Polish].
OsiĔski P., 2012. Ocena statecznoĞci skarp maáych budowli ziemnych. InĪ. Mor. Geotech. 4, 478–
–473.
Santos E.C.G., Vilar O.M., Palmeira E.M., 2010. The Use of Recycled Construction and Demolition 
Waste in Geosynthetic Reinforced Soil Structures: InÀ uence of the Recycling  Process. 
Proc. 6th Inter. Congress Env. Geotech., New Delhi, 1, 1105–1108.
POPRAWA STATECZNOĝCI SKARP JAKO WYNIK ZASTOSOWANIA 
ZRÓĩNICOWANYCH METOD WZMOCNIENIA
Streszczenie. Artykuá przedstawia zastosowanie zróĪnicowanych metod wzmocnienia 
skarp skáadowiska Radiowo przy uĪyciu materiaáów antropogenicznych, geosyntetyków 
oraz metod bioinĪynierii. Zaprezentowany w artykule przykáad dowodzi, iĪ kombinacja 
zbrojenia oraz ksztaátowania skarp znacząco poprawia wspóáczynnik statecznoĞci ogólnej. 
Materiaáy zastosowane w celu wzmocnienia skarp skáadaáy siĊ z materacy, zuĪytych opon, 
odpadów ze skáadowiska, materiaáów geosyntetycznych, geosiatek oraz technik bioinĪy-
nierskich. Ocena efektywnoĞci zastosowanych rozwiązaĔ zostaáa przeprowadzona na dro-
dze modelowania numerycznego oraz dáugotrwaáych obserwacji terenowych wzmocnionej 
konstrukcji. Obliczenia numeryczne przeprowadzono przy uwzglĊdnieniu wymaganych 
parametrów geotechnicznych zastosowanych materiaáów. Ponadto badanie dowiodáo, iĪ za-
stosowanie okrywy roĞlinnej wyĞcielonej materiaáem kompostowym znacząco poprawiáo 
14                                                                                                                                            E. Koda, P. OsiĔski
Acta Sci. Pol.
warunki statecznoĞci skarp rozpatrywanego obiektu. Wyniki analiz numerycznych oraz ob-
serwacje terenowe dowiodáy poprawnoĞci zastosowanych rozwiązaĔ, gdyĪ wspóáczynnik 
statecznoĞü ogólnej skarp wzmocnionych znacząco poprawiá siĊ w stosunku do warunków 
bez zbrojenia, a Īadne oznaki utraty statecznoĞci obiektu nie zostaáy do tej pory zaobser-
wowane.
Sáowa kluczowe: skáadowisko, osuwisko, geosyntetyki, okrywa roĞlinna, materiaáy odpa-
dowe
Accepted for print – Zaakceptowano do druku: 17.12.2012
