Modeling the Stone Column Behavior in Soft Ground with
Special Emphasis on Lateral Deformation
Sudip Basack, Ph.D., M.ASCE1; Buddhima Indraratna, Ph.D., F.ASCE2;
Cholachat Rujikiatkamjorn, Ph.D., A.M.ASCE3; and Firman Siahaan4
Abstract: Among various ground-improvement techniques, soft-soil reinforcement by stone columns is one of the most common and convenient methods with numerous benefits including increased bearing capacity and consolidation, reduced postconstruction settlement and lateral movement, and improved slope stability and liquefaction control, among others. Because of the limited confinement offered by the surrounding soft soil especially at shallow depths, lateral deformation of stone columns is not uncommon. Although several analytical and numerical solutions are available to predict the load-settlement performance and consolidation characteristics of stone-column-improved soft ground, most existing models do not accurately capture the lateral deformation of stone columns. In view of this, the authors have developed in-house a novel numerical model based on the Fast Lagrangian Finite-Difference technique with associated subroutines to analyze the behavior of a stone column including its lateral deformation. In particular, the displacement compatibility and the barreling effect are con- sidered in the model. Soft-soil consolidation under imposed loading is considered by adopting the modified Cam-clay theory. The proposed solutions are validated using available field observations and existing numerical solutions. The model was successfully applied to a selected case study at the Pacific Highway near the town of Ballina, New South Wales, Australia. It is demonstrated that both the deformation pattern and bulging depth of stone columns are dependent on several factors including the particle interlock, imposed load-intensity, soil-column
Society of Civil Engineers.
Author keywords: Finite-difference method; Interfaces; Lateral displacement; Soft soils; Stone columns.
Introduction
Reducing the long-term settlement of infrastructure and enabling cost-effective foundations with sufficient load-bearing capacities are essential criteria for developing infrastructure in most countries
(Black et al. 2007) because soft-soil foundations can cause exces- sive settlement that induces undrained soil failure without effective ground improvement
(Indraratna
2009).
Although different ground-improvement techniques have been used over several dec- ades, reinforcing soft ground by installing stone columns is now an established technique worldwide (Sivakumar et al. 2011; Wang
2009) because this method increases the bearing capacity, reduces postconstruction settlement and lateral movement of soil, improves the stability of slopes, and controls liquefaction (Guetif et al. 2007;
Fatahi et al. 2012a; Bouassida and Carter 2014).
For a typical fill embankment, high column-to-soil stiffness ra- tio initiates an arching effect of the surcharge load over the stone columns, resulting in an uneven distribution of vertical stress on the surface even under free strain (Indraratna et al. 2013). The dissi- pation of excess pore-water pressure initiates the consolidation of soft soil. However, during consolidation, excessive hydraulic gradient at the soil–column interface causes migration of clay par- ticles to the column pores, initiating clogging (Adalier and Elgamal
2004; Indraratna et al. 2013). Under imposed loading, reactions such as arching, clogging, and lateral deformation occur simulta- neously in soft ground reinforced by stone columns (Basack et al.
2015b), as shown in Fig. 1. The lateral deformations of stone col- umns are essentially time-dependent.
Although numerous analytical and numerical studies have been proposed in the past to study the load-transfer and consolidation characteristics of stone-column-reinforced soft ground (Alamgir et al.
1996; Han and Ye 2001, 2002; Wang 2009; Lu et al. 2010; Indraratna et al. 2013), these models have been based on the assumption of purely vertical deformation of the columns and the surrounding soil, while ignoring any lateral deformation (i.e., under K0-conditions).
The load-bearing capacity of stone-column-reinforced soft ground depends upon the lateral confinement of columns offered by the surrounding soil (Black et al. 2007; Hughes et al. 1975;
McKenna et al. 1975). In the case of soft clay at shallow depths where such lateral confinement is significantly low, the reinforced ground may not be able to support the imposed loading because of excessive bulging of the columns (Moseley and Kirsch 2004). As the lateral confinement increases with depth, significant lateral
1Research Academic (Australian Research Council), Centre for Geome- chanics and Railway Engineering, School of Civil, Mining and Environ- mental Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences,
Univ. of Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail: sudip@uow.edu.au; basackdrs@hotmail.com.
2Distinguished Professor of Civil Engineering and Research Director,
Centre for Geomechanics and Railway Engineering; Program Leader,
ARC Centre of Excellence in Geotechnical Science and Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences, Univ. of Wollongong,
Wollongong City, NSW 2522, Australia (corresponding author). E-mail:
indra@uow.edu.au
3Associate Professor, Centre for Geomechanics and Railway Engineer- ing, Univ. of Wollongong, Wollongong City, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail:
cholacha@uow.edu.au
4Ph.D. Candidate, Centre for Geomechanics and Railway Engineering,
Univ. of Wollongong, Wollongong City, NSW 2522, Australia. E-mail:
frs904@uowmail.edu.au
Note. This manuscript was submitted on October 9, 2015; approved on
September 21, 2016; published online on February 21, 2017. Discussion period open until July 21, 2017; separate discussions must be submitted for individual papers. This paper is part of the Journal of Geotechnical and
04017016-1
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
deformation (bulging) of the column usually occurs only at rela- tively shallow depths (McKelvy et al. 2004). In past case studies, it has been shown that the failure of a column group largely occurs due to excessive bulging of individual stone columns (Hughes and
Withers 1974; Hanna et al. 2013; Han 2015). Therefore, the main aim of this study was to model the reinforced-soft-ground behavior with special emphasis on the lateral deformation of columns to examine the corresponding load-deformation response.
An analytical correlation was proposed by Brauns (1978) to evaluate the extent of bulging (i.e., column portion that has under- gone significant lateral deformation) and thereby to estimate the true bearing capacity. The total column compression was evaluated from the deformations of the bulged and unaffected column por- tions (Deng et al. 2003; Sun and Gong 2008). An elastic solution that considered the effect of stress concentration ratio, internal fric- tion of column particles, and soft-soil strength was developed by
Zhang et al. (2013). However, the previous models did not analyze the true lateral deformation pattern of stone columns initiated under induced stresses and time-dependant consolidation.
The unit cell analogy appears to successfully capture the long- term performance of soft soil improved by stone columns close to the embankment centerline (Lorenzo and Bergado 2004; Murugesan and Rajagopal 2010), although this approach may not predict the true behavior accurately at locations away from the centerline due to several reasons including large strain conditions, column distortion, plastic deformation, heaving at toe, etc. (Indraratna et al. 2013).
In this study, a finite-difference-based numerical solution on the long-term performance of stone-column-improved soft clay previ- ously developed by Indraratna et al. (2013) and Basack et al.
(2015b) has been substantially extended to accurately capture the lateral deformation. An in-house numerical model has been developed based on the Fast Lagrangian Finite-Difference ap- proach with corresponding subroutines. It performs significantly faster than some available commercial software without compro- mising the output accuracy. The initial lateral deformation of column is induced under imposed embankment loading, which pro- gresses with consolidation. Correlations for the induced stresses and strains in the column were derived taking into account of the barreling effect originated from the possible end restraints of the column. The consolidation pattern of the surrounding soft clay has been captured by the radial consolidation theory (Barron 1947) incorporating the modified Cam-clay model (Roscoe and Burland
1968). The condition of displacement compatibility was applied at the column–soil interface. The parametric studies carried out and conclusions derived therefrom are discussed in this paper.
Previous solutions (Indraratna et al. 2013; Basack et al. 2015a) were predominantly focused on the load-transfer mechanisms and the role of consolidation characteristics of the reinforced soil, rather than on the lateral deformation of stone columns, which forms the primray objective here. Zhang et al. (2013) considered the bulging of columns, but their model is based on the elastic deformations of the column related to the vertical and radial stress components in- duced by the imposed surface load, without considering the effect of time-dependent soil consolidation. In the present study, the authors have also considered the influence of radial consolidation on the deformation characteristics of the soil and column. Also, the vertical column deformation is evaluated by applying a displace- ment compatibility at the interface, while the lateral column deformation is analyzed by considering both the stress-induced component and the barreling effect. Apart from time-dependant vertical and lateral deformation patterns of the column, the influ- ences of particle interlock, clay cohesion, earth pressure coefficient,
Fig. 1. Typical stone column under embankment surcharge loading demonstrating simultaneous arching, clogging, and lateral deformation (adapted from Basack et al. 2015b)
04017016-2
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
column geometry, and stress concentration ratio have been consid- ered. Moreover, the corresponding load-carrying capacity of the reinforced soft clay has also been captured.
Analytical and Numerical Modeling
The analysis has been carried out for an isolated stone column adopting a unit cell analogy based on the free strain hypothesis, which closely resembles an embankment loading condition
(Indraratna et al. 2013; Deb and Shiyamalaa 2015). The computa- tions have been performed by finite-difference discretization using forward, backward, and central difference techniques. The salient features of the model are described in the following sections.
Problem Identification
Fig. 2(a) portrays the problem, where the layer of soft clay of thick- ness H overlays an impervious rigid boundary and supports an embankment loading with an average intensity, ¯w. Thus, for an em- bankment height He and unit weight γe carrying a surcharge load with intensity wsur, the average intensity ¯w is given as w _ wsur þ γeHe ð1Þ
Within the unit cell, the radii of the column and the unit cell are rc and re, respectively. Following a previous analysis (Indraratna et al. 2013), the cross section of the entire unit cell has been dis- cretized into four distinct zones as shown in Fig. 2(a): an unclogged column zone, a clogged column zone, a smear zone, and an outer undisturbed soil zone. The constant unit weight and Poisson’s ratio of the soft clay are γs and νs, while those of the column were γc and νc, respectively.
In most cases, the shear strength of soil has been observed to increase with depth (Skempton 1948; Moavenian et al. 2016). This variation is often assumed to be linear and such a simplification has been found to yield satisfactory results in some bearing-capacity analyses too (e.g., Raymond 1967; Davis and Booker 1973). In the present study, the soft soil has been assumed to possess an initial undrained cohesion of cu0, which is assumed to increase lin- early with depth at a constant rate of ζ.
Recent experimental studies using computed tomography (CT) scanning have revealed that the thickness of the clogged column zone varies with depth (Basack et al. 2015c). However, to simplify the already-complex mathematical expressions, the properties of the clogged column zone and its thickness have been assumed to be constant with depth. This simplification is justified as the numerical results can still provide a reasonable agreement with the field observations (Indraratna et al. 2013; Basack et al. 2015b).
For finite-difference computation, both the column and soil within the unit cell have been divided vertically into a number of equal divisions, nz, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The soil mass (includ- ing the clogged column zone) is divided radially into a number of equal divisions, nr, and the total computational time (tt) is equally discretized into nt divisions. The separators are hereby referred to as nodes and the soil elements are ring-shaped. The specific time tt is the desired computational time to be chosen arbitrarily. Each ra- dial, vertical, and time division (δr, δz, and δt, respectively) are given by δr _ re −αrc nr −1 ð2aÞ δz _
H nz −1 ð2bÞ δt _ tt nt −1 ð2cÞ where α = ratio of the radii of the unclogged zone to the overall column.
Assumptions
The analysis was carried out based on the following assumptions:
•
The stone column is homogeneous and isotropic, although un- der sustained loading, its stiffness would probably alter progres- sively with induced stress components;
•
Axisymmetric deformation in the column and soil occurs both in the vertical and radial directions; at the unit cell boundary, even though the displacement is vertical, it is still axisymmetric;
•
Displacement compatibility exists at the column–soil interface;
•
The thickness of the clogged column zone remains constant dur- ing consolidation;
•
The flow of pore water in the soft clay is purely horizontal and towards the column; and
•
The soil is fully saturated and Darcy’s law is valid.
Load-Transfer Mechanism
As consolidation progresses, the surcharge fill arches over the re- inforced ground surface because of the relatively high column to soil stiffness ratio. When a steady state is reached, this arching ef- fect imposes an uneven load on the surface, as shown in Fig. 2(a).
The magnitudes and distribution pattern of imposed vertical stresses on the column and the soft soil surface are largely depen- dent on the column–soil stress concentration ratio and the arching effect (Indraratna et al. 2013).
Stress Concentration Ratio
Referring to Figs. 3(a and b), considering the normal stress com- ponents induced in the column, the vertical strain at Point A de- duced from the classical theory of solid mechanics (Timoshenko and Goodier 1970; Asaro and Lubarda 2011) is given by εv
A _ wcol −ϑcKswðrcÞ −ϑcwcoltan2ð45° −ϕc=2Þ
Ec ð3aÞ
Similarly, considering the stress components relevant to the soil element at A [Fig. 3(c)], the same vertical strain can also be written as εv
A _ wðrcÞ −2νsKswðrcÞ
Es ð3bÞ where wcol = vertical stress on column; wðrcÞ = vertical stress on soft clay at the interface; Ks = lateral to vertical ratio of soil stresses; ϕc = column friction angle; and Ec and Es = elastic moduli of the column and soft soil, respectively. Friction is mobilized at the clay–column interface due to nonuniform ground settlement under embankment loading (Indraratna et al. 2013). The vertical strain of soil indeed depends on the Poisson’s ratio (elastic) as well as the friction angle (elastoplastic).
Eqs. (3a) and (3b) have been derived from elastic correlations between the vertical strains and the normal stress components in- duced in the column and the soil, respectively, at Point A. Under induced embankment loading, the strain εv
A is compressive both in column and soil. From classical solid mechanics (Asaro and
Lubarda 2011; Timoshenko and Goodier 1970), the term εv
A is the resultant of the individual strain components induced by the vertical stress [wcol in the column element and wðrcÞ in the soil element] and that of the horizontal stresses Ks:wðrcÞ. Since the horizontal
04017016-3
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
(b)
(d)
(c)
(a)
(e)
Fig. 2. (a) Sections of unit cell; (b) finite-difference discretization (adapted from Basack et al. 2015b); (c) stress components on column element;
(d and e) three-dimensional and two-dimensional finite-difference grids, respectively
04017016-4
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
stresses induce an orthogonal tensile strain in the vertical direction, the terms νcKswðrcÞ and 2νsKswðrcÞ are negative in both equations.
Eliminating the term εV
A from the preceding equations and ap- plying the correlation wcol _ nswðrcÞ, where ns is the column–soil stress concentration ratio, the following expression is obtained:
ns _ ϑcKs þ Ec
Es ð1 −2ϑsKsÞ
1 −ϑctan2ð45° −ϕc=2Þ ð4Þ
Immediately after the embankment load is applied on the rein- forced ground surface, both the column and the surrounding soil undergo undrained elastic settlements (Deb 2010). As the deforma- tions progress, the secant moduli of both the column and soil con- tinue to decrease, which inevitably demands the vertical stress distribution on the reinforced ground surface to vary with time.
However, experimental investigations (e.g., Siahaan et al. 2014) have shown that the stress concentration ratio ns varies during the initial loading, but stabilizes asymptotically in a short time.
Similar observations have also been found in the analysis by
Han and Ye (2001), where the stress concentration ratios were found to increase in the initial stage of loading, but soon stabilized to a steady-state value. To simplify the already-complex equations, it is assumed that the secant moduli of the column and soil continue to decrease with the same ratio. Analysis based on this simplified assumption that the parameter ns to remain constant with time, has been proven to yield results that agree with the field observations
(e.g., Indraratna et al. 2013; Basack et al. 2015b). Thus, with the properly estimated value of the secant moduli of the column and soft clay relevant to the applied load range, the column–soil stress concentration ratio can be evaluated from the Eq. (4), which is sim- ilar to the available empirical correlations (e.g., FHWA 1983;
Siahaan et al. 2011).
Arching Effect
Attributed to the arching effect, the vertical load intensity wðreÞ on the soft-soil surface at the unit cell boundary is given by (Indraratna et al. 2013; Basack et al. 2015b) wðreÞ _ γerc ðN −1ÞðKp −1Þ
Kp −2 þ
 ws þ γeHe −γere
Kp −1
Kp −2
 ð1 −1=NÞðKp−1Þ ð5Þ where N _ re=rc; and Kp = passive earth pressure coefficient of the embankment material.
The distribution of the vertical stress wðrÞ on the soft-soil sur- face at a radial distance of r from unit cell centerline is parabolic with the slope diminishing at the unit cell boundary due to sym- metry (Indraratna et al. 2013). The appropriate expression for wðrÞ is therefore given by wðrÞ _ wðreÞ½1 −FðN −r=rcÞ2 ð6aÞ where the stress function F is given as
F _
N2 þ ns −1 −N2
¯w wðrcÞ

N2−1 þ ns
 ðN −1Þ2 ð6bÞ
Soft-Soil Consolidation
Using the radial consolidation theory (Barron 1947), the differen- tial equation relevant to dissipation of excess pore-water pressure is given by
∂urt
∂t _ kh mvγw
1 r
∂urt
∂r þ ∂2urt
∂r2
 ð7Þ where urt = excess pore-water pressure at the ith radial node; t = time; kh = horizontal permeability of soft soil; γw = unit weight of water; and mv = coefficient of volume compressibility of soil.
The characteristics of the smear zone depend on the technique used to install the columns in the field (Kirsch and Bell 2012). Han and Ye (2002) stated that for a typical stone column, the ratio rs=rc varies from 1.1 to 1.2, and kh=ks is usually in the order of 10, where rs is the radius of the smear zone and ks is the horizontal permeabil- ity of soil in the smear zone. In a past study by Wang (2009), the value of rs=rc was assumed to be in the range of 1–2 and kh=ks was 10.
Expressing Eq. (7) in a finite-difference form by applying for- ward, backward, and central difference techniques and by adopting appropriate boundary conditions, the unknown values of u for all nodal points can be evaluated (Indraratna et al. 2013). The ratio of horizontal permeability of the clogged column zone to the smear zone was denoted as αk. The void-ratio-dependent soil compress- ibility was incorporated into the model by adopting the modified
Cam-clay theory (Roscoe and Burland 1968; Basack et al. 2015a, c), and is expressed by mv _ −
3λp 0 ð1 þ 2KsÞp 0½1 þ e0 −λ lnðp 0=p 0
0Þ ð8Þ
(b)
(c)
(a)
Fig. 3. Loaded column and soil: (a) deformed column and ground surface; (b) stress components in column element at A; (c) stress com- ponent in soil element at A
04017016-5
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
where p 0 = average value of the mean effective stress in soil at a radial distance r and at time t; e0 = void ratio of soil corresponding to the unit effective pressure p 0
0; λ = slope of the e −ln p 0 curve; and
Ks = ratio of horizontal to vertical stress components in the soil.
While Eq. (7) is the governing equation for radial consolidation,
Eq. (8) considers the effect of stress variation via a nonlinear correlation between the void ratio and effective stress using the modified Cam-clay theory. Both the equations are then coupled to solve the stress variation through time and space. Thus, the stress distribution/variation with time is indeed an outcome of the time- dependent consolidation analysis.
To simplify the already-complex mathematical equations, the parameter Ks was assumed to remain constant during consolida- tion, which is a limitation of the model. It is very difficult to estimate the accurate value of the lateral to vertical ratio of soil stresses at the interface (Ks), whose value is expected to vary with depth and the magnitude of lateral deformation. Duncan and
Mokwa (2001) modeled the lateral earth pressure as hyperbolic function of lateral displacement, having a maximum value attaining the passive earth pressure. In the vicinity of bulged column zone at the interface, the lateral stress is expected to reach this maximum value. However, since it is difficult to estimate an appropriate value of the earth pressure coefficient Ks for other depths, a simplified assumption of in situ earth pressure condition (i.e., earth pressure at rest) throughout the column–soil interface has been made in past studies and considered as a reasonable option in developing math- ematical formulations (Raithal and Kempfert 2000; Zhang et al.
2013). In this paper, the value of Ks has been estimated from the available literature (Hayashi et al. 2012; Tong et al. 2013).
Considering the volumetric strain in the soil as being propor- tionate to the net volume of expelled water, the displacement at any point (r, z, t) in the soil is given as (Indraratna et al. 2013) ρrzt _ −
Z t
Z H z mv
∂urt
∂t dzdt ð9Þ
During consolidation, the undrained strength and stiffness of the soil increase progressively (Umezaki et al. 1993). Following this analysis of the correspondence between the effective stress, void ratio, and undrained shear strength of soft clay, the undrained cohesion at any point (r, z, t) in the space-time coordinate system may be written as (Indraratna et al. 2013) cuðr; z; tÞ _ cu0 þ ζcz
1 − e0−eðr;z;tÞ mvð1þe0Þp 0ðr;z;tÞ ð10Þ
Lateral Deformation of Column
The axisymmetric lateral deformation of stone column was as- sumed under the combined effect of deformation that originated from the induced axial and radial stress components and the bar- reling effect produced by the restraints at both ends of the column.
Commencing from the analysis of stresses, algebraic expressions have been derived to evaluate the displacement components at the column–soil interface.
Analysis of Stresses
The normal-stress and shear-stress components induced in a typical column element at a depth of z below the surface are shown in
Fig. 2(c). The vertical equilibrium of the element yielded the fol- lowing differential equation:
∂σzv
∂z _ 2 rc τz þ γc ð11Þ where σzv and τ z = axial-stress and shear-stress components, respectively.
Integration of the preceding equation yielded the following:
σzv _ wc þ 2 rc
Z z τ zdz þ γcz ð12Þ
The total axial stress induced in the column is limited to a maximum value given by (Hughes et al. 1975; Murugesan and
Rajagopal 2010) σzvmax _ ðσr0 þ 4cuÞtan2

45° þ ϕc
 ð13Þ where σr0 and cu = initial effective radial stress on the column and undrained cohesion of soil at a depth of twice the column diameter, respectively; and Φc = friction angle of the column particles.
The radial-stress component σzr was obtained as σzr _ ½wðrcÞ þ γszKs ð14Þ
According to the displacement compatibility between the soil and column at the interface (i.e., a no-slip condition), the axial stress-strain relationship of the column is given as
∂ρrczt
∂z
_ −1
Ec ðσzv −2μcσzrÞ ð15Þ
Differentiating Eq. (15) with respect to z and combining with
Eq. (11) leads to the following expression:
τz _

−Ec
∂2ρrczt
∂z2 þ Ksμcγs −γc
 rc ð16Þ where Ec = Young’s modulus of the column. Starting with an initial value of Ec, the stress components were determined using Eqs. (12),
(14), and (16), which may then be combined with Eq. (15) for obtaining a new value of Ec. The procedure was thus repeated until the desired convergence was achieved.
The vertical stress induced in the soft soil at a radial distance of r and depth z is given as σszv _ wðrÞ þ γsz ð17Þ
Stress-Induced Deformation
From the conventional theory of elasticity (Timoshenko and
Goodier 1970), the lateral deformation produced at the column–soil interface under axial-stress and radial-stress components is given as ρez _ νcrc
Ec
½σzv þ ð1 −1=νcÞσzr ð18Þ
It should be mentioned here that the analysis for determining Ec as described earlier is the secant modulus at the appropriate stress- strain levels induced in the column at the specific nodal point under consideration.
Eqs. (15)–(18) are based on the theory of elasticity. However, since the deformations are essentially time-dependant, the Young’s modulus Ec of the stone column varies with the strain levels and therefore, the stone column response can be considered as nonlin- ear elastic.
04017016-6
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Although the proposed model is based on the assumption of column–soil displacement compatibility at the interface (as dis- cussed in the “Assumptions” subsection), the differential settlement of the soft soil induces a frictional stress (denoted as τz at any depth z) at the interface due to shear distortion. In the analysis, the vertical strain induced in the column originated from stress-induced defor- mation and barreling effect. The first component is a function of the normal as well as shear stress components, as evidenced from
Eqs. (12) and (18). The barreling component, on the other hand, occurs due to significant frictional resistance at the top and bottom surface of the column.
In this analysis, the friction-induced deformation can be ne- glected because it is much smaller than the vertical strain caused by radial consolidation as captured in Eq. (9).
Barreling Effect
Due to significant frictional resistance at the top and bottom sur- faces of the column, the induced shear stress is likely to produce an additional component of horizontal deformation to the lateral sur- face of the column, which is similar to barreling of a solid cylinder under uniaxial compression (Schey et al. 1982; Carter and Lee
1985). The upper-bound analysis reveals that the barreling surface profile is essentially parabolic (Altinbalik and Çan 2011). Since the barreling is produced due to the shear stress alone, no volume change in the column is likely to occur (Kulkarni and Kalpakjian
1969). Applying these boundary conditions, the following correla- tions can then be obtained:
ρb z _ aðz2 −HzÞ þ ρe
Hð1 −ηbÞ z
H þ ρe
0ð1 −ηtÞ

1 −z
H
 ð19aÞ
Z H ρb z
 rc þ ρb z
 dz _ 0 ð19bÞ where ρb z = lateral deformation of column surface at a depth of z produced due to barreling effect alone; ρe
0 and ρe
H = stress-induced deformations at ground surface and base of the column, respec- tively; and ηt and ηb = nondimensional restraint factors defined herein as the ratio of the net lateral deformation to the stress- induced deformation component at the top and base of the column, respectively. The values of the restraint factors vary in the range of
0 ≤ηt; ηb ≤1. For complete fixity, the value should be essentially zero and increase up to unity for a no-restraint condition. More discussion on these restraint coefficients have been given in the
“Parametric Studies” section.
It is difficult to carry out a rigorous analysis to evaluate the true lateral-deformation component initiated by barreling. To simplify, an approximate analysis to estimate this barreling component has been chosen here, as described previously. The arbitrary constant a in Eq. (19a) has been derived by performing the integration in
Eq. (19b), which is then substituted into Eq. (19a) for obtaining the barreling components of nodal lateral deformations.
Net Lateral Deformation
The net lateral deformation of the column surface has been ex- pressed as the algebraic sum of the stress induced and the barreling components. Thus, the net lateral deformation ρtz at a depth of z is given by ρt z _ ρe z þ ρb z ð20Þ
Development of Computer Program
The entire computation was carried out using the finite-difference method and by adopting the forward, backward, and central differ- ence techniques. For this purpose, a user-friendly program Lateral
Deformation of Column (LDCOL) was written in FORTRAN 90, the flowchart of which is shown in Fig. 4. The computations were based on an iterative technique until the desired convergence was achieved (chosen as 1% in the current analysis). More information on the numerical technique adopted is available in the Appendix.
Fig. 4. Flowchart of the computer program LDCOL
04017016-7
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Validation
The model was validated by comparing the numerical results ob- tained from the model with the results of the field test and the existing numerical solutions. To validate the proposed solution, the comparison with reliable field data from available literature is most appropriate. There are several well-documented field based studies on the reinforced soft-soil behavior (e.g., Oh et al. 2007;
McCabe et al. 2009; Mohamedzein and Al-Shibani 2011). How- ever, most of these studies are based on vertical load-settlement responses.In the field study by Hughes et al. (1975), plate load test- ing of an isolated stone column was conducted, and at the end of test, the soil surrounding the column was excavated to examine the deformed shape. Appropriate data relevant to the soil parameters, column geometry, loading pattern, and lateral column deformation are available for comparison. Another study (Indraratna et al. 2015) was based on a coupled discrete-element–finite-difference model, which was applied for predicting the load settlement as well as lat- eral deformation of a stone column pertaining to a laboratory model study (Sivakumar et al. 2011). Since the input data for the soft clay, column, and loading are available, this case study has been conven- iently used to validate the proposed solution. There are a few other case studies where appropriate data relevant to lateral deformation of stone columns is available (e.g., McKelvey et al. 2004; Tandel et al. 2012), but not all such studies could be accommodated in the paper due to required brevity.
Hughes et al. (1975) carried out field-based investigations with plate load testing on an isolated stone column constructed by vibro- replacement in soft clay in London, United Kingdom. Site inves- tigations revealed the existence of a top crust about 1–2 m thick overlying soft clay to about 7 m depth followed by a layer of sand or silt. The stone column had an effective diameter of 660 mm and a length of 10 m. Axial loading was applied onto the column surface only (i.e., not on the soil) by means of plate load test until failure.
After the test, the column was exhumed to investigate its deformed shape. A comparison of computed net lateral deformation against depth using the present model with field results is presented in
Fig. 5. The lateral deformations have been normalized to the initial column radius while the depth below ground surface has been nor- malized to the initial embedded depth. The computed results ob- tained from the elastic model by Zhang et al. (2013) were also plotted. The input parameters used for computation are as follows:
rc _ 0.33 m,
H _ 9 m, wcol _ 614 kPa,
Φc _ 38°; σzvmax _
210 kPa, ηt _ 1.0, and ηb _ 0. For the computations, the secant modulus of the stone column estimated from the field plate load test results was 35 MPa. Since instantaneous loading was applied only onto the column surface and not on the surrounding soil sur- face, no soil consolidation is likely to occur while the column deformations are not time-dependent. The unit weights for soil and column were taken as follows: γs _ 18.5 kN=m3 and γc _
19 kN=m3, respectively (Gasparre 2005; Isaac and Girish 2009).
The Poisson’s ratio of column has been estimated from the angle of friction of column particles based on available empirical corre- lations (Zomorodian and Eslami 2005; Kulhway 1984). The values of the input parameters taken are given in Table 1.
The lateral earth pressure coefficient Ks not only influences the lateral column deformation, but also affects the volumetric com- pressibility of clay as well as the column-soil stress concentration ratio. It is true that any increase in the value of Ks enhances the stress induced lateral deformation of column [Eqs. (2), (14), and
(18)], and simultaneously decreases the volumetric compressibility as well as the deformation in the soft soil [Eqs. (8) and (9)]. Also, an increase in Ks reduces the value of ns [Eq. (3a)], thereby de- creasing the vertical stress, hence the stress-induced deformation components on the column. Thus, the increase in Ks initiates two opposite influences on the lateral column deformation, espe- cially for embankment loading relevant to transport infrastructure.
At any specific depth or location where the lateral displacements are substantial (e.g., where bulging occurs), the value of Ks is ex- pected to be in the passive range (greater than unity), but elsewhere along the column depth, the apparent Ks will be significantly less than unity approaching the at-rest value towards the bottom part of the column. The actual depth of the bulging zone is quite small compared to the overall column length.
As observed from Fig. 5, the values of measured column lateral deformations at different depths are in close proximity with the computed results obtained from the present model for νc _ 0.3 with an average deviation of about 15%. The computed lateral de- formation of column has been observed to decrease with depth in a curvilinear manner with slightly increasing slope, unlike the quasi- linear trend predicted by the elastic model (Zhang et al. 2013). The authors have used Ks _ 2.5 within the bulging zone, based on the
Rankine theory for a drained friction angle of 25°. For the remain- ing column length, the lateral deformation is small enough, thus value of Ks is close to its in situ value [Fig. 5(a)]. The values of earth pressure coefficients are similar to those reported by Clayton et al. (2013); recently conducted constant normal stiffness (CNS) shear tests at University of Wollongong, Australia, have also indi- cated similar range of values of the earth pressure coefficients. As observed from Fig. 5(b), the variation of lateral coefficient along
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Validation: (a) depthwise variation of Ks; (b) comparison of numerical results with field test data by Hughes et al. (1975) and ana- lysis of Zhang et al. (2013)
04017016-8
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
the column provides a substantial improvement of the results (up to
20% increase) in the bulged zone (0 < z=H < 0.05) over that by using an average value of Ks _ 0.85. In relation to the increased computational effort, improvement in the results compared to the simplified use of an averaged value of 0.85 over the remaining col- umn length (i.e., 0.05 < z=H < 1) is insignificant (<4%). Several past studies have also used and justified a mean Ks values in par with the preceding explanations (e.g., Raithal and Kempfert
2000; Zhang et al. 2013). This pattern of variation may be reason- ably justified by the assumption that the top of the column was not laterally restrained against translation (ηt _ 1.0) under the imposed loading condition. Compared to the elastic analysis by Zhang et al.
(2013), the computations in the present model were based on the assumed soil–column displacement compatibility, which has also influenced the numerical results significantly. In this study, along the much-thicker lower clay deposit, the variation of Ks from 0.5 to
1.0 seems adequately represented by an average value of 0.85, hence the overall resulting error in using an average value over the length of the column is not significant. However, for other ground conditions, assuming a constant value of Ks may generate notable discrepancies, and therefore, this is a limitation in this particular analysis, and the variation of Ks with depth is a more- rigorous approach.
Indraratna et al. (2015) carried out a coupled discrete-element– finite-difference (DEM-FDM) model using PFC2D and FLAC soft- ware to study the load-deformation characteristics of an isolated stone column in soft clay. This DEM-FDM model was validated by Sivakumar et al. (2011) based on load-transfer mechanism to the foundation soil through the stone column by large-scale triaxial data (specimen size of 300-mm diameter and 400-mm height). The loading was initiated in two stages: 50 kPa of effective pressure was applied in the first stage followed by a ramp loading at a rate of
1 kPa=h. The lateral deformation of the column at the end of the ramp loading stage, as predicted by Indraratna et al. (2015), has been compared with those obtained by the present model (Fig. 6), assuming partially restrained end conditions (ηt _ ηb _ 0.5).
Computations have been carried out with the assumed values of
Poisson’s ratio νc as 0.2 and 0.3 for the column (Zomorodian and Eslami 2005; Kulhawy 1984). Since no specific model test was conducted by Sivakumar et al. (2011) to capture any specific lateral-deformation characteristics of the column, a comparison was made with the applied vertical stress versus settlement as shown in Fig. 6(a). The stress concentration ratio ns is taken as
3.0 (Han and Ye 2001) while the lateral earth pressure coefficient
Ks is chosen as 0.9 (Fatahi et al. 2012b). The values of the input parameters taken are given in Table 1. As observed, the computed settlement increases in a hyperbolic manner with the applied ver- tical stress, with an average deviation from the test results below
10%. Fig. 6(b) reveals that the pattern of variation of column lateral deformation with depth predicted by the present model is in close proximity to that computed by the DEM-FDM model, with an aver- age deviation below 20%. The depth plotted here and throughout this paper thereafter was normalized by the initial soft clay thick- ness H. The maximum lateral deformation of column (specifically termed as bulging) was observed to occur within the top 10% of the column length. The observed deformation pattern agrees with the argument that bulging occurs in the upper part of the column close to the ground surface (Black et al. 2007). As observed from Figs. 6
(c and d), the normalized bulging depth zb=H (zb = depth of maximum lateral deformation) and the corresponding normalized
Table 1. Input Parameters for Validation
Material
Parameter
Value
Hughes et al. (1975)
Indraratna et al. (2015);
Sivakumar et al. (2011)
Soft clay
Coefficient of horizontal permeability (kh)
—a
5.2 × 10−8 m=sb
Initial coefficient of volume compressibility (mv)
—a
3 × 10−6 N2=mc
Initial void ratio (e0)
—a
1.12d
Slope of the e −ln p 0 curve (λ)
—a
0.16e
Normalized horizontal permeability of smear zone (ks=kh)
—a
0.1f
Normalized radius of smear zone (rs=rc)
—a
1.15g
Depth of soft clay (H)
9 mh
0.4 mi
Earth pressure coefficient (Ks)
Variable
0.9j
Unit weight (γs)
18.5 kN=m3c
18.5 kN=m3b
Stone column
Radius of stone column (rc)
0.33 mb
0.04, 0.05, 0.6 mj
Radius of unit cell (re)
—a
0.3 mj
Unit weight (γc)
19 kN=m3d
19 kN=m3d
Frictional angle (ϕc)
38°b
37°j
Poisson’s ratio (νc)
0.2, 0.3e
0.2, 0.3e
Limiting axial stress (σzvmax)
210 kPab
Evaluated from cu0 (= 22 kPaj) and ϕc
Restraint coefficients (ηt, ηb) ηt _ 1; ηb _ 0f ηt _ ηb _ 0.5f
Stress concentration ratio (ns)
—a
3.0h
Radius factor of clogging (α)
—a
1.0
Permeability factor for clogging (αk)
—a
1.0 aData not required (no consolidation).
bData from Hughes et al. (1975).
cData from Gasparre (2005).
dData from Isaac and Girish (2009).
eData from column friction angle (Zomorodian and Eslami 2005; Kulhawy 1984).
fData from given end conditions.
gData from Basack et al. (2015c).
hData from Han and Ye (2002).
iData from Indraratna et al. (2015) and Sivakumar et al. (2011).
jData from Hayashi et al. (2012), Fatahi et al. (2012b), Tong et al. (2013), and Basack et al. (2015b).
04017016-9
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
maximum column deformation ρhmax=rc predicted by the present model are close enough to that computed by the DEM-FDM model with average deviations of about 19 and 7%, respectively. In this paper, the maximum lateral deformation of column ρtz has been denoted by ρhmax for simplicity.
Parametric Studies
A section of the Pacific Highway linking Sydney and Brisbane was constructed as a bypass to reduce the traffic congestion in
Ballina. This bypass route crosses a floodplain that consists of highly compressible and saturated marine clay deposits. The soft soil was stabilized by a group of stone columns installed and tested at the site. Siahaan et al. (2011) conducted extensive field- based investigations to study the deformation characteristics of the reinforced clay under embankment surcharge loading. A comparison of the computed load-settlement response with the observed field data is presented in Fig. 7. The computational input parameters were taken from Siahaan et al. (2011) and Indraratna
(2009) and are presented in Table 2. Compared to the irregular ramp loading seen in the field, a stepwise increase in the applied load intensity was assumed for computational purposes [Fig. 7(a)].
As shown in Fig. 7(b), the nonlinear solution proposed in this paper matches the field data well with an average deviation below 8%, compared to the linear model previously introduced by Indraratna et al. (2013).
Parametric analysis was carried out using 531 elements with
600 nodes in the axisymmetric unit cell, and 18,000 nodes in the space-time frame (nr _ 10, nz _ 60, and nt _ 30). This ensured a reasonable compromise between the computational time and accuracy.
The effects of variation of the friction angle of column particles, imposed load intensity, soft-clay strength, and column geometry on the lateral-deformation characteristics of stone columns have been studied in details. The induced stresses in column and soil and the influence of column geometry on the capacity of reinforced soft ground have also been investigated.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7. Comparison of computed load-settlement characteristics with field data of Siahaan et al. (2011)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. Comparison of numerical results with laboratory test data and
DEM-FDM: (a) applied vertical stress versus settlement; (b) lateral- deformation profiles; (c) maximum lateral deformations; (d) bulging depths
04017016-10
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Time-Dependent Column Deformation
In the case of embankment loading, significant frictional resistance is likely to be developed between the top surface of the column and the base of the embankment, preventing any lateral displacement of column. It is therefore reasonable to consider the restraint coeffi- cient ηt _ 0. The base restraint has been chosen as ηb _ 0.5, i.e., the column is partially restrained against the impervious and rigid base of the unit cell. The accuracy of the solution depends on the appropriate choice of the restraint coefficients based on proper engineering judgement.
The time-dependent deformation pattern of the column is illustrated in Fig. 8(a). As observed, the normalized lateral defor- mation (ρtz=rc) sharply increases following a linear pattern from zero at ground surface to 0.15–0.17 at a depth of about
0.275H, where bulging of the column is evident. With further in- crease of depth, the lateral deformation decreases following a curvilinear pattern. The deformation near the column base
(0.8 ≤z=H ≤1.0) is negligible (ρtz=rc ≤0.015). This can be jus- tified by the fact that significant radial stress imposed on the lateral column surface near its base by the surrounding soft soil against the limited axial stress (σZmax) induced in the column, as per
Eq. (13). While the magnitudes of lateral deformation have been found to increase with time, the bulging depth remains constant
(zb=H _ 0.275).
The time-dependent lateral deformation of the column was investigated in more detail through Fig. 8(b). The variation of nor- malized lateral deformation with the modified time factor, T 0r _ kht=ðmvγwH2Þ (Basack et al. 2015b) has been considered. This modified time factor is different from the conventional one (Barron
1947). Since the column radius is varied to study the influence of column geometry on reinforced soft-ground performance, this modified time factor is used, where the constant term H is included.
As observed, the lateral deformation increases sharply in the range of 0 ≤T 0r ≤0.008 and gradually stabilized afterwards. The time pattern of variation of vertical deformation of the column at differ- ent depths is shown in Fig. 8(c). With the assumed displacement compatibility, the vertical deformation of the column is same as the soft-clay settlement at the interface. With the chosen clogging effect, the soil settlement increased asymptotically with time, sta- bilizing after T 0r ≥0.01.
Fig. 8(d) portrays the influence of the restraint factors on the column lateral deformation. As the end restraints increases from a complete fixity (ηt _ ηb _ 0) to a complete free condition
(ηt _ ηb _ 1), the maximum lateral deformation increases in the range of 14% ≤ρtz=rc ≤16.2%. The solution to Eqs. (7) and (9) associated with clogging and displacement compatibility essen- tially implies that the interface vertical settlement is time-dependent
(Indraratna et al. 2013; Basack et al. 2015a). The induced stresses and lateral deformations in the column are therefore time- dependent as well.
The magnitude of column lateral deformations is found to be influenced significantly by the variation of the restraint coefficients ηt and ηb. Having defined them as the ratios of magnitudes of actual to stress-induced deformations of the column, their values essen- tially depend upon the frictional resistance induced at the top and the bottom surfaces of the column. For the interface between angular stone particles and compacted embankment material, it is expected that the net lateral deformation at the top of the column is insignificant. Thus, the coefficient ηt may be taken as 0. Con- versely, for the smooth interface at the top (for example, a plate load test on reinforced ground), negligible lateral restraint is likely to occur; hence, ηt may be taken as 1. For intermediate conditions, the value is site-specific and may be estimated by interface char- acterization test (Fioravante 1999).
At the base of the stone columns, whenever the soft soil overlies a stiffer stratum and the column is extended to this stiff layer ini- tiating significant lateral restrainst to the base (e.g., Hughes et al.
1975), it is reasonable to choose ηb _ 0. On the contrary, even though the column is not embedded into the stiffer soil layer, the imposed vertical stress is expected to induce partial base restraint to lateral deformation; therefore, ηb would fall between 0 and 1.
In the field tests conducted by Hughes et al. (1975), the site con- sisted of a soft-clay layer up to 9 m in thickness below the ground surface, overlying a relatively stiff silty sand layer. The isolated stone column had an overall depth of embedment of 10 m and it was subjected to the plate load test. Thus, for computation, the val- ues of the restraint coefficients have been chosen as ηt _ 1 and ηb _ 0, justified by the earlier explanations. Similarly, for compu- tations relevant to the laboratory model testing of Sivakumar et al. (2011), the partially restrained end conditions are assumed
Table 2. Input Parameters for Parametric Studies
Material
Parameter
Value
Soft clay
Coefficient of horizontal permeability (kh)
1.0 × 10−9 m=s
Initial coefficient of volume compressibility (mv)
3.0 × 10−6 m2=N
Initial void ratio (e0)
2.9
Slope of the e −ln p 0 curve (λ)
0.57
Normalized horizontal permeability of smear zone (ks=kh)
0.1a
Normalized radius of smear zone (rs=rc)
1.15a
Depth of soft clay (H)
10 m
Unit weight (γs)
18 kN=m3
Embankment surcharge loading
Passive earth pressure coefficient (Kp)
3b
Unit weight
2.0 kN=m3
Stone column
Radius of stone column/SCP (rc)
0.5 m
Radius of unit cell (re)
1.16 m
Unit weight (γc)
17 kN=m3
Stress concentration ratio (ns)
8.9c
Radius factor of clogging (α)
0.9d
Permeability factor for clogging (αk)
0.9d aAssumed value [data from Han and Ye (2002) and Indraratna et al. (2013)].
bData from Indraratna et al. (2013).
cData from Siahaan et al. (2011) and FHWA (1983).
dData from Basack et al. (2015c).
04017016-11
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
as ηt _ ηb _ 0.5 in the absence of any further information. Lastly, in the parametric study, the highly angular stone particles and stiff, compacted embankment material are likely to induce significant interface frictional resistance at the top of the column. Since the column base is not embedded into the stiffer soil layer underlying the soft-clay deposit, a partial base-restraint condition may justify the assumption of ηt _ 0 and ηb _ 0.5.
The column deformation at the base depends on the nature of the soil layer at the bottom of the columns. Embedment of the stone column base to a stiffer stratum under high confining pressure is expected to reduce significantly the lateral deformation at this location.
Stresses Induced in the Column and Soil
With the assumption that the column-to-soil stress concentration ratio ns remains constant throughout the process of soil consolida- tion, the vertical stresses imposed on the column and the soil do not alter with time in the mathematical model.
The vertical and lateral stress components, normalized by the average load intensity, induced in the column at various time fac- tors, have been depicted in Fig. 9(a). As observed, the normalized vertical stress is 3.7 at the ground surface and increases nonlinearly until a maximum value is attained at a depth of z _ 0.275H. This maximum value of vertical stress is found to increase with time, its normalized values being 16.1, 18.9, and 19.9 at modified time fac- tor (T 0r) of 0.001, 0.002, and 0.003, respectively. The lateral com- ponent of column stress, on the other hand, was found to increase linearly from a normalized value of 0.32 at the ground surface to
0.396 at the column base. These observations are consistence with
Eqs. (11), (13), and (14) relevant to the stress components induced in the column together with the Eq. (10) relevant to the relationship between the undrained soil strength and consolidation.
The vertical-stress components induced in the soft soil have been portrayed in Fig. 9(b). The normalized stress was found to increase linearly with depth from a minimum value of 0.4 at ground surface to 1.38 at the base. The magnitude of vertical stress at any given depth is found to increase with the radial distance from the column centre. These observations are in agreement with the
Eq. (17) which implies a linear increment of vertical stress induced in soft soil, together with Eq. (6a) which initiates a parabolic in- crease in the imposed vertical stress on the soft soil surface.
To carry out a sensitivity analysis, the coefficients ηt and ηb have been varied from 0 to 1 and the corresponding increase in the col- umn bulging magnitude, expressed as percent of the value relevant to ηt _ ηb _ 0, are studied. As observed from Fig. 9(c), the in- crease in the magnitude of column bulging is found to be less than
12%, as the values of restraint coefficients increase from 0 to 1.
Influence of Column and Soft-Soil Properties and
Loading
The effects of the column and soft-soil parameters and imposed embankment loading on the lateral deformation pattern were stud- ied in detail, as described next.
Particle Interlock
The effects of interlocking and the friction angle of the aggregates on the magnitude of the bulging and the corresponding column depth were investigated (Fig. 10). As observed from Fig. 10(a), the magnitude of bulging nonlinearly decreases with the column friction angle with ascending slope. As the friction angle increases as 40° ≤Φc ≤50°, the ratio of ρhmax=rc at a time factor of T 0r _
0.001 decreases in the range of 0.02–0.63, 0.048–0.118, and
0.08–0.174 for a corresponding Poisson’s ratio of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3,
Fig. 8. (a) Column lateral deformation pattern with depth; (b) maxi- mum lateral deformation of column with time; (c) vertical deformation of column with time; (d) depth wise variation of lateral column defor- mation for different values of fixity coefficients
04017016-12
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
respectively. Fig. 10(b) shows that the normalized bulging depth zb=H has been found to increase between 0.071 and
0.278 as the friction angle increases curvilinearly in the range of
40° ≤Φc ≤50°. The gradient of the curves is initially ascending, but a reverse curvature has been found for higher values of the friction angle, with the value of Φc being relevant to the point of inflection (i.e., gradually reducing from 47 to 41° as the
Poisson’s ratio increases in the range of 0.1 ≤νc ≤0.3). A higher friction angle is likely to reduce bulging, which would eventually decrease the magnitude while increasing the depth of the column bulging.
Undrained Cohesion and Earth Pressure Coefficient
It is obvious from Eq. (10) that the undrained cohesion progres- sively increases with soil consolidation (Umezaki et al. 1993;
Indraratna et al. 2013). With the elastic analysis, Eqs. (12) and (13) imply that the stresses and deformations produced in the column are significantly influenced by the initial soil cohesion cu0 as well as the earth pressure coefficient Ks. With the increasing values of initial cohesion cu0, as observed from Figs. 11(a and b), the ratio ρhmax=rc decreases almost linearly, while the normalized bulging depth zb=H increases curvilinearly with an ascending gradient.
With an increase in the earth pressure coefficient Ks, the associated increment in normalized bulging (ρhmax=rc) was observed
[Fig. 12(a)] until a peak value was attained and decreased there- after. Conversely, the opposite observation was found in relation to the normalized bulging depth zb=H, as observed from Fig. 12(b).
Alteration in Ks affects the soft-soil compressibility as well as the settlement characteristics of the surrounding soft clay, which sub- sequently influences the stresses and elastic deformations produced in the column. This factor also attributed to the complex nature of variation found in Figs. 12(a and b).
Increase in undrained cohesion of soft clay initiates greater con- finement of the stone column, which in turn increases the magni- tude of axial stress induced in the column [Eq. (13)]. As a result, the critical depth (i.e., depth above which the axial stress induced in the column becomes constant) increases. On the contrary, the radial stress induced in the column by the adjacent soil increases linearly with depth, as observed in Fig. 9(a). Since the stress-induced col- umn deformation depends on these two mutually orthogonal stress components [Eq. (18)], the bulging depth increases with undrained cohesion of soft clay, as observed from Fig. 11.
Fig. 9. Induced stresses in (a) column; (b) soft soil; (c) sensitivity analysis of restraint coefficients
04017016-13
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Column Geometry
To study the influence of the change in column geometry on its lateral deformation, the column spacing and radius were varied in the ranges of 2 ≤N ≤4 and 30 ≤H=rc ≤50, respectively, for which the magnitude of normalized bulging (ρhmax=rc) was observed to increase from 0.17 to 0.58 (T 0r _ 0.003). With an in- crease in N, the maximum lateral deformation initially increased with an ascending slope up to N _ 2.75, followed thereafter by a gradual stabilization [Fig. 13(a)]. On the other hand, increase in
H=rc induced a nonlinear increase of bulging with a descending slope as shown in Fig. 13(b). Conversely, the opposite trend is ob- served for the variation of bulging depth [Figs. 13(c and d)].
These observations can be justified because any alteration in the geometry of the column not only affects the stresses on the soil and the column, but also influences the consolidation of the soft clay, which subsequently affects the column stiffness and deformation.
The lateral deformation of a stone column is thus a complex prob- lem with opposing factors such as stress transfer, consolidation, and lateral confinement.
The alteration in column geometry (specifically the nondimen- sional parameter N and H=rc) influences the bulging magnitude and depth significantly. From the observed data in Fig. 13 plus further computational analysis carried out by the authors reveal that the magnitude of maximum bulging may increase with N and H=rc before it gradually stabilizes. Such a trend was observed to occur for a normalized column geometry for N _ 4.5 and
H=rc _ 53. In view of this, it can be concluded that for the current parametric study, the alteration in the magnitude of maximum bulging is insignificant for column dimensions for rc < 0.19 m and spacing > 1.71 m.
The current solution based on the unit cell concept is more ap- propriate for embankment loading relevant to transport corridors, escpecially for centrally located columns (Lorenzo and Bergado
2003; Murugesan and Rajagopal 2006). However the authors’ cur- rent model may not successfully capture the true load-deformation response for columns located further away from the embankment centerline and in the case of large projects involving several hun- dreds of columns attributed to soil heaving at the toe, angular dis- tortion of column, etc. (Indraratna et al. 2013).
Fig. 10. Influence of interparticle friction angle of stone column on
(a) maximum lateral deformation (bulging); (b) bulging depth
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11. Influence of soft clay cohesion on (a) maximum column lat- eral deformation; (b) bulging depth
Fig. 12. Influence of earth pressure coefficient on (a) maximum column lateral deformation; (b) bulging depth
04017016-14
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Stress Concentration Ratio
Since the magnitudes of column–soil stress concentration ratio af- fect the stone column deformations significantly (Zhang et al.
2013), the influences are further studied here. With an increase in stress concentration ratio in the range of 5 ≤ns ≤9, the column bulging (ρhmax=rc) decreases curvilinearly. The slopes of the curves are observed to be descending up to ns _ 6.5 followed by gradual ascending slopes thereafter [Fig. 14(a)]. Increase in ns initiates an increase in the stress on the column wcol, while decreasing the stresses on the surrounding soil wðrcÞ (Indraratna et al. 2013).
Although the increase in wcol is likely to induce greater deformation of the stone column, a significant reduction in soil settlement at the interface under reduced value of wðrcÞ has possibly amplified the column stiffness Ec [Eq. (15)].
The stress concentration ratio ns is found to influence the depth of bulging significantly, as observed from Fig. 14(b); thus, zb=H increases in a curvilinear manner with an ascending slope with ns.
When the stress concentration ratio increases, the vertical stress imposed on the column increases, while the vertical stress on the adjacent soft-clay surface decreases. The reduction in vertical stress on the soil surface reduces the soil settlement [Eq. (9)]. With the assumed column–soil displacement compatibility at the interface, such reduced settlement is likely to amplify the value of the
Young’s modulus of column Ec as per Eq. (15), thereby reducing the magnitude of column bulging. Also, an increase in the vertical stress accompanied by a reduction in the radial stress has been attributed to the increased depth of bulging.
Load-Carrying Capacity
With the known value of the limiting axial stress on column given by Eq. (13) and based on the arching theory [Eqs. (5) and (6)] together with the available correlations relevant to step loading proposed by Indraratna et al. (2013) on the load-transfer mecha- nism on stone-column-reinforced soft ground, the load-carrying capacity of the reinforced soft-ground surface is given by
¯wmax _ σzmax=ns c1 þ c2ðN −1Þ2 ð21Þ where ¯wmax = maximum load intensity that can be applied on the reinforced ground surface corresponding to the axial stress intensity σzmax induced on the column at its top; with the known value of the passive earth pressure coefficient Kp of the embankment material, the coefficients c1 and c2 are given by c1 _ N −1
H=rc
Kp −1
Kp −2 þ

1 −
N
H=rc
Kp −1
Kp −2

1 −1
N
Kp−1 ð22aÞ c2 _
N2 −c1ðN2 þ ns −1Þ ðN þ 1ÞðN −1Þ3=6 þ nsðN −1Þ2 ð22bÞ
The variation of ¯wmax with time is shown in Fig. 15(a). Since the undrained cohesion cu increases exponentially with time during consolidation (Indraratna et al. 2013), the load-carrying capacity of the reinforced soft clay is observed to increase with time with a stabilizing tendency, the rate of increase being significantly high in the range of 0 ≤T 0r ≤0.02. The variation of ¯wmax with the col- umn geometry (N and H=rc) is also studied here through Figs. 15(b and c). As observed, the load-carrying capacity decreases curvilin- early with increasing N with stabilizing tendency, with the rate of decrease being considerably high in the range of 2 ≤N ≤4. With an increasing value of H=rc, on the other hand, the load-carrying capacity decreases marginally. This can be justified by the fact that the coefficients c1 and c2 are highly sensitive to N, while compa- ratively less sensitive to H=rc.
Fig. 13. Variation of (a) ρhmax with N; (b) ρhmax with H=rc; (c) zb=H with N; (d) zb=H with H=rc
(a)
(b)
Fig. 14. Influence of ns on (a) maximum column lateral deformation;
(b) bulging depth
04017016-15
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
The preceding parametric studies imply that under low confin- ing pressure, the stone column bulges more, thereby negatively influencing the load-carrying capacity.
Although the current numerical model is capable of capturing the lateral-deformation characteristics of stone-column-reinforced soft ground under static loading during the consolidation stage, it has a few inherent limitations:
•
The model deviates from accuracy when there is double drai- nage (i.e., vertical and radial), especially in the case of partially penetrated columns; and
•
The pattern of lateral deformation of stone columns in soft soil depends upon the barreling effect. However, the information available on the appropriate choice of values of the fixity factors ηt and ηb is limited.
Conclusions
A numerical solution to predict the behavior of stone-column- reinforced soft ground, with special emphasis on lateral deforma- tion, was developed under unit cell conditions. Comparisons of the numerical results with the available field and laboratory test data as well the existing solutions were used to validate the proposed model. The study indicates that a bulging zone producing a maxi- mum lateral deformation occurs in the vicinity of the ground sur- face, the magnitude of which is essentially time-dependent. For a particular depth, the column lateral deformation was found to in- crease sharply in the time range of 0 ≤T 0r ≤0.008 and gradually stabilized thereafter. A negligibly small lateral deformation was produced near the column base (0.8 ≤z=H ≤1) due to the high radial stress induced in the column by the surrounding soil. With the chosen clogging effect, the vertical deformation of column increases asymptotically with time and stabilizes after T 0r ≥0.01.
The column deformation pattern was found to be influenced by the variation of the restraint coefficients.
The time-dependent vertical stress developed in the column was observed to increase with depth until a maximum value was at- tained. The lateral stress on the column, on the other hand, was found to increase linearly with depth. The vertical stress in the soft soil increases linearly with depth as a function of the radial distance from the column.
Several factors that affected the magnitude of column bulging and its depth during consolidation were studied. An increase in the friction angle of the column resulted in a curvilinear decrease in the magnitude of bulging, while the bulging depth increased. The re- lationship between friction angle and magnitude of bulging also varied in ascending slope as Poisson’s ratio of the column in- creased. The relationship between the friction angle and bulging depth followed a typical shape of reverse curvature with the point of inflexion that decreased as the Poisson’s ratio of the column increased.
The bulging depth increased and its magnitude decreased as the initial undrained cohesion of the surrounding clay (cu0) increased.
The curve gradient that describes the relationship between the bulg- ing magnitude and initial cohesion increased as the earth pressure coefficient (Ks) increased, while the gradient that describes the re- lationship between the bulging depth and initial cohesion increased in a slight curvilinear shape as the coefficient Ks increased. The influence of Ks was rather complex; as the value of Ks increased, the magnitude of bulging increased in a curvilinear shape with a descending slope up to a peak value before it decreased linearly.
An opposite trend was identified for the bulging depth.
Column bulging was also influenced by its geometry, which is described as the ratio of the radius of the unit cell to that of the stone column (N) and ratio of the embedded depth to the radius of the stone column (H=rc), assuming a fully penetrating stone column.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 15. Variation of normalized maximum load intensity with (a) time; (b) N; (c) H=rc
04017016-16
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
An increase in the column spacing N initially results in an increase in the bulging magnitude before the magnitude gradually stabilizes when the radius of the unit cell is about 2.75 times the radius of the column. The bulging magnitude generally increases as the column becomes thinner, whereas the opposite is generally applicable with respect to the bulging depth.
The stress-concentration ratio (ns) not only influences the con- solidation characteristics of soft clay, but also affects the induced deformations to a significant extent. The bulging magnitude de- creases with an increase in ns in a curvilinear fashion. An increase in the stress-concentration ratio caused an increase in the bulging depth with an ascending curve gradient.
The load-carrying capacity of stone-column-stabilized soft ground increased over time with an asymptotically stabilizing trend, but this capacity decreases in a curvilinear fashion as the column spacing increases. This capacity also decreased marginally as the column became thinner.
Appendix. Adopted Numerical Scheme
The numerical methodology adopted in the model involves for- ward, backward, and central difference techniques coupled with the explicit procedure where the grid size is adjusted in each of the computational steps performed. Referring to the grid shown in
Fig. 2(d), the partial derivatives in Eq. (7) have been expressed as follows:
∂urt
∂t
 i;k
_ ui;kþ1 −ui;k−1
2δt ð23aÞ
∂urt
∂r
 i;k
_ uiþ1;k −ui−1;k
2δr ð23bÞ
∂2urt
∂r2
 i;k
_ uiþ1;k −2ui;kþui−1;k δ2r ð23cÞ
Incorporating the appropriate values of the nodal indices i and k in the preceding equations and applying the boundary conditions
[details explained in Indraratna et al. (2013)], the following matrix equation has been formulated:
f11 f12 f12
· · · f1;nr f21 f22 f23
· · · f2;nr f31 f32 f32
· · · f3;nr
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · · fnt;1 fnt;2 fnt;3
· · · fnt;nr
·
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
U1
U2
U3
· · ·
Unr
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
_
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
b1 b2 b3
· · · bnr
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
; ð24Þ where Ui _ fu1i; u2i; u3i; : : : ; unr;igT; fði; jÞ = typical element of the finite-difference coefficient matrix; and bi = typical element of the augment vector.
The expression for the partial derivative ∂2ρrczt=∂z2 in the
Eq. (16) in terms of the nodal indices j and k is given by
∂2ρrczt
∂z2
 j;k
_ ρrc;jþ1;k −2ρrc;j;kþρrc;j−1;k δ2z ð25Þ
At the end of each time step, the grid sizes δr and δz are likely to be deceased due to progressive ground settlement coupled with lateral deformation, respectively. These reduced grid sizes have been used in the next time step and the procedure is continued accordingly until the end of the desired computational time. The reduced grid sizes have been estimated by δrðz; tÞ _ ðre −rcÞ −ρt z nr −1 ð26aÞ δzðr; tÞ _ H −ρr;1;t nz −1 ð26bÞ where the reduced grid sizes are represented by δr (z, t) and δz (r, t), respectively.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports received from the Australian Research Council (ARC) and industry partners, namely Coffey Geotechnics and Keller Ground Engineering, in the form of an industry linkage project. The editorial assistance of
Mr. Bill Clayton is also acknowledged.
Notation
The following symbols are used in this paper:
a = lateral deformation coefficient; bi = typical element of the augment vector; cu0 = initial soil cohesion at ground surface; cuðr; z; tÞ = nodal soil cohesion;
Ec = Young’s modulus of column; e = void ratio; e0 = initial void ratio;
F = stress function; fði; jÞ = typical element of the finite difference coefficient matrix;
H = thickness of the soft clay deposit;
Ks = earth pressure coefficient of clay;
Kp = passive earth pressure coefficient of embankment; kh = horizontal soil permeability; ks = horizontal permeability of smear zone; mv = soil volume compressibility;
N = re=rc; nr; nz; nt = number of divisions; ns = steady-state concentration ratio; r = radial coordinate of unit cell; rc = radius of stone column; r 0c = radius of stone column excluding the clogged zone; re = radius of influence of one stone column; rs = radius of smear zone;
T 0r = modified time factor; t = time coordinate; tt = total time of consolidation;
Ui = column vector of pore-water pressure; urt = excess pore-water pressure;
¯w = surcharge load intensity on ground surface; wcol = average vertical stress on top of column; wðrÞ = vertical stress on ground surface at radial distance of r; z = depth coordinate; zb = bulging depth; α = radius factor for clogging; αk = permeability factor for clogging; γ 0 = effective unit weight of soil;
04017016-17
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
γc = unit weight of column material; γs = unit weight of soil; γw = unit weight of water; δr = length of an element on radial axis; δt = length of an element on time axis; δz = length of an element on depth axis; εV
A = vertical strain component at Point A.
ηt; ηb = restraint factors; λ = slope of e −ln p 0 curve; νc = column Poisson’s ratio; νs = soil Poisson’s ratio; ρbz = barreling component of column deformation; ρep z = stress-induced component of column deformation; ρhmax = maximum net lateral deformation
(bulging) of column; ρrzt = vertical displacement of a soil nodal point; ρt z = net lateral deformation of column; ρv = vertical displacement of a column nodal point; σzr = radial-stress component on column; σzvmax = maximum axial stress in column; σzv = nodal axial stress in column; σszv = vertical stress component in soft soil; τ z = interface shear stress; and ς = rate of increase of soil cohesion with depth;
References
Adalier, K., and Elgamal, A. (2004). “Mitigation of liquefaction and asso- ciated ground deformations by stone columns.” Eng. Geol., 72(3–4),
275–291.
Alamgir, M., Miura, N., Pooorooshasb, H. B., and Madhav, M. R. (1996).
“Deformational analysis of soft ground reinforced by columnar inclusions.” Comput. Geotech., 18(4), 267–290.
Altinbalik, T., and Çan, Y. (2011). “An upper bound analysis and determi- nation of the barrelling profile in upsetting.” J. Eng. Math. Sci.,
18(6), 416–424.
Asaro, R., and Lubardo, V. (2011). Mechanics of solids and materials,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Barron, B. A. (1947). “Consolidation of fine-grained soils by drain wells.”
Trans. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng., 113(2346), 718–742.
Basack, S., Indraratna, B., and Rujikiatkamjorn, C. (2015a). “Modeling the performance of stone column-reinforced soft ground under static and
.1943-5606.0001378, 04015067.
Basack, S., Indraratna, B., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., and Siahaan, F. (2015b).
Theoretical and numerical perspectives on performance of stone col- umn improved soft ground with reference to transport infrastructure,
Elsevier, Oxford, U.K., 747–79.
Basack, S., Siahaan, F., Indraratna, B., and Rujikiatkamjorn, C. (2015c).
“Influence of clogging on the performance of stone column improved soft ground.” Proc., 15th Pan-American Conf. on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, IOS Press, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
1615–1622.
Black, J., Sivakumar, V., Madhav, M., and Hamill, G. (2007). “Reinforced stone columns in weak deposits: Laboratory model study.” J. Geotech.
Geoenviron.
Eng.,
10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2007)133:9(1154),
1154–1161.
Bouassida, M., and Carter, J. (2014). “Optimization of design of column- reinforced foundations.” Int. J. Geomech., 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943
-5622.0000384, 04014031.
Brauns, J. (1978). “Die anfangstraglast von schottersäulen im bindigen untergrund.” Bautechnik, 55(8), 263–271 (in German).
Carter, W. T., and Lee, D. (1985). “A finite element analysis of cylinder and ring compression and its experimental verification.” Comp. Struct.,
21(1–2), 1–19.
Clayton, C. R. I., Woods, R. I., Bond, A. J., and Milititsky, J. (2013). Earth pressure and earth retaining structures, 3rd Ed., CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL.
Davis, E. H., and Booker, J. R. (1973). “The effect of increasing strength with depth on the bearing capacity of clays.” Géotechnique, 23(4),
551–563.
Deb, K., and Shiyamalaa, S. (2015). “Effect of clogging on rate of consoli- dation of stone column-improved ground by considering particle migration.” Int. J. Geomech., 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-56220000492,
04015017.
Deng, X. F., Liu, X. H., and Zhang, L. (2003). “A method to calculate the settlement of stone-column composite ground.” Chin. J. Xiangtan Min.
Inst., 18(4), 55–57.
Duncan, J., and Mokwa, P. (2001). “Passive earth pressures: Theories and
(2001)127:3(248), 248–257.
Fatahi, B., Basack, S., Premananda, S., and Khabbaz, H. (2012a). “Settle- ment prediction and back analysis of Young’s modulus and dilation angle of stone columns.” Aust. J. Civil Eng., 10(1), 67–80.
Fatahi, B., Le, T. M., and Khabbaz, H. (2012b). “Effects of initial stress state on performance of embankments on soft soils.” Aust. Geomach.,
47(3), 75–86.
FHWA (Federal Highway Administration). (1983). “Design and construc- tion of stone columns.” Rep. No. FHWA/RD-83/026/1, U.S. Dept. of
Transportation, Washington, DC.
Fioravante, V., Ghionna, V. N., Pedroni, S., and Porcino, G. (1999). “A constant normal stiffness direct shear box for soil-solid interface tests.”
Rivista Italiana Di Geotecnica, 3(99), 7–22.
FLAC version 8 [Computer software]. Itasca Consulting Group, Inc.,
Minneapolis.
Gasparre, A. (2005). “Advanced laboratory characterisation of London clay.” Ph.D. thesis, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Imperial College London, London.
Guetif, T., Bouassida, M., and Debats, J. M. (2007). “Improved soft clay characteristics due to stone column installation.” Comput. Geotech.,
34(2), 104–111.
Han, J. (2015). “Recent research and development of ground column technologies.” Ground Improv., 168(4), 246–264.
Han, J., and Ye, S. L. (2001). “Simplified method for consolidation rate of
10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2001)127:7(597), 597–603.
Han, J., and Ye, S. L. (2002). “A theoretical solution for consolidation rates for stone column reinforced foundations accounting for smear and well resistance effects.” Int. J. Geomech., 10.1061/(ASCE)1532-3641(2002)
2:2(135), 135–151.
Hanna, A. M., Etezad, M., and Ayadat, T. (2013). “Mode of failure of a group of stone columns in soft soil.” Intl. J. Geomech., 10.1061
/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0000175, 87–96.
Hayashi, H., Yamazoe, N., Mitachi, T., Tanaka, H., and Nishimoto, S.
(2012). “Coefficient of earth pressure at rest for normally and overcon- solidated peat ground in Hokkaido area.” Soils Found., 52(2), 299–311.
Hughes, J. M. O., and Withers, N. J. (1974). “Reinforcing of soft cohesive soils with stone columns.” Ground Eng., 7(3), 42–49.
Hughes, J. M. O., Withers, N. J., and Greenwood, D. A. (1975). “A field trial of the reinforcing effect of a stone column in soil.” Géotechnique,
25(1), 31–44.
Indraratna, B. (2009). “Recent advances in the application of vertical drains and vacuum preloading in soft clay stabilization.” Aust. Geomech. J.,
45(2), 1–44.
Indraratna, B., Basack, S., and Rujikiatkamjorn, C. (2013). “Numerical solution to stone column reinforced soft ground considering arching,
/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.0000789, 377–394.
Indraratna, B., Ngo, N. T., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., and Sloan, S. W. (2015).
“Coupled discrete element-finite difference method for analysing the load-deformation behaviour of a single stone column in soft soil.”
Comp. Geotech., 63, 267–278.
Isaac, D. S., and Girish, M. S. (2009). “Suitability of different materials for stone column construction.” El. J. Geotech. Eng., 14(D), 2–12.
04017016-18
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.
Kirsch, K., and Bell, A. (2012). Ground improvement, 3rd Ed., CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL.
Kulhawy, F. H. (1984). “Limiting tip or side resistance: Fact or fallacy.”
Proc., Symp. on Analysis and Design of Pile Foundations, ASCE,
Reston, VA, 80–98.
Kulkarni, K. M., and Kalpakjian, S. (1969). “A study of barrelling as an example of free deformation in plastic working.” J. Eng. Ind., 91(3),
743–754.
Lorenzo, G. A., and Bergado, D. T. (2003). “New consolidation equation for soil-cement pile improved ground.” Can. Geotech. J., 40(2),
265–275.
Lorenzo, G. A., and Bergado, D. T. (2004). “Fundamental parameters of cement-admixed clay—New approach.” J. Geotech. Geoenv. Eng.,
10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2004)130:10(1042), 1042–1050.
Lu, M. M., Xie, K. H., and Guo, B. (2010). “Consolidation theory for a composite foundation considering radial and vertical flows within the column and the variation of soil permeability within the disturbed soil zone.” Can. Geotech. J., 47(2), 207–217.
McCabe, B. A., Nimmons, G. J., and Egan, D. (2009). “A review of field performance of stone columns in soft soils.” Geotech. Eng., 162(6),
323–334.
McKelvey, D., Sivakumar, V., Bell, A., and Graham, J. (2004). “Modeling vibrated stone columns on soft clay.” Geotech. Eng., 157(3), 137–149.
McKenna, J. M., Eyre, W. A., and Wolstenholme, D. R. (1975). “Perfor- mance of an embankment supported by stone columns in soft ground.”
Géotechnique, 25(1), 51–59.
Moavenian, M. H., Nazem, M., Carter, J. P., and Randolph, M. F. (2016).
“Numerical analysis of penetrometers free-falling into soil with shear strength increasing linearly with depth.” Comput. Geotech., 72(2016),
57–66.
Mohamedzein, Y. E. A., and Al-Shibani, I. H. (2011). “Performance of an embankment supported on soft soil reinforced by stone columns.”
Ground Improv., 164(4), 213–224.
Moseley, M. P., and Kirsch, K. (2004). Ground improvement, 2nd Ed., E &
FN Spon, London, 57–118.
Murugesan, S., and Rajagopal, K. (2006). “Geosynthetic-encased stone columns: Numerical evaluation.” Geotex. Geomembr., 24(6), 349–358.
Murugesan, S., and Rajagopal, K. (2010). “Studies on the behavior of single and group of geosynthetic encased stone columns.” J. Geotech.
Geoenviron. Eng., 10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.0000187, 129–139.
Oh, E. Y. N., et al. (2007). “Behaviour of a highway embankment on stone column improved estuarine clay.” Proc., 16th Southeast Asian Geotech- nical Conf., Southeast Asian Geotechnical Society, Asian Institute of
Technology, Bangkok, Thailand, 567–572.
PFC2D version 5 [Computer software]. Itasca Consulting Group, Inc.,
Minneapolis.
Raithel, M., and Kempfert, H. G. (2000). “Calculation models for dam foundations with geotextile coated sand columns.”
Proc.,
Int.
Conf. Geological, Geotechnical, Australian Geomechanics Society,
Australia.
Raymond, G. P. (1967). “The bearing capacity of large footings and embankments on clay.” Géotechnique, 17(1), 1–10.
Roscoe, K. H., and Burland, J. B. (1968). “On the generalised stress-strain behaviour of ‘wet’ clay.” Engineering plasticity, J. Heyman and
F. A. Leckie, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.,
535–609.
Schey, J. A., Venner, T. R., and Takomana, S. L. (1982). “Shape changes in the upsetting of slender cylinders.” J. Eng. Ind., 104(1), 79–83.
Siahaan, F., Indraratna, B., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., and Basack, S. (2014).
“Vertical stresses in stone column and soft clay during one-dimensional consolidation test.” Proc., Soft Soils, Parahyangan Catholic Univ.,
Indonesia.
Siahaan, F., Kelly, R., and Wong, P. (2011). “Performance of an embank- ment constructed on stone columns.” Int. Conf. on Advanced Geotech- nical Engineering, Curtin Univ. of Technology, Perth, Australia,
943–949.
Sivakumar, V., Jeludine, D. K. N. M., Bell, A., Glynn, D. T., and
Mackinnon, P. (2011). “The pressure distribution along stone column in soft clay under consolidation and foundation loading.” Géotechnique,
61(7), 613–620.
Skempton, A. W. (1948). “A study of the geotechnical properties of some post-glacial clays.” Géotechnique, 1(1), 7–22.
Sun, L. N., and Gong, X. N. (2008). “Research on settlement calculation method of composite foundation of discrete material piles.” Chin. J.
Rock Soil Mech., 29(3), 846–848.
Tandel, Y. K., Solanki, C. H., and Desai, A. K. (2012). “Deformation behaviour of ground improved by reinforced stone columns.” Austr.
Geomech., 47(2), 51–60.
Timoshenko, S. P., and Goodier, J. P. (1970). Theory of elasticity,
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Tong, L., Liu, L., Cai, G., and Du, G. (2013). “Assessing the coefficient of the earth pressure at rest from shear wave velocity and electrical resis- tivity measurements.” Eng. Geol., 163(2013), 122–131.
Umezaki, T., Ochiai, H., and Hayashi, S. (1993). “Undrained shear strength of clay during consolidation.” Proc., 11th Southeast Asian Geotechnical
Conf., Southeast Asian Geotechnical Society, Bangkok, Thailand,
269–274.
Wang, G. (2009). “Consolidation of soft soil foundations reinforced by stone columns under time dependant loading.” J. Geotech. Geoenviron.
Eng., 10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.0000178, 1922–1931.
Zhang, L., Zhao, M., Shi, C., and Zhao, H. (2013). “Settlement calculation of composite foundation reinforced with stone columns.” Int. J. Geo- mech., 10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-5622.0000212, 248–256.
Zomorodian, A., and Eslami, A. (2005). “Determining the geotechnical parameters of stabilized soils by stone column based on SPT results.”
J. Geotech. Eng., 10(A), in press.
04017016-19
Downloaded from ascelibrary.org by University of Newcastle on 02/20/17. Copyright ASCE. For personal use only; all rights reserved.