 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: 
implications for engineered slopes and open pit mines 
D Donati  Simon Fraser University, Canada 
D Stead  Simon Fraser University, Canada 
D Elmo  University of British Columbia, Canada 
E Onsel  Simon Fraser University, Canada 
 
Abstract 
The stability of high rock slopes is becoming an increasingly important concern in the fields of mining and civil 
engineering. The need for mineral resources due to the exponential world population growth is driving the 
excavation of deeper and steeper open pit mines. Today, large open pit mines can reach depths in excess of 
1 km. Maintaining and monitoring the stability of the excavation is of paramount importance to ensure the 
safety of miners, equipment, and mining operations, as well as the profitability of the mine. Despite safe, 
state-of-the-art mining practices being followed, pit slope deformations occur, usually controlled by 
geological factors and driven by the progressive accumulation of stress within the pit walls. The deformation 
of high engineered rock slopes is inevitably associated with the formation of slope damage features, such as 
rock mass dilation and bulging, brittle fracture and rockfalls. The progressive accumulation of slope damage 
can reduce the slope rock mass and discontinuity strength causing a decrease in stability, potentially resulting 
in slope failure. Blast damage, localised at the pit wall surface, may also promote rockfalls and increase the 
risk of slope instability. 
In this paper, we present the results of recent slope damage research undertaken in the Engineering Geology 
and Resource Geotechnics Group at Simon Fraser University. The focus of this ongoing research program 
includes the definition and characterisation of slope damage, modelling, monitoring and visualisation of slope 
damage. The factors and mechanisms that can promote and/or induce the accumulation of slope damage 
within engineered slopes are discussed. The role of engineering geological factors, including geological 
structures, rock mass quality, lithology, intact rock strength, stress magnitude and groundwater, are 
addressed and a preliminary rock slope damage interaction matrix approach is presented. Examples of the 
characterisation of damage using field mapping and remote sensing are presented. New methods of 
quantifying slope damage are also described. 
The range of numerical modelling techniques we have used in the investigation of rock slopes is outlined, with 
a focus on the explicit simulation of rock slope damage accumulation. The critical inter-relationship between 
slope damage and fracture connectivity is discussed with implications for pit slope design. The importance of 
continuous monitoring of slope deformation (damage) is highlighted both for the purposes of early warning 
systems, and as a means to constrain numerical simulations. Finally, a brief discussion on the potential 
applications of innovative, immersive geo-visualisation methods, such as mixed and virtual reality, in the 
interpretation of slope damage mechanisms in engineered slopes is provided. 
Keywords: slope damage, brittle fracture, fracture connectivity, remote sensing, numerical modelling 
1 
Introduction 
During the past few decades, the stability of high rock slopes has become an increasingly important focus of 
geoscientists and engineers in natural slopes, engineered rock cuts and in large open pits. The excavation of 
steeper and deeper large open pit mines allows reduction in the waste rock (stripping ratio) and maximises 
ore recovery (Obregon & Mitri 2019). In turn, this can result in a decrease in open pit slope. An additional 
Slope Stability 2020 - PM Dight (ed.)
© Australian Centre for Geomechanics, Perth, ISBN 978-0-9876389-7-7
Slope Stability 2020
129
doi:10.36487/ACG_repo/2025_03
 
factor which must increasingly be considered when assessing the role of damage on pit stability is the 
proximity of underground workings to the open pit slopes and influence of open pit underground interaction. 
As any interruption in the mining activity can be extremely costly, ensuring the stability of the open pit slopes 
is a key aspect in mining operations. The characterisation and monitoring of slope deformation is critical to 
identify potential instabilities within the open pit area. In general, the deformation of natural and engineered 
rock slopes is associated with the formation of slope damage, which has important implications on the 
behaviour and displacement of rock slopes (Donati 2019). 
In this paper, we briefly review the factors controlling the formation of damage in rock slopes, and the effects 
on rock slope stability. We then summarize field, remote sensing, and numerical modelling methods and 
techniques developed by our research group to characterise the spatial distribution of rock slope damage, 
and its evolution with time. The effects of slope damage on fracture connectivity are also highlighted, in 
terms of changes in rock mass quality and slope kinematics. 
2 
Slope damage: mechanisms, effects, characterisation 
The stability of high rock slopes is controlled by several geological factors. Lithological and structural features, 
such as bedding, faults, folds, joints, and foliation can provide kinematic freedom to potentially unstable 
slopes and define the location, volume, and potential displacement and failure mechanisms of the instability 
(Stead & Wolter 2015). The action of so-called endogenic and exogenic factors also contribute to the 
evolution of the stability conditions of the slope, by decreasing the mechanical properties of the rock mass 
or changing the stress conditions of the slope (Whalley 1974). Endogenic processes act from within the slope 
and include ground shaking (e.g. earthquakes), isostasy, and volcanism. Exogenic processes occur at the 
ground surface and can include rainfall and snowmelt, slope steepening, alteration, and weathering. These 
processes reduce the stability of rock slopes, promoting deformation and inducing landsliding through 
progressive failure mechanisms (Eberhardt et al. 2001). Additionally, anthropic activity may cause effects 
similar to long-term exogenic and endogenic processes to occur in a short, engineering time (Table 1). 
Table 1 
Analogy between short-term anthropic activities and long-term geological processes, and effects 
on slope stability 
Process 
Typical slope processes and time 
frame 
Effects on slope stability 
Effects on slope 
damage 
Exhumation 
and 
unloading 
Engineered slopes:
Open pit excavation, roadcut 
(days to years) 
Slope debuttressing and 
unloading, steepening, stress 
concentration and 
redistribution, enhanced 
kinematic freedom, initiation of 
creep, development of deep-
seated gravitational slope 
displacements, structurally 
controlled failures 
Spalling due to lower 
confining stress, rock 
mass dilation, 
fracture propagation, 
formation of tension 
cracks, rockfall 
Natural slopes: 
stream/glacial erosion (thousands 
to million years) 
Dynamic 
loading 
Engineered slopes:
Blasting(high frequency, focused 
at slope surface) 
Decreased rock mass quality, 
slope failure through rock mass, 
rockfall, formation of fully 
persistent release surfaces, 
structurally controlled 
instabilities 
Brittle fracture 
propagation, rock 
bridge failure, rock 
mass dilation, 
shearing of asperities 
along discontinuity 
planes 
Natural and engineered slopes: 
Earthquakes (low frequency, 
regional scale) 
Submersion 
Engineered slopes:
Reservoir impoundment (weeks 
to months) 
Increased watertable, reduced 
effective stresses along 
discontinuities, sliding along 
discontinuity planes 
Displacement causes 
shearing of asperities 
along discontinuity 
planes 
Natural slopes:
Lake formation (years) 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
130
Slope Stability 2020
 
The deformation of rock slopes, both in the long-term and short-term, is inherently associated with the 
formation of slope damage features, which may range in scale from microcracks and joint asperity damage 
to visible intact rock fracture, tension cracks, rock mass and joint dilation, slope bulging and slumping, and 
increased rockfall activity. Slope damage can have important impacts on the stability of rock slopes, and in 
some cases the formation and accumulation of damage is an essential kinematic requirement for the 
development of slope instabilities. Single slope damage features (e.g. tension cracks) may act as rear release 
surfaces for unstable volumes of rock mass, actively promoting the displacement of blocks at various scales 
(Figure 1a). The brittle propagation of fractures may also cause the formation of fully persistent basal sliding 
or lateral release surfaces, effectively changing the kinematic conditions of rock slopes (Donati et al. 2019; 
Havaej et al. 2012) (Figure 1b). It has been noted that the investigation of spatial distribution and temporal 
evolution of slope damage can provide important insights on the mechanisms and factors underlying the 
deformation and failure of rock slopes. Thus, slope damage characterisation should be considered as a 
standard procedure in comprehensive slope stability assessment (Donati 2019). 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1 
Potential effects of slope damage features on slope kinematics: (a) Tension crack at the crest of 
the Aknes Slide (Norway), acting as rear release surface for the sliding mass; (b) Small-scale 
brittle fracturing at a roadcut (Canada) affected by flexural toppling instability 
To effectively characterise and classify slope damage features, a reliable set of descriptors must be 
developed. Slope damage features may be classified based on their location, spatial distribution, and origin. 
Stead & Eberhardt (2013) suggested that slope damage could be referred to as internal and external, 
depending on the visibility of the features at the slope surface. While external slope damage features can be 
characterised using remote sensing and traditional field techniques, internal slope damage requires the use 
of sub-surface datasets, such as borehole core logs or geophysical analyses. Slope damage may also be 
classified based on the distribution of features as focused or distributed (damage accumulating in localised 
or large volumes of rock mass, respectively). Finally, slope damage may be distinguished between tensile and 
shear, depending on the mechanism of failure of the rock mass. 
2.1 
Remote sensing characterisation of slope damage 
A strong relationship exists between rock mass quality, failure mechanism, and slope damage (i.e. type, 
location, size, and distribution of damage features). Thus, the characterisation and interpretation of slope 
damage must carefully consider the characteristics of the slope rock mass and geological structures therein. 
Prior to the open pit slope excavation, the collection of geological and structural data largely rely on 
sub-surface investigation, including borehole core logging and televiewer, and geophysical methods 
(e.g. seismic tomography). Traditional field methods are essential to collect important geomechanical 
information, such as uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the intact rock, discontinuity characteristics (joint 
waviness, joint roughness and joint condition) and geological strength index (GSI) (Cai et al. 2004; Hoek & 
Brown 2019). Remote sensing techniques, however, are critical for collecting data from parts of the slope 
that are inaccessible, and are often the only available method to collect the required discontinuity data across 
open pit mine slopes and high natural rock slopes. Remote sensing techniques are also important for 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
131
 
characterising rock mass parameters that are critical for the construction, validation, and analysis of 
sophisticated numerical models, but seldom collected during slope investigation, such as fracture intensity, 
connectivity, and termination, block size and shape, and joint offset (Donati et al. 2017). 
Terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) and photogrammetric techniques, such as terrestrial digital photogrammetry 
and structure-from-motion (SfM), are routinely employed to obtain high-resolution 3D models of the 
investigated rock slope. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are also being increasingly used to characterise the 
rock mass in open pit slopes (e.g. UAV-SfM), as the advantageous point of view limit obstructions and the 
consequent bias, enhancing model and data quality. 3D models can be used to collect orientation, spacing, 
and persistence data of discontinuities (Stead et al. 2019), as well as to perform change detection analyses 
for assessing displacements and rockfall rates (Kromer et al. 2017). The same 3D models can also be used to 
map and characterise slope damage features, such as tension cracks (Donati 2019) and brittle fractures 
(Sampaleanu et al. 2017). 2D datasets, such as high-resolution photographs (HRP), can also be employed to 
identify, map, and quantitatively assess the distribution and intensity of brittle damage (de Vilder et al. 2017; 
Sampaleanu et al. 2017), blast damage characteristics, blast damage intensity and pit slope seepage intensity 
(Lupogo 2017; Tuckey & Stead 2016; Vivas et al. 2015). Thermal imagery, also referred to as infrared 
thermography (IRT), has been employed to identify seepage (Sampaleanu 2017; Vivas et al. 2015), as well as 
voids and cavities across snow-covered rock slopes (Baroň et al. 2014). Ground-based hyperspectral imaging 
techniques (HSI) has also been introduced to investigate lithological changes in rock slopes (Kurz et al. 2012). 
In general, the integrated use of 3D and 2D methods shows significant potential in the characterisation and 
interpretation of slope damage. A coupled TLS-IRT approach can be used to identify and map open fractures 
potentially controlling the stability of rock slopes (Teza et al. 2015). Draping HRP onto TLS datasets has also 
proved effective in quantifying the percentage of rock bridges along rockfall scars (Figure 2). Coupled TLS-HSI 
datasets have been employed to characterise the infrared response of rock within a referenced model, 
allowing for detailed measurements to be undertaken (Kurz et al. 2012). It is evident that the development 
of multi-sensor remote sensing approaches (MSRS) may allow comprehensive rock slope datasets (such as 
TLS-HRP-IRT-HIS integrated datasets) to be collected and examined to identify correlations between rock 
mass quality, groundwater, slope damage, and slope deformation mechanism. 
 
Figure 2 
Potential application of an integrated TLS-HRP approach for the estimation of rock bridge 
percentages along rockfall scars in 2D and 3D (modified from Donati & Stead 2019) 
2.2 
The role of stress on slope damage and rock slope stability 
The morphology of the slope and the mechanical characteristics of the rock mass are among the most 
important factors controlling the accumulation of slope damage, and the subsequent effects on slope 
stability (Sjöberg 1996). Tectonic environment, slope geometry, along with material density and existing 
stress or blast induced damage and deformation are the key factors defining the stress magnitude within 
natural and engineered rock slopes. The presence of slope breaks and steps (e.g. benches) can also influence 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
132
Slope Stability 2020
 
the distribution and concentration of stresses, which may be important for rock bridge failure and 
toe-breakout phenomena (Havaej et al. 2014a; Styles et al. 2011). The location of geological structures within 
a slope has a critical role on stress concentrations encountered during slope excavation. Key factors 
determining in the influence of structures on stress distribution within a rock slope include fault persistence, 
fold type (antiform or synform, fold plunge, fold interlimb angle, fold axial cleavage) and the structure 
locations with respect to the slope geometry. In turn, both the structures and rock mass quality (pre-existing 
and damaged) has an important effect on the measured displacement of the slope at varied stress 
magnitudes and confinement conditions. Table 2 qualitatively describes the variation of rock slope stress 
magnitude (as a function of scale) and how rock mass quality can affect slope kinematics and slope stability. 
Table 2 
Qualitative analysis of the role of stress and rock mass quality on slope stability and slope 
kinematics (modified from Donati 2019) 
 
 
Rock mass quality 
 
 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Stress 
High 
(Pit slope-scale) 
• 
Kinematics and rock 
mass strength control 
stability 
• 
Roto-translational 
failure possible 
• 
Very high slope 
damage intensity 
• 
Significant rock mass 
dilation and slope 
bulging 
• 
High rockfall frequency 
(possibly localised near 
geological structures) 
• 
Kinematics and intact rock 
strength control stability 
• 
Intersecting discontinuities 
and intact rock fracturing 
may form step-path 
release surfaces 
• 
Kinematics and intact rock 
strength control stability 
• 
Shear and tensile brittle 
damage may form along 
potential rupture surface 
• 
Brittle damage may cause 
failure of kinematically 
stable blocks (e.g. 
non-daylighting 
wedges/toe-breakout) 
• 
Debuttressing causes 
propagation of exfoliation 
and stress relief joints 
Medium 
(Multi-Bench scale) 
• 
Kinematics and rock 
mass strength control 
stability 
• 
Local stress 
concentration may 
cause brittle damage 
• 
High slope damage 
intensity 
• 
Kinematics and intact rock 
strength control stability 
• 
Intersecting discontinuities 
may form step-path 
release surfaces 
• 
Brittle damage due to 
tensile stress 
concentration along 
rupture surfaces 
• 
Kinematics control 
stability 
• 
Persistent discontinuities 
may increase kinematic 
freedom 
• 
Low brittle damage 
intensity 
Low 
(Bench scale) 
• 
Kinematics control 
stability 
• 
Local stress 
concentration may 
cause brittle damage 
• 
Kinematics control 
stability 
• 
Low brittle damage 
intensity 
• 
Kinematics control 
stability 
• 
Negligible brittle damage–
limited to shear-induced 
on failure surfaces 
In high quality rock masses, slope instability is generally associated with varied amounts of brittle fracturing, 
which can result in the failure of non-daylighting wedges, and the detachment of blocks along stepped rupture 
surfaces (Cai et al. 2004; Havaej et al. 2014a; Leith 2012; Elmo et al. 2018). At the slope surface, fracturing 
occurs due to de-stressing and may result in spalling (Sampaleanu et al. 2017) and the formation of stress relief 
and exfoliation joints in natural slopes, generally subparallel to the surface (Leith 2012). With increase in 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
133
 
confinement stress, brittle fracturing occurs when the microcrack initiation threshold is exceeded. A further 
increase in stress can then cause brittle cracks to coalesce promoting the formation of through-going shear 
surfaces as intact rock bridges are failed (Diederichs 2007). In low quality (weathered/altered) rock masses, 
tensile failure such as localised cracking, spalling, ravelling, and small-scale, structurally controlled instabilities 
may occur under very low stresses encountered near the slope surface (Stead & Eberhardt 2013), and can be 
associated with rock mass and joint dilation. Brittle fracturing and tensile failure of rock bridges can also control 
the detachment of small-scale blocks. Conversely, with increase in confinement stress at depth within the slope, 
slope damage accumulates due to a combination of rock mass failure in shear (e.g. sliding along discontinuities, 
shearing of asperities, intact rock failure due to localised microcrack coalescence, etc.). In open pits and 
engineered slopes, the situation can be complex due to the combination of slope induced gravitational stresses 
with blast damage and underground-open pit interaction. The influence of groundwater on both changing 
stress distribution and slope failure is inherently linked to slope damages and changes in fracture connectivity. 
The role of such damage induced fracture connectivity on secondary permeability, porewater pressures and 
shear resistance along failure surfaces is critical. 
The distribution of slope damage is strictly related to the areas of stress concentration, with respect to local 
rock mass structure and strength. In turn, areas of stress concentration are a function of the excavation 
geometry and methods, and geomorphic processes (either man-made or natural) that are active at the site. 
Stress relief due to excavation (i.e. excavation damage, blast damage) or exhumation (i.e. stream and glacial 
incision, glacial retreat; Leith 2012) results in accumulation of damage near the slope surface, due to a 
decrease in confining stress. These processes can induce the formation of a ‘damage skin’ that may extend 
up to 20–40 m behind the slope face, as a function of stress ratio, lithology, discontinuity orientation, 
excavation geometry, and blasting technique (Hoek & Brown 2019; Lu et al. 2013; Lupogo 2017; Martino 
& Chandler 2004). 
The slope failure mechanism also affects the importance and distribution of slope damage. In simple 
kinematic failure mechanisms (planar, wedge sliding) the accumulation of stress-induced damage along the 
sliding surface results from shearing of asperities and may be a critical factor in slope stability along with near 
surface disturbance due to blasting (Lupogo 2017). The failure of intact rock bridges increases connectivity 
and may cause the formation of fully persistent, planar or stepped rupture surfaces (Elmo et al. 2018). Near 
surface brittle damage may result in the failure of non-daylighting wedges by toe-breakout posing an 
unforeseen hazard for safe mining operations (Havaej et al. 2012). The concentration of stresses within an 
unstable compound slide may also cause damage within the transition zone, enhancing the kinematic 
freedom of the unstable footwall and mountain slope (Havaej et al. 2014a; Kvapil & Clews 1979). Higher and 
steeper rock slopes increase the likelihood of geological structures and rupture surfaces daylighting or failing 
by toe-breakout. Deformation and failures may occur at various scales, from small-scale kinematically 
controlled removable blocks, to slope-scale, deep-seated instabilities (Clayton et al. 2017). 
2.3 
The role of fracture intensity and connectivity 
Fracture intensity and density (also referred to as P21 and P32, respectively) are parameters routinely 
employed for the construction of discrete fracture networks (DFNs). Fracture intensity is defined as the ratio 
of the total length of fractures per unit area (Dershowitz et al. 2000), whereas fracture density represents 
the ratio of fracture area per unit volume. P21 and P32 therefore provides a preliminary indication on the 
amount of fracturing that characterises a rock mass: low fracture density values may represent massive rock 
masses, whereas high fracture density are typical of blocky rock masses. Although fracture intensity is a key 
parameter in DFN engineering, it is recognised that it cannot adequately describe the connectivity of the 
fracture network (Karimi Sharif et al. 2018), which strongly controls both the shear strength of a fractured 
rock mass and potential rock slope instability (Poulsen et al. 2015). 
The formation and accumulation of brittle fractures within the slope (i.e. brittle slope damage) result in an 
increase in fracture intensity, fracture density, and fracture connectivity. Such an increase is likely more 
significant in high quality rock masses, inherently characterised by a lower fracture connectivity, as their 
deformation is necessarily associated with the propagation of brittle fractures (Cai et al. 2004). Conversely, 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
134
Slope Stability 2020
 
the deformation of lower quality rock masses, characterised by a highly interconnected network of 
discontinuities, can occur with limited fracturing through intact rock, and slope damage forms due to rock 
mass and joint dilation, and shearing along pre-existing discontinuities. Thus, an increase in fracture porosity, 
P33, defined as the ratio of the total volume of fractures per unit volume, may be observed. 
An increase in fracture connectivity within high quality rock masses can enhance kinematic freedom, when 
fully persistent release surfaces result from the brittle propagation of fractures (Elmo et al. 2018). Important 
factors that may cause increases in fracture density and fracture connectivity include blast damage, which 
can promote ravelling and local kinematically controlled instabilities (Lupogo 2017), and stress concentration 
along potential rupture surfaces, due to excavation, steepening, and undermining, that may promote sudden 
or long-term propagation of tectonic fractures (Figure 3). 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3 
Fracture connectivity in rock slopes: (a) Effects of blasting on fracture connectivity and rock mass 
quality. Note the pervasive blasting-induced fracturing observed in the slope of an open pit mine 
(Tuckey 2012); (b) Potentially unstable knob in high quality rock mass at the Whitemans Pond 
reservoir (Canmore, Canada). Brittle damage enhances fracture connectivity along the incipient 
rupture surface 
The interaction of large open pit and underground excavation (e.g. due the change from open pit to block 
caving mining) may cause stress concentration within the pit slope, resulting in both new cracking and joint 
dilation, increased fracture connectivity, reduction of shear strength on major structures, increase in 
dilational damage (fracture porosity), spatial changes in rock mass permeability. The reduced kinematic 
constrain may ultimately result in major rock slope failures (Vyazmensky et al. 2010). 
2.4 
A qualitative slope damage interaction matrix 
The use of interaction matrices for engineering problems was introduced by Hudson (1992) to describe the 
complex interaction between multiple controlling factors. An interaction matrix is a schematic tool that is 
capable of describing the behaviour of complex systems, in which project-specific leading elements (forming 
the diagonal of the matrix) interact with each other following a ‘cause-process-effect’ scheme. 
Based on field, remote sensing, and numerical modelling analyses and observations, Donati (2019) 
summarised an interaction matrix describing the factors controlling and driving the accumulation of slope 
damage in rock slopes. The diagonal of the matrix includes geological factors that were noted to play a major 
role in the formation and evolution of slope damage features. Conversely, the out-of-diagonal cells describe 
the processes and features resulting from each interaction (Figure 4). This slope damage interaction matrix 
was based largely in natural rock slope failures, but the authors suggest could be a useful method for 
understanding surface mine slope damage, the emphasis on geomorphic processes being replaced by mine 
operational characteristics such as mining method, open pit underground interaction, blast damage, bull 
nose geometries, location of mine dumps, etc. 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
135
 
 
Figure 4 
Natural slope damage interaction matrix (modified from Donati 2019) 
3 
Spatio-temporal evolution of damage 
The progressive accumulation of slope damage is a direct consequence of slope deformation. Investigating 
how the distribution and intensity of slope damage varies spatially and with time can provide important 
insights on the mechanisms underlying the slope instability. Using a set of historical aerial photographs, 
Clayton et al. (2017) investigated the slope damage that formed and accumulated within the southern slope 
of the Mitchell Creek, in northern British Columbia, Canada. Slope damage features developed prior to the 
2010 Mount Meager rock avalanche have been described by Roberti et al. (2018). They tracked and observed 
the geometrical evolution of tension cracks and scarps that would form the headscarp of the landslide. In 
both these events, the progressive slope deformation and the subsequent evolution of slope damage was 
noted to have been caused by the progressive glacial retreat at the base of the unstable slope. 
3.1 
Remote sensing displacement and slope damage monitoring 
Monitoring the displacement of rock slopes in engineered slopes is critical to ensure the safety of the 
workers, mining operations, and infrastructures. Depending on the rates of displacement and the risk 
associated to potential failures, periodical survey can be performed in quasi-real time or with longer time 
span between consecutive surveys (e.g. daily, monthly or yearly survey). 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
136
Slope Stability 2020
 
Ground-based radar techniques, such as real aperture radar and interferometric synthetic aperture radar 
(GB-InSAR), allows for relative displacement (i.e. between repeat surveys) in the line-of-sight of the 
instrument to be mapped with a sub-millimetre accuracy. Therefore, they are routinely employed to monitor 
open pit slope displacements (Bellet et al. 2015). These techniques are critical to characterise the 
deformation rate evolution of the slope after blasting. Velocity curves can be interpolated using empirical 
and rheological models, potentially allowing for predictive analyses to be undertaken (Danielson 2018). 
Satellite-based InSAR can also be employed to monitor subsidence of sublevel and block caving mines 
(Woo et al. 2013). Displacement monitoring has been successfully employed to forecast significant slope 
failures, such as the 2013 Bingham Canyon copper mine rockslide (Pankow et al. 2014; Styles et al. 2011), 
allowing to minimise the financial loss and disturbance to mining activity. Periodical TLS survey can also be 
performed to characterise displacement within engineered slopes. Change detection analyses can be 
undertaken by comparing datasets collected at different times. TLS monitoring is routinely used to monitor 
unstable slopes across open pit mines (Sampaleanu et al. 2016), and along infrastructure corridors 
(Kromer et al. 2015). 
Early warning systems (EWS) are among the most important application of slope displacement monitoring, 
and they largely rely on the comparison of displacement rates with site-specific velocity thresholds (Thiebes 
& Glade 2016). GB-InSAR is widely employed in EWS due to its high accuracy, the ability of processing data 
through automated and semi-automated procedures, and the high-frequency survey capability (up to 90 s; 
Thiebes & Glade 2016). Its use is widespread for the monitoring of both engineered and natural slopes (Crosta 
et al. 2017; Intrieri et al. 2012). The application of the inverse-velocity method (Fukuzono 1985) has also 
proved to be very effective in forecasting the time of failure of unstable slopes, thus allowing for a timely 
evacuation of the site, or the installation of remedial measurements (Atzeni et al. 2015; Rose & Hungr 2007). 
The use of acoustic emission (AE) and micro-seismicity (MS) monitoring for EWS in rock slopes has also 
recently been proposed, however, research is needed to better constrain AE and MS rate thresholds to the 
slope deformation process and evolution (Dixon et al. 2015). 
3.2 
Spatio-temporal slope damage plots 
Characterising the spatial and temporal distribution of slope damage in 2D and 3D datasets can provide useful 
insights on the factors driving the slope deformation. The Ten Mile slide, in British Columbia, Canada, is an 
excellent example of how airborne laser scanning (ALS) can be used to characterise the progressive formation 
and accumulation of slope damage features within an unstable, engineered slope. Since 2006, monitoring at 
this site includes the periodic collection of high-resolution ALS dataset. In order to quantitatively assess the 
evolution of slope damage across the slide area, Donati (2019) proposed the use of a slope damage intensity 
parameter, SD21, defined as the total length of slope damage features per unit area, as a method to track the 
changes in slope damage distribution. The slide area was subdivided into a square grid, and SD21 computed 
for each cell. An indexed table was then created, comprising the SD21 value of all cells from each of the 17 ALS 
datasets investigated. Interrogating the table using a Python script allowed for slope damage time plots to 
be produced (Figure 5). Using this approach, areas where significant slope damage can be identified, 
potentially allowing focused analyses to be undertaken, in order to optimise monitoring efforts, resources, 
and planning. Such a method could be used to track spatio-temporal damage associated with 
ground/UAV-based photogrammetry or laser scanning of pit slope failures with constraint against  
ground-radar data, providing important information on both the spatio-temporal development of the failure 
and structural or rock mass controls on the failure mechanism. 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
137
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 5 
Examples of slope damage intensity temporal plot obtained from the analysis of the Ten Mile 
Slide: (a) Location of the investigated points in the ALS hillshade map; (b) Slope damage temporal 
plots for points 588, 1017, 912, and 1150 
4 
Numerical modelling of slope damage 
The use of numerical modelling techniques in the investigation of landslides and potentially unstable slopes can 
provide important insight on the damage mechanisms associated with active or potential slope instability. 
The characterisation of slope damage in numerical analyses can be used to validate the numerical results and 
to investigate the role of slope damage (and its evolution) on the slope failure mechanism. 
Donati (2019) performed a numerical investigation of the Downie Slide a massive, extremely slowly moving 
rockslide located British Columbia, Canada. By using a Mohr–Coulomb strain softening approach, he was able 
to reproduce in a 3D, distinct element numerical model the slope damage features that can be observed at 
the site. A strong correlation was shown to exist between the orientation, size, and type of slope damage 
features and the morphology of the deep-seated sliding surface of the rockslide (Figure 6). Modelling was 
constrained against both surface monitoring and borehole inclinometer data. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 6 
Overview of the numerical modelling of the Downie Slide: (a) ALS hillshade map; (b) Simulated 
volumetric strain plot. Note the agreement between the observed external damage and the 
simulated slope damage features, represented by zones of dilation in the numerical model 
Brittle fracturing of intact rock can have an important role in defining and changing the kinematics of rock 
slopes. This process can be effectively characterised using a set of numerical modelling methods, including 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
138
Slope Stability 2020
 
distinct element (DEM), hybrid finite-distinct element (FDEM), and lattice spring methods (Lisjak & 
Grasselli 2014; Donati et al. 2018). Havaej et al. (2014b) introduced the concept of ellipsoid of damage as a 
method to describe the intensity and distribution of brittle damage within simulated rock slopes, as a 
function of the sliding surface morphology. Donati et al. (2019) used 2D and 3D hybrid and lattice scheme 
numerical modelling methods to investigate the failure of the 2014 San Leo landslide (Italy), highlighting the 
key role of long-term fracture propagation on the stability of the slope (Figure 7). The progressive increase 
in fracture connectivity due to time-dependent fracture propagation was also identified as a controlling 
factor of the 1965 Hope Slide (Donati 2019). In this case, the progressive accumulation of internal slope 
damage initiated in the aftermath of a prehistoric landslide, causing a critical stress redistribution within the 
slope that ultimately resulted in the catastrophic 1965 failure. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 7 
Numerical modelling of the San Leo landslide: (a) Orthophoto of the post-failure slope; 
(b) Simulation results after 20 and 60 seconds of numerical time. Note the progressive 
accumulation of microcracks in the model (modified from Donati et al. 2019) 
The introduction of a numerical inverse-velocity (NIV) approach allowed for an enhanced comparison and 
constrain between the observed and modelled displacement rates. Hamdi et al. (2018) used a DFN approach 
to investigate the deformation occurring at the LKAB sublevel cave mine (Sweden). The NIV plots were used 
to identify and characterise the regressive, progressive, and steady state phases of the hanging wall 
deformation. A NIV approach was also employed by Havaej et al. (2015) to investigate the effects of 
groundwater level, shear strength of the sliding surface, number of composing blocks, and brittle fracturing 
on the failure of the 1963 Vajont Slide. In particular, the analysis of NIV plots allowed the onset of failure, 
defined as the limit between the regressive and progressive state of the slide, to be identified for each 
simulated scenario. It is suggested that a similar approach to analysis of pit slope modelling results 
constrained by ground-InSAR/RADAR monitoring data would allow improved understanding of large open pit 
failures particularly if constrained by borehole and microseismic monitoring of internal slope damage. 
5 
Advanced geovisualisation techniques 
During the past two decades, advances in remote sensing techniques have significantly enhanced the detail 
and resolution of 2D and 3D datasets that are available for rock mass and slope characterisation. Likewise, 
the computational power available with modern workstations allows for more sophisticated and complex 
numerical models to be examined. The effective visualisation and manipulation of these large ‘big datasets’ 
is one of the great challenges encountered by geoscientists and engineers in their interpretation. 
The application of advanced mixed and virtual reality systems (MR and VR) can provide an immersive 
engineering experience and an enhanced interpretation of 3D remote sensing and numerical modelling 
datasets. To date, MR and VR have been largely employed for communication and public relation purposes. 
Research and development conducted by the Engineering Geology and Resource Geotechnics Research 
Group allowed for innovative applications of VR and MR to rock engineering, for the purpose of data 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
139
 
collection and interpretation (Onsel et al. 2018). The software EasyMap MR (EMMR, developed in 
collaboration with SRK Consulting) has been developed to allow rock mass characterisation to be performed 
using MR. EMMR exploits the Microsoft HoloLens and its inbuilt scanner to create in real time a 
georeferenced 3D model of the rock outcrop. The software allows discontinuity and geological mapping to 
be undertaken directly onsite, automatically storing geological data collected by the user in the form of 
points, polylines, polygons, and annotations. The 3D model and the data are saved, allowing them to be 
reviewed and shared, enhancing interpretation and quality control (Onsel et al. 2019). This method of 
holographic mapping is being extended to allow holographic mapping of slope damage features both in the 
field and on remote sensing data in the office. Microsoft HoloLens applications have also been developed to 
display 3D numerical modelling of open pit-underground interaction, to measure joint surface roughness, to 
visualise 3D models of rock slope remote sensing data, and to visualise 3D virtual models of rock cores for 
logging, rock mass classification, and quality control (Onsel et al. 2019). Mysiorek et al. (2019) presented an 
innovative application of VR and MR techniques, allowing holographic visualisation of numerical simulation 
of rockfall, to be performed using Unity software (www.unity.com), based on 3D data collected in the field 
using remote sensing techniques (i.e. TLS and SfM). 
6 
Summary and conclusion 
The progressive deformation of rock slopes results in the formation and accumulation of slope damage. The 
type, orientation, size, and spatial distribution of slope damage features is strictly related to the slope failure 
mechanism, rock mass quality, location and morphology of the rupture surface. Thus, we suggest that slope 
damage assessments should be considered as a critical procedure in slope stability investigations. In 
particular, as large open pits become deeper and open pit-underground interaction more common the role 
of stress-induced damage must be considered. 
This paper summarises the factors and mechanisms controlling the formation and accumulation of slope 
damage in natural, and engineered slopes, including open pits. It demonstrates the use of state-of-the-art 
remote sensing methods and approaches that have been employed to map, describe, and classify rock slope 
damage features. Remote sensing data, when coupled with traditional field data, allows for an enhanced 
interpretation of the mechanisms underlying the instability and deformation behaviour of rock slopes. The 
data collected can be used as input for numerical modelling analyses, from simple kinematic analyses to more 
sophisticated methods, including hybrid and lattice scheme software for the analysis of brittle fracturing of 
intact rock. Finally, the use of innovative geo-visualisation techniques, such as MR and VR, provides the 
engineer with an immersive experience, allowing for both enhanced data interpretation and analysis. 
Acknowledgement 
The methods summarised in this paper are built on the research undertaken in the past 15 years by many 
former and present members of the Engineering Geology and Resource Geotechnics Research Group at 
Simon Fraser University. Their contribution is acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Dr Loren Lorig 
and Dr John Read of CSIRO, Australia, for their assistance in the provision of the Slope Model code. 
References 
Atzeni, C, Barla, M, Pieraccini, M & Antolini, F 2015, ‘Early warning monitoring of natural and engineered slopes with ground-based 
synthetic-aperture radar’, Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 235–246. 
Baroň, I, Bečkovský, D & Míča, L 2014, ‘Application of infrared thermography for mapping open fractures in deep-seated rockslides 
and unstable cliffs’, Landslides, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 15–27. 
Bellet, P, Noon, D, Leva, D & Rivolta, C 2015, ‘3D and 2D radars for open-pit slope monitoring’, in SAIMM & SANIRE (eds), Proceedings 
of the 2015 International Symposium on Slope Stability in Open Pit Mining and Civil Engineering, Camera Press, Johannesburg, 
pp. 591–606. 
Cai, M, Kaiser, PK, Uno, H, Tasaka, Y & Minami, M 2004, ‘Estimation of rock mass deformation modulus and strength of jointed hard 
rock masses using the GSI system’, International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 3–19. 
Clayton, A, Stead, D, Kinakin, D & Wolter, A 2017, ‘Engineering geomorphological interpretation of the Mitchell Creek Landslide, 
British Columbia, Canada’, Landslides, vol. 14, no. 5, p. 1655–1675. 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
140
Slope Stability 2020
 
Crosta, GB, Agliardi, F, Rivolta, C, Alberti, S & Dei Cas, L 2017, ‘Long-term evolution and early warning strategies for complex rockslides 
by real-time monitoring’, Landslides, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1615–1632. 
Danielson, J 2018, An investigation into the time dependent deformation behavior of open pit slopes at Gibraltar Mine, BC, Canada, 
MSc Thesis, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby. 
de Vilder, SJ, Rosser, NJ & Brain, MJ 2017, ‘Forensic analysis of rockfall scars’, Geomorphology, vol. 295, pp. 202–214. 
Dershowitz, W, Hermanson, J, Follin, S & Mauldon, M 2000, ‘Fracture intensity measures in 1-D, 2-D, and 3-D at Aspo, Sweden’, 
Proceedings of the 4th North American Rock Mechanics Symposium, American Rock Mechanics Association, Alexandria, 
pp. 849–853. 
Diederichs, MS 2007, ‘The 2003 Canadian Geotechnical Colloquium: Mechanistic interpretation and practical application of damage 
and spalling prediction criteria for deep tunnelling’, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 1082–1116. 
Dixon, N, Codeglia, D, Smith, A, Fowmes, GJ & Meldrum, P 2015, ‘An acoustic emission slope displacement rate sensor — case studies’, 
in PM Dight (ed.), Proceedings of the Ninth International Symposium on Field Measurements in Geomechanics, Australian 
Centre for Geomechanics, Perth, pp. 743–756. 
Donati, D 2019, The characterization of slope damage using an integrated remote sensing-numerical modelling approach, PhD Thesis, 
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby. 
Donati, D & Stead, D 2019, ‘Potential applications of multi-sensor remote sensing in rock mass characterization’, in SAB Fontoura, 
RJ Rocca & JF Pavon Mendoza (eds), Proceedings of the 14th International Congress of Rock Mechanics, International Society 
for Rock Mechanics Lisbon, pp. 536–543. 
Donati, D, Stead, D, Brideau, MA & Ghirotti, M 2017, ‘A remote sensing approach for the derivation of numerical modelling input 
data: insights from the Hope Slide, Canada’, Proceedings of the ISRM International Symposium AfriRock Conference, Southern 
African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, Cape Town. 
Donati, D, Stead, D, Elmo, D & Borgatti, L 2019, ‘A preliminary investigation on the role of brittle fracture in the kinematics of the 
2014 San Leo landslide’, Geosciences, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 256. 
Donati, D, Stead, D, Elmo, D, Karimi Sharif, L, Gao, F, Borgatti, L & Spreafico, MC 2018, ‘Experience gained in modelling brittle fracture 
in rock’, Proceedings of the 52nd US Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, American Rock Mechanics Association, 
Alexandria. 
Eberhardt, E, Willenberg, H, Loew, S & Maurer, H 2001, ‘Active rockslides in Switzerland - Understanding mechanisms and processes’, 
in M Kühne, HH Einstein, E Krauter, H Klapperich & R Pöttler (eds), UEF International Conference on Landslides - Causes, 
Impacts and Countermeasures, Verlag Glückauf GmbH, Essen, pp. 25–34. 
Elmo, D, Donati, D & Stead, D 2018, ‘Challenges in the characterisation of intact rock bridges in rock slopes’, Engineering Geology, 
vol. 245, pp. 81–96. 
Fukuzono, T 1985, ‘A new method for predicting the failure time of a slope’, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference and 
Field Workshop on Landslides, Japan Landslide Society Committee for International Exchange of Landslide Technique, Tokyo, 
pp. 145–150. 
Hamdi, P, Stead, D, Elmo, D & Töyrä, J 2018, ‘Use of an integrated finite/discrete element method-discrete fracture network approach 
to characterize surface subsidence associated with sub-level caving’, International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining 
Sciences, vol. 103, no. ii, pp. 55–67. 
Havaej, M, Stead, D, Lorig, L & Vivas, J 2012, ‘Modelling rock bridge failure and brittle fracturing in large open pit rock slopes’, 
in A Bobet (ed.), Proceedings of the 46th US Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, American Rock Mechanics 
Association, Alexandria. 
Havaej, M, Stead, D, Eberhardt, E & Fisher, BR 2014a, ‘Characterization of bi-planar and ploughing failure mechanisms in footwall 
slopes using numerical modelling’, Engineering Geology, vol. 178, pp. 109–120. 
Havaej, M, Stead, D, Meyer, J & Wolter, A 2014b, ‘Modelling the relation between failure kinematics and slope damage in high rock 
slopes using a lattice scheme approach’, Proceedings of the 48th U.S. Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, American 
Rock Mechanics Association, Alexandria. 
Havaej, M, Wolter, A & Stead, D 2015, ‘The possible role of brittle rock fracture in the 1963 Vajont Slide, Italy’, International Journal 
of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 78, pp. 319–330. 
Hoek, E & Brown, ET 2019, ‘The Hoek–Brown failure criterion and GSI–2018 edition’, Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical 
Engineering, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 445–463. 
Hudson, JA 1992, Rock Engineering Systems. Theory and Practice, Ellis Horwood Ltd, Hemel Hempstead, 185 pp. 
Intrieri, E, Gigli, G, Mugnai, F, Fanti, R & Casagli, N 2012, ‘Design and implementation of a landslide early warning system’, Engineering 
Geology, vol. 147–148, pp. 124–136. 
Karimi Sharif, L, Elmo, D & Stead, D 2018, ‘DFNAnalyzer : A web-based application for discrete fracture network analysis’, Proceedings 
of the 2nd International Discrete Fracture Network Engineering Conference, American Rock Mechanics Association, 
Alexandria. 
Kromer, RA, Abellán, A, Hutchinson, DJ, Lato, M, Chanut, MA, Dubois, L & Jaboyedoff, M 2017, ‘Automated terrestrial laser scanning 
with near-real-time change detection - monitoring of the Séchilienne landslide’, Earth Surface Dynamics, vol. 5, no. 2,  
pp. 293–310. 
Kromer, RA, Hutchinson, DJ, Lato, MJ, Gauthier, D & Edwards, T 2015, ‘Identifying rock slope failure precursors using LiDAR for 
transportation corridor hazard management’, Engineering Geology, vol. 195, pp. 93–103. 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
141
 
Kurz, T, Buckley, S & Howell, J 2012, ‘Close range hyperspectral imaging integrated with terrestrial LiDAR scanning applied to rock 
characterisation at centimetre scale’, ISPRS-International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences, vol. XXXIX-B5, pp. 417–422. 
Kvapil, R & Clews, M 1979, ‘An examination of the Prandtl mechanism in large dimension slope failures’, Transactions of the Institution 
of Mining and Metallurgy: Section A, vol. 88, pp. A1–A5. 
Leith, KJ 2012, Stress development and geomechanical controls on the geomorphic evolution of alpine valleys, PhD Thesis, ETH, Zurich. 
Lisjak, A & Grasselli, G 2014, ‘A review of discrete modeling techniques for fracturing processes in discontinuous rock masses’, Journal 
of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 301–314. 
Lu, WB, Hu, YG, Yang, JH, Chen, M & Yan, P 2013, ‘Spatial distribution of excavation induced damage zone of high rock slope’, 
International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 64, pp. 181–191. 
Lupogo, K 2017, Characterization of blast damage in rock slopes: an integrated field-numerical modelling approach, PhD Thesis, Simon 
Fraser University, Burnaby. 
Martino, JB & Chandler, NA 2004, ‘Excavation-induced damage studies at the Underground Research Laboratory’, International 
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1413–1426. 
Mysiorek, J, Onsel, E, Stead, D & Rosser, NJ 2019, ‘Engineering geological characterization of the 2014 Jure Landslide, Nepal: an 
interactive mixed-reality approach to slope characterization’, Proceedings of the 72nd Canadian Geotechnical Conference, 
The Geotechnical Society of St John’s and Canadian Geotechnical Society, St John’s.  
Obregon, C & Mitri, H 2019, ‘Probabilistic approach for open pit bench slope stability analysis – a mine case study’, International 
Journal of Mining Science and Technology, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 629–640. 
Onsel, E, Chang, O, Mysiorek, J, Donati, D, Stead, D, Barnett, W & Zorzi, L 2019, ‘Applications of mixed and virtual reality techniques 
in site characterization’, Proceedings of the 26th Vancouver Geotechnical Society Symposium, Vancouver Geotechnical 
Society, Vancouver. 
Onsel, E, Donati, D, Stead, D & Chang, O 2018, ‘Applications of virtual and mixed reality in rock engineering’, Proceedings of the 52nd 
US Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, American Rock Mechanics Association, Alexandria. 
Pankow, KL, Moore, JR, Mark Hale, J, Koper, KD, Kubacki, T…& McCarter, MK 2014, ‘Massive landslide at Utah copper mine generates 
wealth of geophysical data’, GSA Today, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 4–9. 
Poulsen, BA, Adhikary, DP, Elmouttie, MK & Wilkins, A 2015, ‘Convergence of synthetic rock mass modelling and the Hoek-Brown 
strength criterion’, International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 80, pp. 171–180. 
Roberti, G, Ward, B, van Wyk de Vries, B, Friele, P, Perotti, L…& Giardino, M, 2018, ‘Precursory slope distress prior to the 2010 Mount 
Meager landslide, British Columbia’, Landslides, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 637–647. 
Rose, ND & Hungr, O 2007, ‘Forecasting potential rock slope failure in open pit mines using the inverse-velocity method’, International 
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 308–320. 
Sampaleanu, C 2017, The role of intact rock fracture in rockfall initiation, MSc Thesis, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby. 
Sampaleanu, C, Stead, D, Donati, D, Griffiths, C, D’Ambra, S & LeBreton, R 2017, ‘Characterizing brittle fracture induced rockfall in an 
open sub-level retreat excavation’, Proceedings of the 51st US Rock Mechanics/Geomechanics Symposium, American Rock 
Mechanics Association, Alexandria. 
Sampaleanu, C, Stead, D & Preston, R 2016, ‘Application of Laser Scanning Monitoring Methods At Jane Basin , Britannia Creek , BC’, 
Proceedings of the 69th Annual Canadian Geotechnical Conference, Vancouver Geotechnical Society and Canadian 
Geotechnical Society, Vancouver. 
Sjöberg, J 1996, Large scale slope instability in open pit mining - a review, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå. 
Stead, D, Donati, D, Wolter, A & Sturzenegger, M 2019, ‘Application of remote sensing to the investigation of rock slopes: experience 
gained and lessons learned’, ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 8, no. 7, p. 296. 
Stead, D & Eberhardt, E 2013, ‘Understanding the mechanics of large landslides’, Italian Journal of Engineering Geology and 
Environment - Book Series, no. 6, pp. 85–112. 
Stead, D & Wolter, A 2015, ‘A critical review of rock slope failure mechanisms: the importance of structural geology’, Journal of 
Structural Geology, vol. 74, pp. 1–23. 
Styles, T, Stead, D, Eberhardt, E, Rabus, B, Gaida, M & Bloom, J 2011, ‘Integrated Numerical Modelling and InSAR Monitoring of a 
Slow Moving Slope Instability at Bingham Canyon Mine’, in E Eberhardt & D Stead (eds), Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Rock Slope Stability in Open Pit Mining and Civil Engineering, Canadian Rock Mechanics Association. 
Teza, G, Marcato, G, Pasuto, A & Galgaro, A 2015, ‘Integration of laser scanning and thermal imaging in monitoring optimization and 
assessment of rockfall hazard: a case history in the Carnic Alps (Northeastern Italy)’, Natural Hazards, vol. 76, pp. 1535–1549. 
Thiebes, B & Glade, T 2016, ‘Landslide early warning systems - fundamental concepts and innovative applications’, in S Aversa, 
L Cascini, L Picarelli & C Scavia (eds.), Landslides and Engineered Slopes. Experience, Theory and Practice, pp. 1903–1911. 
Tuckey, Z & Stead, D 2016, ‘Improvements to field and remote sensing methods for mapping discontinuity persistence and intact 
rock bridges in rock slopes’, Engineering Geology, vol. 208, pp. 136–153. 
Tuckey, Z 2012, An integrated field mapping-numerical modelling approach to characterising discontinuity persistence and intact rock 
bridges in large open pit slopes, MSc Thesis, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby. 
Vivas, J, Stead, D, Elmo, D & Hunt, C 2015, ‘Simulating the interaction between groundwater and brittle failure in open pit slopes’, 
International Journal of Geological and Environmental Engineering, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1295–1303. 
Vyazmensky, A, Stead, D, Elmo, D & Moss, A 2010, ‘Numerical analysis of block caving-induced instability in large open pit slopes: 
a finite element/discrete element approach’, Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 21–39. 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
142
Slope Stability 2020
 
Whalley, WB 1974, ‘The mechanics of high-magnitude, low-frequency rock failure and its importance in a mountainous area’, Reading 
Geographical Papers, vol. 27. 
Woo, KS, Eberhardt, E, Elmo, D & Stead, D 2013, ‘Empirical investigation and characterization of surface subsidence related to block 
cave mining’, International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, vol. 61, pp. 31–42. 
 
 
 
Safety and risk management
Slope Stability 2020
143
 
 
New techniques for characterising damage in rock slopes: implications
for engineered slopes and open pit mines
D Donati et al.
144
Slope Stability 2020
