
Pile Design and Construction 
Practice
Also available from Taylor & Francis
Piling Engineering 2nd ed
M. Tomlinson et al.
Hb: ISBN 0–415–26646–7
Design of Caisson Foundations for Offshore 
Wind Turbines
B. Byrne et al.
Hb: ISBN 0–415–37056–6
An introduction to Geotechnical Processes
J. Woodward
Hb: ISBN 0–415–28645–X 
Pb: ISBN 0–415–28646–8
Introductory Geotechnical Engineering
Y. Fang
Hb: ISBN 0–415–30401–6
Pb: ISBN 0–415–30402–4
Soil Liquefaction
M. Jefferies et al.
Hb: ISBN 0–419–16170–8
Information and ordering details
For price availability and ordering visit our website www.tandf.co.uk/builtenvironment
Alternatively our books are available from all good bookshops.
Pile Design and Construction
Practice
Fifth edition
Michael Tomlinson and 
John Woodward
First published 1977,
reprinted with amendments 1981,
third edition 1987 by Palladian,
reprinted 1991, fourth edition 1994,
reprinted 1994, 1995, 1998 by E & FN Spon
Fifth Edition published 2008
by Taylor & Francis
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Taylor & Francis
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Taylor & Francis is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group,
an informa business
© 1977, 1987, 1994, 2008 Michael Tomlinson and John Woodward
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
The publisher makes no representation, express or implied, with regard 
to the accuracy of the information contained in this book and cannot 
accept any legal responsibility or liability for any efforts or 
omissions that may be made.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Tomlinson, M. J. (Michael John)
Pile design and construction practice / Michael Tomlinson and 
John Woodward . – 5th ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Piling (Civil engineering) I. Woodward, John, 1936– 
II. Title.
TA780.T65 2007
624.1'54–dc22
2006019427
ISBN10: 0–415–38582–2 (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–96429–2 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–38582–4 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–96429–3 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-96429-2 Master e-book ISBN
Contents
Preface to fifth edition
ix
Preface to first edition
xiii
1
General principles and practices
1
1.1
Function of piles 1
1.2
Historical 1
1.3
Calculations of load-carrying capacity 2
1.4
Dynamic piling formulae 4
1.5
Code of practice requirements 5
1.6
Responsibilities of engineer and contractor 7
1.7
References 9
2
Types of pile
10
2.1
Classification of piles 10
2.2
Driven displacement piles 14
2.3
Driven and cast-in-place displacement piles 50
2.4
Replacement piles 58
2.5
Composite piles 65
2.6
Minipiles and micropiles 66
2.7
Factors governing choice of type of pile 66
2.8
Reuse of existing piled foundations 69
2.9
References 69
3
Piling equipment and methods
71
3.1
Equipment for driven piles 72
3.2
Equipment for installing driven and cast-in-place piles 104
3.3
Equipment for installing bored and cast-in-place piles 106
3.4
Procedure in pile installation 124
3.5
Constructing piles in groups 137
3.6
References 137
4
Calculating the resistance of piles to compressive loads
139
4.1
General considerations 139
4.2
Calculations for piles in fine-grained soils 151
4.3
Piles in coarse-grained soils 165
4.4
Piles in soils intermediate between sands and clays 188
4.5
Piles in layered fine- and coarse-grained soils 189
4.6
The settlement of the single pile at the working load 
for piles in soil 192
4.7
Piles bearing on rock 196
4.8
Piles in fill – negative skin friction 212
4.9
References 220
4.10
Worked examples 223
5
Pile groups under compressive loading
240
5.1
Group action in piled foundations 240
5.2
Pile groups in fine-grained soils 243
5.3
Pile groups in coarse-grained soils 263
5.4
Eurocode 7 recommendations for pile groups 272
5.5
Pile groups terminating in rock 272
5.6
Pile groups in filled ground 276
5.7
Effects on pile groups of installation methods 278
5.8
Precautions against heave effects in pile groups 281
5.9
Pile groups beneath basements 282
5.10
The optimization of pile groups to reduce 
differential settlements in clay 287
5.11
References 288
5.12
Worked examples 290
6
The design of piled foundations to resist 
uplift and lateral loading
305
6.1
The occurrence of uplift and lateral loading 305
6.2
Uplift resistance of piles 308
6.3
Single vertical piles subjected to lateral loads 327
6.4
Lateral loads on raking piles 352
6.5
Lateral loads on groups of piles 353
6.6
References 356
6.7
Worked examples 357
7
Some aspects of the structural design of 
piles and pile groups
375
7.1
General design requirements 375
7.2
Designing reinforced concrete piles for lifting after fabrication 376
vi
Contents
7.3
Designing piles to resist driving stresses 379
7.4
The effects on bending of piles below ground level 383
7.5
The design of axially loaded piles as columns 383
7.6
Lengthening piles 385
7.7
Bonding piles with caps and ground beams 386
7.8
The design of pile caps 388
7.9
The design of pile capping beams and connecting ground beams 393
7.10
References 396
8
Piling for marine structures
398
8.1
Berthing structures and jetties 398
8.2
Fixed offshore platforms 416
8.3
Pile installations for marine structures 418
8.4
References 424
8.5
Worked examples 425
9
Miscellaneous piling problems
434
9.1
Piling for machinery foundations 434
9.2
Piling for underpinning 437
9.3
Piling in mining subsidence areas 445
9.4
Piling in frozen ground 449
9.5
Piled foundations for bridges on land 453
9.6
Piled foundations for over-water bridges 463
9.7
Piled foundations in karst 472
9.8
Energy piles 474
9.9
References 475
9.10
Worked example 477
10
The durability of piled foundations
478
10.1
General 478
10.2
Durability and protection of timber piles 479
10.3
Durability and protection of concrete piles 486
10.4
Durability and protection of steel piles 492
10.5
References 497
11
Ground investigations, piling contracts, pile testing
498
11.1
Ground investigations 498
11.2
Piling contracts and specifications 508
11.3
Control of pile installation 514
11.4
Load testing of piles 520
11.5
Tests for the structural integrity of piles 535
11.6
References 537
Contents
vii
Appendix: properties of materials
539
A.1
Coarse-grained soils 539
A.2
Fine-grained and organic soils 539
A.3
Rocks and other materials 540
A.4
Engineering classification of chalk 540
Name index
543
Subject index
547
viii
Contents
Piling rigs are a commonplace feature on building sites in cities and towns today. The
continuing introduction of new, more powerful, and self-erecting machines for installing
piled foundations has transformed the economics of this form of construction in ground
conditions where, in the past, first consideration would have been given to conventional
spread or raft foundations, with piling being adopted only as a last resort in difficult
ground.
The increased adoption of piling is not only due to the availability of more efficient
mechanical equipment. Developments in analytical methods of calculating bearing capacity
and dynamic methods for load and integrity testing have resulted in greater assurance of
sound long-term performance. Further economies in foundation and superstructure design
are now possible because of the increased ability to predict movements of piles under load,
thus allowing engineers to adopt with confidence the concept of redistribution of load
between piles with consequent savings in overall pile lengths and cross-sectional dimensions,
as described in this new edition.
Since the publication of the fourth edition of this book, Eurocode 7, Geotechnical Design,
has been issued. As the name implies this code does not deal with all aspects of foundation
design; there are extensive cross-references to other Eurocodes dealing with such matters as
the general basis of design and the properties of constructional materials. The Code does not
cover foundation design and particularly construction as comprehensively as the present
British Standard 8004 Foundations, and the British National Annex to Eurocode 7 is yet to
be published. The authors have endeavoured to co-ordinate the principles of both codes in this
new book.
The authors are grateful to Professor Richard Jardine and his colleagues at Imperial
College and Thomas Telford Limited for permission to quote from their book on the ICP
method of designing piles driven into clays and sands based on extensive laboratory research
and practical field testing of instrumented piles. Their work represents a considerable
advance on previous design methods. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the help of
Mr Ian Higginbottom in checking the proofs and Mr Tony Bracegirdle of the Geotechnical
Consulting Group for his helpful comments on the application of Eurocode 7 to the design
of piles and pile groups.
Many specialist piling companies and manufacturers of piling equipment have kindly
supplied technical information and illustrations of their processes and products. Where
appropriate the source of this information is given in the text.
Preface to fifth edition
In addition, the authors wish to thank the following for the supply of and permission to
use photographs and illustrations from technical publications and brochures.
Abbey Pynford Foundation Systems Limited
Figure 2.15
ABI GmbH
Figures 3.1 and 3.2
American Society of Civil Engineers
Figures 4.6, 4.11, 4.12, 4.29, 4.39,
5.17, 5.30 and 6.29
Austrian Member Society, SMGE
Figure 6.20
Bachy-Soletanche
Figure 2.29a and b
Ballast Nedam Groep N.V.
Figures 9.22 and 9.23
Bauer Maschinen GmbH
Figure 3.27
The British Petroleum Company Limited
Figure 8.15
BSP International Foundations Limited
Figures 3.12 and 3.14
Building Research Establishment
Figure 10.2a and b
Canadian Geotechnical Journal
Figures 4.34, 4.36, 4.37, 5.20, 
5.38 and 6.9
A. Carter
Figure 9.24
Cement and Concrete Association
Figure 7.13
Cementation Foundations Skanska Limited
Figures 3.30, 3.33, 9.31 and 11.5
Central Electricity Generating Board
Figure 2.18
CIRIA/Butterworth
Figures 4.11 and 5.28
Comité Français SMGE
Figure 6.30
Construction Industry Research and
Figure 4.8
Information Association (CIRIA)
Danish Geotechnical Institute
Figures 5.6–5.10, 6.21 and 6.22
Dar-al-Handasah Consultants
Figure 9.14
Dawson Construction Plant Limited
Figure 3.5
Department of the Environment
Figure 10.1
DFP Foundation Products
Figure 2.28
Fondedile Foundations Limited
Figure 9.5
Frank’s Casing Crew and Rental Inc
Figure 2.17
Fugro Limited
Figure 5.24
GeoDelft
Figure 5.23
The Geological Society
Figure 8.9
U G de Gijt
Figure 4.20
International Construction Equipment
Figure 3.3
International Society for Soil Mechanics
Figures 3.38, 5.24, 5.25, 6.18, 
and Foundation Engineering
6.30 and 9.20
Institution of Civil Engineers / Thomas
Figures 4.28, 5.26, 5.27, 5.33, 
Telford Limited
5.34, 5.35, 5.41, 5.42, 9.21, 9.24, 
9.26 and 9.27
Land and Water, Den Haag
Figure 4.20
Liebherr Great Britain Limited
Figure 3.4
Menck GmbH
Figure 3.12
National Coal Board
Figures 2.18, 4.26 and 8.2
Numa Hammers
Figure 3.32
Offshore Technology Conference
Figures 4.16, 5.29 and 8.17
x
Preface to fifth edition
Pearson Education
Figures 4.16, 4.22, 4.25 and 5.6–5.10
Pentech Press
Figures 4.35 and 5.19
Professor Poulos
Figure 5.24
Russian Society, SMGE
Figure 5.25
Seacore Limited
Figures 3.7, 3.13 and 3.36
Sezai-Turkes-Feyzi-Akkaya Construction
Figure 4.26
Company
Sheet Piling Contractors Limited
Figure 3.19
Soil Mechanics Limited
Figures 2.10 and 2.11
Springer-Verlag
Figure 4.21
Stent Foundations Limited
Figure 2.32
Swedish Geotechnical Society
Figures 5.22 and 5.28
Test Consult Limited
Figures 11.10 and 11.21
Thomson Publishing Services
Figures 3.37 and 4.30
TRL
Figures 9.17, 9.18 and 9.19
Trans-Tech Publications
Figures 6.34 and 6.35
University of Austin in Texas
Figures 6.25, 6.26, 6.27 and 6.28
United States Department of Transportation
Figure 4.33
John Wiley and Sons Incorporated
Figure 4.10
George Wimpey Limited
Figures 2.16, 2.18, 3.8, 8.2, 8.8 
and 8.16
Wirth Maschinen und Bohrgerate-
Figure 3.35
Fabrik GmbH
Figure 9.25 and the front cover are published with the permission of the Deep
Foundations Institute as they were originally published in the DFI 2005 Marine Foundations
Speciality Seminar proceedings. Copies of the full proceedings are available through DFI –
Deep Foundations Institute, 326 Lafayette Avenue Hawthorne, NJ 07506; tel: 973-423-4030;
fax: 973-423-4031; email: dfihq@dfi.org
Permission to reproduce extracts of British Standards is granted by BSI. British Standards
can be obtained from BSI Customer Services, 389 Chiswick High Road, London W4 4AL;
tel: 44 (0) 20 8996 9001; email: cservices@bsiglobal.com
Every effort has been made to contact copyright holders. Please advise the publisher of
any errors or omissions and these will be corrected in subsequent edition.
MJT, Richmond-upon-Thames
JCW, Princes Risborough, 2006
Preface to fifth edition
xi

Piling is both an art and a science. The art lies in selecting the most suitable type of pile and
method of installation for the ground conditions and the form of the loading. Science
enables the engineer to predict the behaviour of the piles once they are in the ground and
subject to loading. This behaviour is influenced profoundly by the method used to install the
piles and it cannot be predicted solely from the physical properties of the pile and of the
undisturbed soil. A knowledge of the available types of piling and methods of constructing
piled foundations is essential for a thorough understanding of the science of their behaviour.
For this reason the author has preceded the chapters dealing with the calculation of allowable
loads on piles and deformation behaviour by descriptions of the many types of proprietary
and non-proprietary piles and the equipment used to install them.
In recent years substantial progress has been made in developing methods of predicting
the behaviour of piles under lateral loading. This is important in the design of foundations
for deep-water terminals for oil tankers and oil carriers and for offshore platforms for gas
and petroleum production. The problems concerning the lateral loading of piles have there-
fore been given detailed treatment in this book.
The author has been fortunate in being able to draw on the world-wide experience of
George Wimpey and Company Limited, his employers for nearly 30 years, in the design and
construction of piled foundations. He is grateful to the management of Wimpey
Laboratories Ltd. and their parent company for permission to include many examples of
their work. In particular, thanks are due to P. F. Winfield, FIStructE, for his assistance with
the calculations and his help in checking the text and worked examples.
Burton-on-Stather, 1977 
M. J. T
Preface to first edition

Chapter 1
General principles and practices
1.1
Function of piles
Piles are columnar elements in a foundation which have the function of transferring load
from the superstructure through weak compressible strata or through water, onto stiffer or
more compact and less compressible soils or onto rock. They may be required to carry uplift
loads when used to support tall structures subjected to overturning forces from winds or
waves. Piles used in marine structures are subjected to lateral loads from the impact of
berthing ships and from waves. Combinations of vertical and horizontal loads are carried
where piles are used to support retaining walls, bridge piers and abutments, and machinery
foundations.
1.2
Historical
The driving of bearing piles to support structures is one of the earliest examples of the art
and science of a civil engineer. In Britain, there are numerous examples of timber piling in
bridge works and riverside settlements constructed by the Romans. In mediaeval times, piles
of oak and alder were used in the foundations of the great monasteries constructed in the
fenlands of East Anglia. In China, timber piling was used by the bridge builders of the Han
Dynasty (200 BC to AD 200). The carrying capacity of timber piles is limited by the girth of
the natural timbers and the ability of the material to withstand driving by hammer without
suffering damage due to splitting or splintering. Thus primitive rules must have been estab-
lished in the earliest days of piling by which the allowable load on a pile was determined
from its resistance to driving by a hammer of known weight and with a known height of
drop. Knowledge was also accumulated regarding the durability of piles of different species
of wood, and measures taken to prevent decay by charring the timber or by building masonry
rafts on pile heads cut off below water level.
Timber, because of its strength combined with lightness, durability and ease of cutting
and handling, remained the only material used for piling until comparatively recent times. It
was replaced by concrete and steel only because these newer materials could be fabricated
into units that were capable of sustaining compressive, bending and tensile forces far beyond
the capacity of a timber pile of like dimensions. Concrete, in particular, was adaptable to
in-situ forms of construction which facilitated the installation of piled foundations in drilled
holes in situations where noise, vibration and ground heave had to be avoided.
Reinforced concrete, which was developed as a structural medium in the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, largely replaced timber for high-capacity piling for works on
land. It could be precast in various structural forms to suit the imposed loading and ground
conditions, and its durability was satisfactory for most soil and immersion conditions. The
partial replacement of driven precast concrete piles by numerous forms of cast in-situ piles
has been due more to the development of highly efficient machines for drilling pile bore-
holes of large diameter and great depth in a wide range of soil and rock conditions, than to
any deficiency in the performance of the precast concrete element.
Steel has been used to an increasing extent for piling due to its ease of fabrication and
handling and its ability to withstand hard driving. Problems of corrosion in marine struc-
tures have been overcome by the introduction of durable coatings and cathodic protection.
1.3
Calculations of load-carrying capacity
While materials for piles can be precisely specified, and their fabrication and installation can
be controlled to conform to strict specification and code of practice requirements, the
calculation of their load-carrying capacity is a complex matter which at the present time is
based partly on theoretical concepts derived from the sciences of soil and rock mechanics,
but mainly on empirical methods based on experience. Practice in calculating the ultimate
carrying capacity of piles based on the principles of soil mechanics differs greatly from
the application of these principles to shallow spread foundations. In the latter case the entire
area of soil supporting the foundation is exposed and can be inspected and sampled to
ensure that its bearing characteristics conform to those deduced from the results of
exploratory boreholes and soil tests. Provided that the correct constructional techniques are
used the disturbance to the soil is limited to a depth of only a few centimetres below the
excavation level for a spread foundation. Virtually the whole mass of soil influenced by
the bearing pressure remains undisturbed and unaffected by the constructional operations
(Figure 1.1a). Thus the safety factor against general shear failure of the spread foundation
and its settlement under the design working load can be predicted from a knowledge of the
physical characteristics of the undisturbed soil with a degree of certainty which depends
only on the complexity of the soil stratification.
The conditions which govern the supporting capacity of the piled foundation are quite
different. No matter how the pile is installed, whether by driving with a hammer, by jetting,
by vibration, by jacking, screwing or drilling, the soil in contact with the pile face, from
which the pile derives its support by shaft friction, and its resistance to lateral loads, is com-
pletely disturbed by the method of installation. Similarly, the soil or rock beneath the toe of
a pile is compressed (or sometimes loosened) to an extent which may affect significantly its
end-bearing resistance (Figure 1.1b). Changes take place in the conditions at the pile–soil
interface over periods of days, months or years which materially affect the skin-friction
resistance of a pile. These changes may be due to the dissipation of excess pore pressure set
up by installing the pile, to the relative effects of friction and cohesion which in turn depend
on the relative pile-to-soil movement and to chemical or electro-chemical effects caused by
the hardening of the concrete or the corrosion of the steel in contact with the soil. Where
piles are installed in groups to carry heavy foundation loads, the operation of driving or
drilling for adjacent piles can cause changes in the carrying capacity and load/settlement
characteristics of the piles in the group that have already been driven.
In the present state of knowledge, the effects of the various methods of pile installation
on the carrying capacity and deformation characteristics cannot be calculated by the strict
application of soil or rock mechanics theory. The general procedure is to apply simple
empirical factors to the strength, density and compressibility properties of the undisturbed
2
General principles and practices
soil or rock. The various factors which can be used depend on the particular method of
installation and are based on experience and on the results of field loading tests.
The basis of the ‘soil mechanics approach’ to calculating the carrying capacity of piles is
that the total resistance of the pile to compression loads is the sum of two components,
namely shaft friction and base resistance. A pile in which the shaft-frictional component
predominates is known as a friction pile (Figure 1.2a), while a pile bearing on rock or some
other hard incompressible material is known as an end-bearing pile (Figure 1.2b). The need
for adopting an adequate safety factor in conjunction with calculations to determine these
components is emphasized by the statement by Randolph(1.1) ‘that we may never be able to
estimate axial pile capacity in many soil types more accurately than about 30%’. However,
even if it is possible to make a reliable estimate of total pile resistance, a further difficulty
arises in predicting the problems involved in installing the piles to the depths indicated by
the empirical or semi-empirical calculations. It is one problem to calculate that a precast
concrete pile must be driven to a depth of, say, 20 m to carry safely a certain working load,
but quite another problem to decide on the energy of the hammer required to drive the pile
to this depth, and yet another problem to decide whether or not the pile will be irredeemably
shattered while driving it to the required depth. In the case of driven and cast-in-place piles
the ability to drive the piling tube to the required depth and then to extract it within the
pulling capacity of the piling rig must be correctly predicted.
Time effects are important in calculating the resistance of a pile in clay; the effects
include the rate of applying load to a pile and the time interval between installing and testing
a pile. The shaft-frictional resistance of a pile in clay loaded very slowly may only be one-
half of that which is measured under the rate at which load is normally applied during a pile
loading test. The slow rate of loading may correspond to that of a building under
General principles and practices
3
Vertical stress
on soil q/10
Bulb of
pressure
Bulb of pressure
for friction pile
Square foundation
Backfill
Applied pressure q
Zone of 
disturbed soil
Q
Undisturbed soil
Soil displaced
by entry of pile
Zone of sheared
soil close to pile
Zone of 
ruptured soil
(b)
(a) 
Figure 1.1 Comparison of pressure distribution and soil disturbance beneath spread and piled
foundations (a) Spread foundation (b) Single pile.
construction, yet the ability of a pile to carry its load is judged on its behaviour under a
comparatively rapid loading test made only a few days after installation. Because of the
importance of such time effects both in fine- and coarse-grained soils the only practicable
way of determining the load-carrying capacity of a piled foundation is to confirm the design
calculations by short-term tests on isolated single piles, and then to allow in the safety factor
for any reduction in the carrying capacity with time. The effects of grouping piles can be
taken into account by considering the pile group to act as a block foundation, as described
in Chapter 5.
1.4
Dynamic piling formulae
The soil mechanics approach to calculating allowable working loads on piles is that of
determining the resistance of static loads applied at the test-loading stage or during the
working life of the structure. Methods of calculation based on the measurement of the resist-
ance encountered when driving a pile were briefly mentioned in the context of history.
Historically all piles were installed by driving them with a simple falling ram or drop
hammer. Since there is a relationship between the downward movement of a pile under a
blow of given energy and its ultimate resistance to static loading, when all piles were driven
by a falling ram a considerable body of experience was built up and simple empirical
formulae established from which the ultimate resistance of the pile could be calculated from
the ‘set’ of the pile due to each hammer blow at the final stages of driving. However, there
are many drawbacks to the use of these formulae with modern pile-driving equipment par-
ticularly when used in conjunction with diesel hammers. The energy of blow delivered to the
pile by these types increases as the resistance of the ground increases. The energy can also
vary with the mechanical condition of the hammer and its operating temperature. Simple
dynamic formulae are now largely discredited as a means of predicting the resistance of
piles to static loading unless the driving tests are performed on piles instrumented to meas-
ure the energy transferred to the pile head. If this is done the dynamic analyser (see Section 7.3)
provides the actual rather than the assumed energy of blow enabling the dynamic formula to
be used as a means of site control when driving the working piles. Dynamic pile formulae
4
General principles and practices
(a)
(b)
Soil progressively
increasing in
stiffness or
relative density
with increasing
depth
Rock or hard
relatively incompressible
soil
Soft highly
compressible soil
Figure 1.2 Types of bearing pile (a) Friction pile (b) End-bearing pile.
are allowed to be used by Eurocode EC7 provided that their validity has been demonstrated
by experience in similar ground conditions or verified by static loading tests.
Steady progress has been made in developing analytical methods for calculating pile
capacity. With increasing experience of their use backed by research, the soil mechanics
approach can be applied to all forms of piling in all ground conditions, whereas even if a
reliable dynamic formula could be established its use would be limited to driven piles only.
However, dynamic formulae still have their uses in predicting the stresses within the
material forming the pile during driving and hence in assessing the risk of pile breakage, and
their relevance to this problem is discussed in Chapter 7.
1.5
Code of practice requirements
The uncertainties in the methods of predicting allowable or ultimate loads on piles are
reflected in the numerous ways of defining these loads in the many codes of practice which
cover piling. The British Standard Code of Practice BS 8004: 1986 (Foundations) defines the
ultimate bearing capacity of a pile as ‘The load at which the resistance of the soil becomes
fully mobilized’ and goes on to state that this is generally taken as the load causing the head
of the pile to settle a depth of 10% of the pile width or diameter. BS 8004 does not define
ultimate loads for uplift or lateral loading. Specific design information is limited to stating the
working stresses on the pile material and the cover required to the reinforcement, the require-
ments for positional tolerance and verticality also being stated. No quantitative information is
given on shaft friction or end-bearing values in soils or rocks, but many countries place limits
on these values or on maximum pile loads in order to ensure that piles are not driven very heav-
ily so as to achieve the maximum working load that can be permitted by the allowable stress
on the cross-sectional area of the pile shaft.
A conflict can arise in British practice where structures, including foundation substructures,
are designed to the requirements of BS 8110 and their foundations to those of BS 8004. In the
former document partial safety factors are employed to increase the characteristic dead and
imposed loads to amounts which are defined as the ultimate load. The ultimate resistance of
the structure is calculated on the basis of the characteristic strength of the material used for
its construction which again is multiplied by a partial safety factor to take into account the
possibility of the strength of the material used being less than the designed characteristic
strength. Then, if the ultimate load on the structure does not exceed its ultimate resistance to
load, the ultimate or collapse limit state is not reached and the structure is safe. Deflections
of the structure are also calculated to ensure that these do not exceed the maximum values
that can be tolerated by the structure or user, and thus to ensure that the serviceability limit
state is not reached.
When foundations are designed in accordance with BS 8004, the maximum working load
is calculated. This is comparable to the characteristic loading specified in BS 8110, i.e. the
most unfavourable combination of the dead and imposed loading. The resistance offered by
the ground to this loading is calculated. This is based on representative shearing strength
parameters of the soils or rocks concerned. These are not necessarily minimum or average
values but are parameters selected by the engineer using his experience and judgement and
taking into account the variability in the geological conditions, the number of test results
available, the care used in taking samples and selecting them for test, and experience of
other site investigations and of the behaviour of existing structures in the locality. The
maximum load imposed by the sub-structure on the ground must not exceed the calculated
General principles and practices
5
resistance of the ground multiplied by the appropriate safety factor. The latter takes into
account the risks of excessive total and differential settlements of the structure as well as
allowing for uncertainties in the design method and in the values selected for the shearing
strength parameters.
The settlements of the foundations are then calculated, the loading adopted for these
calculations being not necessarily the same as that used to obtain the maximum working
load. It is the usual practice to take the actual dead load and the whole or some proportion
of the imposed load, depending on the type of loading, i.e. the full imposed load is taken for
structures such as grain silos, but the imposed wind loading may not be taken into account
when calculating long-term settlements.
There is no reason why this dual approach should not be adopted when designing structures
and their foundations, but it is important that the designer of the structure should make an
unambiguous statement of the loading conditions which are to be supported by the ground. If
he provides the foundation engineer with a factored ultimate load, and the foundation engineer
then uses this load with a safety factor of, say, 2.5 or 3 on the calculated shearing resistance of
the ground, the resulting design may be over-conservative. Similarly, if the ultimate load is
used to calculate settlements, the values obtained will be unrealistically large. The foundation
engineer must know the actual dead load of the superstructure and sub-structure and he must
have full details of the imposed loading, i.e. its type, distribution and duration.
Many of the conflicts between the design of structures and sub-structures to BS 8110 or sim-
ilar structural codes, and the design of piled foundations to BS 8004 have been dealt with in BS
EN 1997-1: 2004 Eurocode 7 (EC7), Geotechnical Design – Part 1 General rules(1.2) and BS EN
1992-1: 2004 Eurocode 2 (EC2), Design of Concrete Structures – Part 1-1 General rules and
rules for buildings(1.3). These two Eurocodes will partially supersede BS 8004 and BS 8110 (and
other related geotechnical standards). However, until all the Eurocode packages for designing
the various parts of a structure are available together with the National Annexes, the British
Standards Institute advises that the current standards will remain valid for geotechnical inves-
tigation and design and concrete design ‘until further notice’. This ‘coexistence period’for EC7
is likely to last for several years before the current standards are modified or withdrawn.
EC7 has to be read in conjunction with BS EN 1990 Eurocode 0: Basis of Structural
Design(1.4) and BS EN 1991-1 Eurocode 1: Part 1 Actions on Structures which ensure that
partial factors are considered in a logical and uniform manner avoiding the application of
global safety factors. In addition, reference has to be made to BSEN 1993-1: 2005 Eurocode 3
(EC3): Design of Steel Structures, Part 1-1 General Rules and Part 5: 2007 (EC3-5) Piling
and BS EN 1995-1: 2004 Eurocode 5 (EC5): Design of Timber Structures, Part 1-1 General
Rules. It should be noted that new European Standards have been published dealing with the
‘execution of special geotechnical works’ (bored piling, displacement piles, sheet piles,
micropiles, etc.) which have the status of current British Standards (designated as ‘BS EN’).
Clause 7 of EC7 deals with piled foundations from the aspects of actions on piles from
superimposed loading or ground movements, design methods for piles subjected to
compression, tension and lateral loading, pile-loading tests, structural design and supervision
of construction. In using Clause 7 of EC7 the designer is required to demonstrate that the
sum of the ultimate limit state components of bearing capacity of the pile or pile group
(resistances ‘R’) exceeds the ultimate limit state design loading (actions ‘F’) and that the
serviceability limit-state is not reached.
The EC7 loading scenarios, defined as ‘actions’ in the Eurocodes, are designed to cover
‘permanent unfavourable’, ‘permanent favourable’ and ‘variable’ situations and require the
6
General principles and practices
application of different load factors depending on which of three ‘design approaches’ is
being used. The National Annex documents (to be published separately from the Eurocodes)
which are to be used in each country to conform to their individual practices will address
within prescribed limits the design approach, partial factors, methods of calculating
settlement and the procedures to be used where alternatives to EC7 are needed. Design
Approach 1 with ‘partial factor combinations 1 and 2’ is to be adopted in the UK in which the
factors are applied at source to actions and shear strengths, but the code notes that for pile
design the partial factors must be applied to the bearing capacity or ground ‘resistance’. When
EC7 Design Approach 1 (DA1) is used, partial factor ‘combination 1’ usually governs the
structural design values of actions for piles and ‘combination 2’ the geotechnical sizing.
References are made to EC7 in the chapters of this book dealing with pile design and to
the BS EN standards for the execution of geotechnical works, but EC7 itself does not make
specific recommendations on methods of pile design. Essentially it prescribes the succes-
sion of stages in the design process using conventional methods to determine end bearing,
frictional resistance and displacement. References are therefore continued to BS 8004 and
BS 8110 alongside the appropriate Eurocode. At the time of preparing this edition the
application of EC7 is not mandatory in the UK, but in due course all geotechnical design
will have to conform. If the reader wishes to apply the EC7 rules to current designs, a
thorough study of the Designer’s Guide(1.5) which sets out the step-by-step design process
and takes account of the various qualifications to the application of the code rules is
recommended. Whether or not the Eurocode is used for design in preference to present
conventional methods it does provide a very useful design check, itemizing all the factors
which can influence economic foundation design.
As the British National Annex stating the partial factors to be used in designing piles is
not due to be published until 2008, the factors provided in the tables in Chapter 4 and used
in worked examples are those given in Annex A to EC7. The reader should therefore check
that the quoted values conform to the data in the National Annex when avaliable. Also,
engineers designing foundations in EU countries other than the UK should consult the
particular National Annexes for guidance on design procedures and partial factors. The
selection of characteristic parameters and the application of EC7 partial factors to ‘numerical
methods’ for complex foundation design are yet to be decided and are therefore not dealt
with in this edition.
1.6
Responsibilities of engineer and contractor
In Britain and in many other countries piling is regarded as a specialist operation and the
procedure for calling for tendered prices for this work may result in a division of
responsibility which can lead to undesirable practices. When the engineer is wholly
responsible for design or supervision of construction, the type, width and overall length of
the piles will be specified based on the ground information. Detailed designs for concrete
piles showing the reinforcement, concrete mix proportions, cover and cube crushing
strengths will then be prepared. In the case of steel piles the standard sections, grade of
steel and welding requirements will be specified. The engineer will decide on the depth of
penetration of each pile from the results of preliminary calculations checked by field
observations during driving. Responsibility will be accepted by the engineer for paying the
contractor for any costs involved in shortening or lengthening piles, or of providing
additional piles should the ground conditions differ from those envisaged or should
General principles and practices
7
the piles fail a loading test or fail to achieve the specified ‘set’ criterion when at the
design length.
Quite a different procedure is adopted when the contractor is responsible for design. The
engineer will provide the piling contractor with whatever ground information is available,
and will state either the required working load on a single pile, or he may simply provide a
building layout plan showing the column loads or the load per metre run from the load-bearing
walls. In the latter case, the contractor will be responsible for deciding the required piling
layout. In all cases the contractor will determine the type and required diameter and length
of the piles, but will be careful to quote a price for lengthening the piles should the actual
ground conditions differ from the information supplied at the time of tendering. The
contractor’s tender is usually accompanied by financial provisions to guarantee the
performance and safety of the design.
The engineer may not always specify allowable working stresses on the pile shaft, min-
imum cube crushing strengths or minimum cement contents in concrete mixes. It may be
considered the proper duty of the piling contractor to decide on these values since they
may be governed by the particular piling process employed. The need to specify allowable
working stresses and the crushing strength and minimum cement content of concrete piles
is dealt with in Chapters 2 and 10. In all cases the engineer must specify the maximum
permissible settlement at the working load and at some simple multiple, say 1.5 times or
twice the working load, either on test piles or on working piles or both. This is essential
as it is the only means that the engineer possesses of checking that the contractor’s design
assumptions and the piles as installed will fulfil their function in supporting the structure.
Only the engineer can state the requirement for settlement at the working load from
knowledge of the tolerance of the structure to total and differential settlement. It fre-
quently happens that the maximum settlements specified are so unrealistically small that
they will be exceeded by the inevitable elastic compression of the pile shaft, irrespective
of any elastic compression or yielding of the soil or rock supporting the pile. However, the
specified permissible settlement should not be so large that the safety factor is compro-
mised (see Section 4.1.4) and it should be remembered that the settlement of a pile group
is related to the settlement of a single pile within the group (Chapter 5). It is unrealistic
to specify the maximum movement of a pile under lateral loading, since this can be
determined only by field trials.
The above procedure for contractor-designed piling has been advantageous in that it has
promoted the development of highly efficient piling systems. However, they have the draw-
back that they place the engineer in a difficult position when checking the contractor’s
designs and in deciding whether or not to approve a request for pile lengths that are greater
than those on which the tendered price was based. If the engineer declines to authorize extra
pile lengths the contractor will withdraw a guarantee of performance. Nevertheless, the
engineer has a duty to the employer or client to check the specialist contractor’s designs as
far as practically possible (guidance regarding this is given in Chapter 4) to enquire as to
whether or not the contractor has made proper provision for difficult ground conditions such
as obstructions or groundwater flow, to check on site that the piles are being installed in a
sound manner and that they comply with the requirements for test loading. In the interests
of the client the engineer should not allow extra pile lengths if it is considered that the
contractor is being over-cautious in his assessment of the conditions. However, a decision
should not be made without test-pile observations or previous knowledge of the performance
of piles in similar soil conditions.
8
General principles and practices
The contractor’s guarantee is usually limited to that of the load/settlement characteristics
of a single pile and for soundness of workmanship, but his responsibilities regarding effects
due to installation extend to the complete structure and to any nearby existing buildings or
services. For example, if a building were to suffer damage due to the settlement of a group
of piles and the settlement were due to the consolidation of a layer of weak compressible soil
beneath the zone of disturbance caused by pile driving (Figure 1.3), the contractor could
reasonably decline to accept responsibility. The engineer should have considered this in his
overall design and specified a minimum pile length to take account of this compressible
layer. On the other hand, a contractor is regarded as responsible for any damage to
surrounding structures caused by vibrations or ground heave when driving a group of piles,
or by any loss of ground when drilling for groups of bored and cast-in-place piles.
Because of the great importance of installation effects on pile behaviour, the various types
of pile available and their methods of installation are first described in Chapters 2 and 3,
before going on to discuss the various methods of calculating allowable loads on single piles
and groups of piles in Chapters 4–6.
1.7
References
1.1 RANDOLPH, M. F. Science and empiricism in pile foundation design, Geotechnique, Vol. 53, No. 10,
2003, pp. 847–75.
1.2 BS EN 1997-1:2004 Eurocode 7: Geotechnical Design, Part 1 General Rules, British Standards
Institution, London.
1.3 BS EN 1992-1:2004 Eurocode 2: Design of Concrete Structures, Part 1-1 General Rules and Rules
for Buildings, British Standards Institution, London.
1.4 BS EN 1990 Eurocode 0: Basis of Structural Design, British Standards Institution, London.
1.5 FRANK, R., BAUDIN, C., DRISCOLL, R., KAVVADAS, M., KREBBS OVESEN, N., ORR, T., and SCHUPPENER, B.
Designers’ Guide to EN 1997-1 Eurocode 7: Geotechnical Design – General Rules, Thomas
Telford, London, 2004.
General principles and practices
9
Load transfer
Weak compressible soil
Hard incompressible
soil
Soft compressible
soil
Soil disturbed
by pile driving
Figure 1.3 Pile group terminating in hard incompressible soil layer underlain by weak compressible soil.
Chapter 2
Types of pile
2.1
Classification of piles
The British Standard Code of Practice for Foundations (BS 8004: 1986) places piles in three
categories. These are as follows:
Large displacement piles comprise solid-section piles or hollow-section piles with a closed
end, which are driven or jacked into the ground and thus displace the soil. All types of
driven and cast-in-place piles come into this category. Large diameter screw piles and
rotary displacement auger piles are increasingly used for piling in contaminated land and
soft soils.
Small displacement piles are also driven or jacked into the ground but have a relatively small
cross-sectional area. They include rolled steel H- or I-sections and pipe or box sections
driven with an open end such that the soil enters the hollow section. Where these pile
types plug with soil during driving they become large displacement types.
Replacement piles are formed by first removing the soil by boring using a wide range of
drilling techniques. Concrete may be placed into an unlined or lined hole, or the lining
may be withdrawn as the concrete is placed. Preformed elements of timber, concrete or
steel may be placed in drilled holes. Continuous flight auger (CFA) piles have become the
dominant type of pile in the UK for structures on land.
Eurocode 7 (EC7)(1.2) does not categorize piles, but Clause 7 applies to the design of all
types of load-bearing piles. When piles are used to reduce settlement of a raft or spread
foundation (e.g. Love(2.1)), as opposed to supporting the full load from a structure, then
the provisions of EC7 may not apply directly. A basic classification with examples of
displacement piles is given in BS EN 12699: 2000 Execution of special geotechnical work –
Displacement piles.
Types of piles in each of the BS 8004 categories can be listed as follows:
Large displacement piles (driven types)
(1) Timber (round or square section, jointed or continuous)
(2) Precast concrete (solid or tubular section in continuous or jointed units)
(3) Prestressed concrete (solid or tubular section)
(4) Steel tube (driven with closed end)
(5) Steel box (driven with closed end)
(6) Fluted and tapered steel tube
Types of pile
11
(7) Jacked-down steel tube with closed end
(8) Jacked-down solid concrete cylinder.
Large displacement piles (driven and cast-in-place types)
(1) Steel tube driven and withdrawn after placing concrete
(2) Steel tube driven with closed end, left in place and filled with reinforced concrete
(3) Precast concrete shell filled with concrete
(4) Thin-walled steel shell driven by withdrawable mandrel and then filled with concrete
(5) Rotary displacement auger and screw piles
(6) Expander body.
Small displacement piles
(1) Precast concrete (tubular section driven with open end)
(2) Prestressed concrete (tubular section driven with open end)
(3) Steel H-section
(4) Steel tube section (driven with open end and soil removed as required)
(5) Steel box section (driven with open end and soil removed as required).
Replacement piles
(1) Concrete placed in hole drilled by rotary auger, baling, grabbing, airlift or reverse-
circulation methods (bored and cast-in-place)
(2) Tubes placed in hole drilled as above and filled with concrete as necessary
(3) Precast concrete units placed in drilled hole
(4) Cement mortar or concrete injected into drilled hole
(5) Steel sections placed in drilled hole
(6) Steel tube drilled down.
Composite piles
Numerous types of piles of composite construction may be formed by combining units in
each of the above categories or by adopting combinations of piles in more than one category.
Thus composite piles of a displacement type can be formed by jointing a timber section to
a precast concrete section, or a precast concrete pile can have an H-section jointed to its
lower extremity. Composite piles consisting of more than one type can be formed by driv-
ing a steel or precast concrete unit at the base of a drilled hole or by driving a tube and then
drilling out the soil and extending the drill hole to form a bored and cast-in-place pile.
Selection of pile type
The selection of the appropriate type of pile from any of the above categories depends on
the following three principal factors:
(1) The location and type of structure
(2) The ground conditions
(3) Durability.
12
Types of pile
Considering the first factor, some form of displacement pile is the first choice for a
marine structure. A solid precast or prestressed concrete pile can be used in fairly shallow
water, but in deep water a solid pile becomes too heavy to handle and either a steel tubular
pile or a tubular precast concrete pile is used. Steel tubular piles are preferred to H-sections
for exposed marine conditions because of the smaller drag forces from waves and currents.
Large-diameter steel tubes are also an economical solution to the problem of dealing with
impact forces from waves and berthing ships. Timber piles are used for temporary works in
fairly shallow water. Bored and cast-in-place piles would not be considered for any marine
or river structure unless used in a composite form of construction, say as a means of extending
the penetration depth of a tubular pile driven through water and soft soil to a firm stratum.
Piling for a structure on land is open to a wide choice in any of the three categories. Bored
and cast-in-place piles are the cheapest type where unlined or only partly lined holes can be
drilled by rotary auger. These piles can be drilled in very large diameters and provided with
enlarged or grout-injected bases, and thus are suitable to withstand high working loads.
Augered piles are also suitable where it is desired to avoid ground heave, noise and vibra-
tion, i.e. for piling in urban areas, particularly where stringent noise regulations are
enforced. Driven and cast-in-place piles are economical for land structures where light or
moderate loads are to be carried, but the ground heave, noise and vibration associated with
these types may make them unsuitable for some environments.
Timber piles are suitable for light to moderate loadings in countries where timber is easily
obtainable. Steel or precast concrete-driven piles are not as economical as driven or bored
and cast-in-place piles for land structures. Jacked-down steel tubes or concrete units are
used for underpinning work.
For the design of foundations in seismic situations reference can be made to criteria in
Eurocode 8 ENV 1998-5: 1994 Design of structures for earthquake resistance Part 5:
Foundations, retaining walls and geotechnical aspects (EC8-5); these rules complement the
information on soil–structure interaction given in EC7. The paper by Raison(2.2) refers to the
checks required under EC8-1 for piles susceptible to liquefaction at a site in Barrow.
The second factor, ground conditions, influences both the material forming the pile and
the method of installation. Firm to stiff fine-grained soils (silts and clays) favour the augered
bored pile, but augering without support of the borehole by a bentonite slurry cannot be
performed in very soft clays or in loose or water-bearing granular soils, for which driven
or driven and cast-in-place piles would be suitable. Piles with enlarged bases formed by
auger drilling can be installed only in firm to stiff or hard fine-grained soils or in weak
rocks. Driven and driven and cast-in-place piles can neither be used in ground containing boul-
ders or other massive obstructions, nor can they be used in soils subject to ground heave, in
situations where this phenomenon must be prevented.
Driven and cast-in-place piles which employ a withdrawable tube cannot be used for very
deep penetrations because of the limitations of jointing and pulling out of the driving tube.
For such conditions a driven pile would be suitable. For hard driving conditions, for
example, boulder clays or gravely soils, a thick-walled steel tubular pile or a steel H-section
can withstand heavier driving than a precast concrete pile of solid or tubular section.
Some form of drilled pile, such as a drilled-in steel tube, would be used for piles taken
down into a rock for the purpose of mobilizing resistance to uplift or lateral loads.
When piling in contaminated land using boring techniques, the disposal of arisings to
licensed tips and measures to avoid the release of aerosols are factors limiting the type of
pile which can be considered and can add significantly to the costs. Precautions may also be
needed to avoid creating preferential flow paths while piling which could allow contaminated
groundwater and leachates to be transported downwards. Hollow tubular steel piles can be
expensive for piling in contaminated ground when compared with other displacement piles,
but they are useful in overcoming obstructions which could cause problems when driving
precast concrete or boring displacement piles. Large displacement piles are unlikely to form
transfer conduits for contaminants, although untreated wooden piles may allow ‘wicking’ of
volatile organics. End-bearing H-piles can form long-term flow conduits into aquifers
(particularly when a driving shoe is needed) and it may be necessary for the piles to be
hydraulically isolated from the contaminated zone.
The factor of durability affects the choice of material for a pile. Although timber piles are
cheap in some countries they are liable to decay above groundwater level, and in marine
structures they suffer damage by destructive mollusc-type organisms. Precast concrete piles
do not suffer corrosion in saline water below the ‘splash zone’, and rich well-compacted
concrete can withstand attack from quite high concentrations of sulphates in soils and
groundwaters. Cast-in-place concrete piles are not so resistant to aggressive substances
because of difficulties in ensuring complete compaction of the concrete, but protection can
be provided against attack by placing the concrete in permanent linings of coated light-gauge
metal or plastics. Check lists for durability of man-made materials in the ground are
provided in Eurocode 2 (EC2) BS EN 1992-1: 2004 Design of Concrete Structures, Part 1-1:
General rules and BS 8500 for concrete, and for steel in Eurocode 3 (EC3) BS EN 1993-1:
2005 Design of Steel Structures, Part 1-1: General rules and BS EN 1993 Part 5, Piling
(EC3–5).
Steel piles can have a long life in ordinary soil conditions, if they are completely embedded
in undisturbed soil, but the portions of a pile exposed to sea water or to disturbed soil must
be protected against corrosion by cathodic means, if a long life is required. Corrosion rates
can be derived from the corrosion tables published in EC3-5 Annex F. Recent work by Corus
Construction and Industrial(2.3, 2.4) has refined guidelines for corrosion allowances for steel
embedded in contaminated soil. ‘Mariner grade’steel to ASTM standard can give performance
improvement of 2 to 3 times that of conventional steels in marine splash zones.
Other factors influence the choice of one or another type of pile in each main classification,
and these are discussed in the following pages, in which the various types of pile are
described in detail. In UK practice specifications for pile materials, manufacturing
requirements (including dimensional tolerances), workmanship and contract documentation
are given in a publication of the Institution of Civil Engineers(2.5). This specification is
generally consistent with the requirements in EC7 and the associated standards for the
‘Execution of special geotechnical works’ – BS EN 1536: 1999 Bored piles, BS EN 12063:
1999 Sheet piling, BS EN 12699: 2000 Displacement piles and BS EN 14199: 2005
Micropiles.
Having selected a certain type or types of pile as being suitable for the location and type
of structure for the ground conditions at the site and for the requirements of durability, the
final choice is then made on the basis of cost. However, the total cost of a piled foundation
is not simply the quoted price per metre run of piling or even the more accurate comparison
of cost per pile per kN of working load carried. The most important consideration is the
overall cost of the foundation work including the main contractor’s costs and overheads.
It has been noted in Chapter 1 that a piling contractor is unlikely to quote a fixed price
based on a predetermined length of pile. Extra payment will be sought if the piles are
required to depths greater than those predicted at the tendering stage. Thus a contractor’s
Types of pile
13
previous experience of the ground conditions in a particular locality is important in assessing
the likely pile length on which to base a tender. Experience is also an important factor in deter-
mining the extent and cost of a preliminary test piling programme. This preliminary work can
be omitted if a piling contractor can give a warranty based on in-house knowledge of the site
conditions that the engineer’s requirements for load/settlement criteria can be met. The cost of
test piling can then be limited to that of proof-loading selected working piles. In well-defined
ground conditions and relatively light structural loads, the client may rely solely on the
contractor’s comprehensive warranty that the working piles meet the load-carrying requirement
with an appropriate safety factor. It is a precept in EC7 that pile design should be related
directly or indirectly to the results of static load tests and in certain cases such tests are manda-
tory. Where analytical calculations or interpretations of dynamic tests are used for design, the
methods must have been validated against previous static load tests ‘in comparable conditions’.
EC7 introduces design by the ‘observational method’ in which the design is reviewed during
construction and in response to monitoring during performance. This is not relevant to pile
design, but a design method based on observed performance of comparable piled foundations
is acceptable provided that it is ‘supported by ground investigation and ground testing’.
In any case, preliminary test piling may be necessary to prove the feasibility of the
contractor’s installation method and to determine the load–settlement relationship for a
given pile diameter and penetration depth. If a particular piling system is shown to be
impracticable, or if the settlements are shown by the test loading to be excessive, then
considerable time and money can be expended in changing to another piling system or
adopting larger-diameter or longer piles. During the period of this preliminary work the
main contractor continues to incur overhead costs and may well claim reimbursement of
these costs if the test-piling work extends beyond the time allowed in the constructional
programme. To avoid such claims it is essential to carry out a thorough ground investigation
(as BS 5930 and EC7-Part 2 Ground investigation and testing), and it is desirable to conduct
the preliminary test piling before the main contractor commences work on the site.
Finally, a piling contractor’s resources for supplying additional rigs and skilled operatives
to make up time lost due to unforeseen difficulties and technical ability in overcoming these
difficulties are factors which may influence the choice of a particular piling system.
2.2
Driven displacement piles
2.2.1
Timber piles
In many ways, timber is an ideal material for piling. It has a high strength to weight ratio, it
is easy to handle, it is readily cut to length and trimmed after driving, and in favourable
conditions of exposure durable species have an almost indefinite life. Timber piles used in
their most economical form consist of round untrimmed logs which are driven butt upper-
most. The traditional British practice of using squared timber may have become established
because of the purchase for piling work of imported timber which had been squared for
general structural purposes in the sawmills of the country of origin. The practice of squaring
the timber can be detrimental to its durability since it removes the outer sapwood which is
absorptive to creosote or some other liquid preservative. The less absorptive heartwood is
thus exposed and instead of a pile being encased by a thick layer of well-impregnated
sapwood, there is only a thin layer of treated timber which can be penetrated by the hooks
or slings used in handling the piles or stripped off by obstructions in the ground.
14
Types of pile
Types of pile
15
Timber piles, when situated wholly below groundwater level, are resistant to fungal decay
and have an almost indefinite life. However, the portion above groundwater level in a struc-
ture on land is liable to decay and BS EN 12699 prohibits the use of timber piles above free
water level, unless creosote or other adequate protection is used. Therefore, it is the usual
practice to cut off timber piles just below the lowest predicted groundwater level and to
extend them above this level in concrete (Figure 2.1a). If the groundwater level is shallow
the pile cap can be taken down below the water level (Figure 2.1b).
Timber piles in marine structures are liable to be severely damaged by the mollusc-type
borers which infest the sea-water in many parts of the world, particularly in tropical seas.
The severity of this form of attack can be reduced to some extent by using softwood impreg-
nated with creosote or greatly minimized by the use of a hardwood of a species known to be
resistant to borer attack. The various forms of these organisms, the form of their attack and
the means of overcoming it are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 10.
Bark should be removed from round timbers where these are to be treated with preservative.
If this is not done the bark reduces the depth of impregnation. Also the bark should be
removed from piles carrying uplift loads by shaft friction in case it should become detached
from the trunk, thus causing the latter to slip. Bark need not be removed from piles carrying
compression loads or from fender piles of uncreosoted timber (hardwoods are not treated
because they will not absorb creosote or other liquid preservatives).
Commercially available timbers which are suitable for piling include Douglas fir, pitch
pine, larch and Western red cedar, in the softwood class, and greenheart, jarrah, opepe, teak
and European oak in the hardwood class. The timber should be straight-grained and free
from defects which could impair its strength and durability. BS 8004 states that a deviation
in straightness from the centre-line of up to 25 mm on a 6 m chord is permitted for round
Timber pile
Timber 
piles
Precast
concrete
(a)
(b)
Pile cap
Lowest ground
water level
Head of timber
pile cast in
concrete before
driving
Figure 2.1 Protecting timber piles from decay (a) By precast concrete upper section above water level
(b) By extending pile cap below water level.
16
Types of pile
logs but the centre-line of a sawn timber pile must not deviate by more than 25 mm from a
straight line throughout its length. This is similar to the end to end centroid deviation
allowed in BS EN 14081-2: 2005 for rectangular structural timber.
The requirements of BS 8004 for working stresses in timber piles merely state that
these should not exceed the green permissible stresses in BS 5268-2 for compression
parallel to the grain for the species and grade of timber being used. The Code suggests
that suitable material will be obtained from stress grades SS and better. Grade stresses in
accordance with BS 5268-2 are shown in Table 2.1, for various classes of softwood and
hardwood suitable for piling work. The working stresses shown in Table 2.1 for the hard-
woods are considerably higher than those of the comparable grades of softwood. It
should be noted that the stresses in Table 2.1 are for dry timber. Timber piles are usually
in a wet environment when the multiplying factors shown in Table 2.2 should be used to
convert the dry stress properties to the wet conditions. When calculating the working
stress on a pile, allowance must be made for bending stresses due to eccentric and lateral
loading and to eccentricity caused by deviations in the straightness and inclination of a
pile. Allowance must also be made for reductions in the cross-sectional area due to
drilling or notching and to the taper on a round log. Eurocode 5 (EC5) BS EN 1995-1:
2004 Design of timber structures: Part 1-1 provides common rules on stresses which will
be relevant to timber piling.
As a result of improved ability to predict and control driving stresses, BS EN 12699
allows the maximum compressive stress generated during driving to be increased to 0.8
Table 2.1 Grade stresses and moduli of elasticity of some softwoods and tropical hardwoods suitable
for bearing piles
BS 5268: Part 2: 2002 (values in N/mm2)
Standard
Grade
Bending
Tension
Compression
Compression
Shear
Modulus of elasticity
name
parallel
parallel
parallel
perpendicular
parallel
to grain*
to grain*
to grain
to grain
to grain' Mean
Minimum
British larch
SS
7.5
4.5
7.9
2.1
0.82
10500
7000
Douglas fir
SS
6.2
3.7
6.6
2.4
0.88
11000
7000
Pitch pine
SS
10.5
6.3
11.0
3.2
1.16
13500
9000
Western red cedar
SS
5.7
3.4
6.1
1.7
0.63
8500
5500
(imported)
GS
4.1
2.5
5.2
1.6
0.63
7000
4500
Douglas fir-larch
SS
7.5
4.5
7.9
2.4
0.85
11000
7500
(Canada and USA)
GS
5.3
3.2
6.8
2.2
0.85
10000
6500
Greenheart
HS
26.1
15.6
23.7
5.9
2.6
21600
18000
Jarrah
HS
13.8
8.2
14.2
3.1
2.0
12400
8700
Opepe
HS
17.0
10.2
17.6
3.8
2.1
14500
11300
Teak
HS
13.7
8.2
13.4
3.1
1.7
10700
7400
Notes
* Stresses applicable to timber 300 mm deep (or wide).
' When the specifications specifically prohibit wane at bearing areas, the SS grade and HS grade comperssion perpendicular to
the grain stress may be multiplied by 1.33 and used for all grades.
SS denotes special structural grade (visually stressed graded).
HS denotes special structural grade (machine stress graded).
All stresses apply to long-term loading.
Types of pile
17
times the characteristic compressive strength measured parallel to the grain. While some
increase in stress (up to 10%) may be permitted during driving if stress monitoring is
carried out, it is advisable to limit the maximum load which can be carried by a pile of any
diameter to reduce the need for excessively hard driving. This limitation is applied in order
to avoid the risk of damage to a pile by driving it to some arbitrary ‘set’ as required by a
dynamic pile-driving formula and to avoid a high concentration of stress at the toe of a pile
end-bearing on a hard stratum. Damage to a pile during driving is most likely to occur at its
head and toe.
The problems of splitting of the heads and unseen ‘brooming’ and splitting of the toes
of timber piles occur when it is necessary to penetrate layers of compact or cemented soils
to reach the desired founding level. This damage can also occur when attempts are made to
drive deeply into dense sands and gravels or into soils containing boulders, in order to
mobilize the required frictional resistance for a given uplift or compressive load.
Judgement is required to assess the soil conditions at a site so as to decide whether or not
it is feasible to drive a timber pile to the depth required for a given load without damage,
or whether it is preferable to reduce the working load to a value which permits a shorter
pile to be used. As an alternative, jetting or pre-boring may be adopted to reduce the
amount of driving required. The temptation to continue hard driving in an attempt to
achieve an arbitrary set for compliance with some dynamic formula must be resisted. Cases
have occurred where the measured set achieved per blow has been due to the crushing and
brooming of the pile toe and not to the deeper penetration required to reach the bearing
stratum.
Damage to a pile can be minimized by reducing as far as possible the number of hammer
blows necessary to achieve the desired penetration, and also by limiting the height of drop
of the hammer to 1.5 m. This necessitates the use of a heavy hammer (but preferably less
than 4 tonnes), which should at least be equal in weight to the weight of the pile for hard
driving conditions and to one-half of the pile weight for easy driving. The lightness of a timber
pile can be an embarrassment when driving groups of piles through soft clays or silts to a
point bearing on rock. Frictional resistance in the soft materials can be very low for a few
days after driving, and the effect of pore pressures caused by driving adjacent piles in the
group may cause the piles already driven to rise out of the ground due to their own buoy-
ancy relative to that of the soil. The only remedy is to apply loads to the pile heads until all
the piles in the area have been driven.
Table 2.2 Modification factor K2 by which dry stresses
and moduli should be multiplied to obtain wet
stresses and moduli applicable to wet
exposure conditions
Property
Value of K2
Bending parallel to grain
0.8
Tension parallel to grain
0.8
Compression parallel to grain
0.6
Compression perpendicular to grain
0.6
Shear parallel to grain
0.9
Mean and minimum modulus of elasticity
0.8
18
Types of pile
Heads of timber piles should be protected against splitting during driving by means of a
mild steel hoop slipped over the pile head or screwed to it (Figure 2.2a and b). A squared pile
toe can be provided where piles are terminated in soft to moderately stiff clays (Figure 2.2a).
Where it is necessary to drive them into dense or hard materials a cast steel point should be
provided (Figure 2.2b). As an alternative to a hoop, a cast steel helmet can be fitted to the pile
head during driving. The helmet must be deeply recessed and tapered to permit it to fit well
down over the pile head, allowing space for the insertion of hardwood packing.
Commercially available timbers are imported in lengths of up to 18 m. If longer piles are
required they may be spliced as shown in Figure 2.3. A splice near the centre of the length
of a pile should be avoided since this is the point of maximum bending moment when the
pile is lifted from a horizontal position by attachments to one end or at the centre. Timber
piles can be driven in very long lengths in soft to firm clays by splicing them in the leaders
of the piling frame as shown in Figure 2.4. The abutting surfaces of the timber should be cut
truly square at the splice positions in order to distribute the stresses caused by driving and
loading evenly over the full cross-section.
2.2.2
Precast concrete piles
Precast concrete piles have their principal use in marine and river structures, i.e. in situations
where the use of driven and cast-in-place piles is impracticable or uneconomical. For land
Corners of pile
chamfered to
receive circular
hoop
Screw
Cast steel point
60 × 20 mm 
M.S. hoop
45 × 7 mm M.S. straph
Screws
20:1
taper
d
d
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2 Protecting timber piles from splitting during driving (a) Protecting head by mild steel hoop
(b) Protecting toe by cast steel point.
Types of pile
19
40 mm dia. dowel
Screw positions
Chamfer
4d
10 mm M.S. plate
sleeve tarred on
inside face
d
M.S. plates
Dowel
Figure 2.3 Splice in squared timber pile.
structures unjointed precast concrete piles are frequently more costly than driven and cast-
in-place types for two main reasons:
(1) Reinforcement must be provided in the precast concrete pile to withstand the bending
and tensile stresses which occur during handling and driving. Once the pile is in the ground,
and if mainly compressive loads are carried, the majority of this steel is redundant.
(2) The precast concrete pile is not readily cut down or extended to suit variations in the
level of the bearing stratum to which the piles are driven.
However, there are many situations for land structures where the precast concrete pile can
be more economical. Where large numbers of piles are to be installed in easy driving
conditions the savings in cost due to the rapidity of driving achieved may outweigh the cost
of the heavier reinforcing steel necessary. Reinforcement may be needed in any case to resist
bending stresses due to lateral loads or tensile stresses from uplift loads. Where high-capacity
piles are to be driven to a hard stratum, savings in the overall quantity of concrete compared
with cast-in-place piles can be achieved since higher working stresses can be used. Where
piles are to be driven in sulphate-bearing ground or into aggressive industrial waste materials,
the provision of sound high-quality dense concrete is ensured. The problem of varying the
length of the pile can be overcome by adopting a jointed type.
From the above remarks it can be seen that there is still quite a wide range of employment
for the precast concrete pile, particularly for projects where the costs of establishing a
precasting yard can be spread over a large number of piles. The piles can be designed and man-
ufactured in ordinary reinforced concrete, or in the form of pre-tensioned or post-tensioned
prestressed concrete members. The ordinary reinforced concrete pile is likely to be preferred for
a project requiring a fairly small number of piles, where the cost of establishing a production line
20
Types of pile
End of timber dowelled
to fit into recess in
adjoining timber
Figure 2.4 Splicing timber piles in multiple lengths.
for prestressing work on site is not justifiable and where the site is too far from an established
factory to allow the economical transportation of prestressed units from the factory to the site.
Precast concrete piles in ordinary reinforced concrete are usually square or hexagonal and
of solid cross-section for units of short or moderate length, but for saving weight long piles
are usually manufactured with a hollow interior in hexagonal, octagonal, or circular
sections. The interiors of the piles can be filled with concrete after driving. This is necessary
to avoid bursting where piles are exposed to severe frost action. Alternatively, drainage holes
can be provided to prevent water from accumulating in the hollow interior. To avoid exces-
sive flexibility while handling and driving the usual maximum lengths of square section
piles, and the range of working loads applicable to each size are shown in Table 2.3. Where
piles are designed to carry the applied loads mainly in end-bearing, for example, piles driven
through soft clays into medium-dense or dense sands, economies in concrete and reductions
in weight for handling can be achieved by providing the piles with an enlarged toe. This is
practised widely in the Netherlands where the standard enlargements are 1.5 to 2.5 times the
shaft width with a length equal to or greater than the width of the enlargement.
Types of pile
21
BS 8004 requires that piles should be designed to withstand the loads or stresses and to
meet other serviceability requirements during handling, pitching, driving and in service in
accordance with BS 8110 for the structural use of concrete (Table 2.4). EC7 requires the
structural design of piles to conform to the serviceability requirements in the relevant
material Eurocodes – EC2, EC3, and EC5 and the relevant National Annexes. EC2-1-1
provides common rules for concrete for building and civil engineering which are not very
different from BS 8110 in terms of general design approach. Concrete performance, quality
and production are subject to BS EN 206-1: 2000, which must be read in conjunction with
the UK’s complementary rules for strength classes, cover, etc. in BS 8500. If nominal
BS 8110 mixes are adopted, a 40-grade concrete with a minimum 28-day cube strength of
40 N/mm2 is suitable for hard to very hard driving and for all marine construction. For
normal or easy driving, a 25-grade concrete is suitable (i.e. 28-day cube strength of
25 N/mm2). Depending on exposure conditions defined in EC2-1-1 and appropriate cover to
reinforcement, BS 8500 recommends strength classes of concrete from C20/25 (i.e. grading
based on minimum characteristic strength of a cylinder at 28 days/minimum characteristic
cube strength at 28 days in N/mm2) in dry or permanently wet conditions to C45/55 in tidal
splash zones. BS EN 12794: 2005 Precast concrete products – Foundation piles does not give
specific requirements for the design strength of concrete for piles, but refers to BS EN
13369: 2004 Common rules for precast products, BS EN 206-1 and EC2. BS EN 12794
defines two classes of piles – ‘Class 1’ with distributed reinforcement or prestressed piles
and ‘Class 2’ with single central reinforcing bar. The only difference this division makes is
to the detailing of pile reinforcement. BS EN 13369 Clause 4.2.2 requires reinforced
concrete products to have a minimum strength class of C20/25 and prestressed concrete a
minimum of C30/37. Foundations in brownfield sites are not covered in BS 8500 and the
recommendations in BRE Special Digest 1(2.6) should be followed for both in-situ foundation
concrete and precast units. It should be noted that the design strengths in EC2 are based on
the characteristic cylinder strengths. High stresses, which may exceed the handling stresses,
can occur during driving and it is necessary to consider the serviceability limit of cracking.
BS 8110 states that National Standards and Codes of Practice require cracks to be controlled
to maximum widths close to the main reinforcement ranging from 0.3 mm down to 0.1 mm
in an aggressive environment, or they require that crack widths shall at no point on the
surface of the structure exceed a specified width, usually 0.3 mm. EC2-1-1 Clause 7.3
provides for maximum crack widths of 0.3–0.4 mm in reinforced concrete elements taking
account of the proposed function of the structure and exposure of precast and prestressed
elements. Application to precast piles is not considered, and neither BS EN 12699 nor
BS EN 12794 comments on cracks due to driving.
Table 2.3 Working loads and maximum lengths for ordinary pre-
cast concrete piles of square section
Pile size
Range of working loads
Maximum length
(mm2)
(kN)
(m)
250
200–300
12
300
300–450
15
350
350–600
18
400
450–750
21
450
500–900
25
Table 2.4 Basic code requirements for structural design of concrete and steel piles to BS 8004 and Eurocode 7
Pile type
BS 8004
BS EN 1536
BS EN 12699
BS EN 12794
Foundations
Bored piles
Displacement piles
Precast concrete products – piles
Precast concrete
Concrete grade
As BS 8110
As BS EN 1992-1-1 and 
As BS EN 12794
As BS EN 1992-1-1 
[25–40 N/mm2
BS EN 206-1/BS 8500 for
BS EN 206-1/BS 8500
typically]
concrete insert elements
C35/45–C60/70
C20/25–C45/55 
Also refer to BS EN13369
(subject to exposure class)
Cement content
300–400 kg/m3
Reinforcing steel
As BS 8110
As ENV 1994-1-1 for load-bearing 
As BS EN1008 and 
elements combining steel 
BS EN 10138
sections and concrete
Calculated driving 
0.8 fck
d (10% increase 
stress
if stresses monitored)
Steel bearing
Steel grade
As BS 4360
As ENV 1993-5/
[43A, 50B typically]
BS EN 10025
S275 and S355 typically
Steel stress in 
0.3fy
a and 0.5fy
b
compression
Calculated driving stress
0.9 fy (20% increase if 
stresses monitored)
Driven cast-in-place
Concrete grade
As BS 8110
As BS EN 1992-1-1 and 
BS EN 206-1/BS 8500
C20/25–C30/37 and C25/30
for semi-dry mix
Cement content
300 kg/m3
325 kg/m3 in dry
conditions
375 kg/m3 in submerged
conditions
350 kg/m3 for semi-dry
concrete
Concrete stress in 
0.25uw
c
compression
Reinforcement
As BS 8110
As BS EN 10080 or ENV 1994-1-1
for steel lining and concrete core
in compression
Bored cast-in-place
Concrete grade
As BS 8110
As BS EN 1992-1-1 and 
BS EN 206-1/BS 8500
C20/25–C30/37
Cement content
300 kg/m3
325 kg/m3 in dry conditions
400 kg/m3 when
375 kg/m3 in submerged conditions
under water or mud
Concrete stress in 
0.25uw
c
compression
Reinforcement
As BS EN 10080 or ENV 1994-1-1 
for steel lining and concrete core
in compression
Notes
a Where fy is the characteristic yield strength of steel and where the safety factor on driving is less than 2.
b For jacked piles or where end-bearing piles are driven through relatively soft soils on to very dense granular soils or sound rock.
c uw is concrete cube strength at 28 days.
d fck is the characteristic cylinder strength at 28 days.
24
Types of pile
To comply with the requirements of BS 8110 precast piles of either ordinary or prestressed
concrete should have nominal cover to the reinforcement as shown in the following table:
Exposure conditions
Nominal cover (mm) for concrete grade of
50 and
25
30
40
over
Buried concrete and concrete continuously under water
40
30
25
20
Alternate wetting and drying and freezing
50
40
30
25
Exposed to sea water and moorland water with abrasion
60
50
Using covers larger than required may lead to spalling of the concrete during driving.
In EC2-1-1 Clause 4.4 nominal cover to reinforcement is defined as cnom  cmin  cdev
where cmin is dependent on bond requirements or environmental conditions as summarized
in the Code. cdev allows for deviations, usually set at 10 mm but reduced where strict
QA/QC procedures are in force. BS 8500 provides tabulated classifications for cover, char-
acteristic concrete strength, cement content and type of cement combination depending on
exposure conditions and type of steel corrosion; for example, for an intended life of 50 years
and 20 mm maximum aggregate:
Corrosion
Exposure
Cement
Cover (mm) with concrete class and cement content (kg/m3)
due to
conditionsa
typesb
20c 25c 30c 35c 40c 45c
Carbonation
Moderate
All except
C40/50
C32/40
C28/35 C25/30
humidity
pfa 36%
340
300
280
260
(XC3 and 4)
Chlorides from Tidal, splash
Group 5 
sea water
and spray
and 6
C35/45 C32/40
zones (XS3) 
380
360
Group 4
C45/55
380
Notes
a Degrees of exposure as defined in BS 8500 and EC2-1-1.
b Cement types ‘CEM I to V’ and combinations are defined in Table 1 of BS EN 197-1 and in Groups in Table A.17
of BS 8500. pfa (fly ash) as BS EN 450.
Neither BS EN 12794 nor BS EN 13369 comments on minimum cover for precast piles,
other than advising that cover may be modified in accordance with BS EN 13369. For example,
the cover may be reduced by 5 mm when using concrete class C40/50 or above, but requires
an increase of 5 mm where achievement of dimensional tolerances may be a factor.
BS 8500 also specifies cement combinations and class of concrete to be used to resist
attack on the concrete itself, again depending on exposure conditions. In addition, reference
should be made to BRE Special Digest 1 and Section 10.3.
Types of pile
25
BS EN 12794 states that longitudinal reinforcement shall be a minimum diameter of 8 mm
with at least one bar placed in the corner of square piles; circular section piles shall have at
least six bars placed around the periphery. Transverse reinforcement must be at least 4 mm
in diameter depending on the pile diameter and the pile head must have a minimum of nine
links in 500 mm. BS EN 12794 refers to BS EN 13369 for the quality of reinforcement and
prestressing steel to be used, which in turn refers to other ENs, such as BS EN 10080 and to
the national standards in the countries where the products are to be used. BS 4449 Steel for
reinforcement of concrete, has been revised for use with BS EN 10080. Notwithstanding the
new standards, users of reinforcing steel are advised to obtain third party certification such
as the CARES scheme in the UK.
The proportion of main reinforcing steel (Table 2.5) in the form of longitudinal bars is
determined by the bending moments induced when the pile is lifted from its casting bed to
the stacking area. The magnitude of the bending moments depends on the number and posi-
tioning of the lifting points. Design data for various lifting conditions are dealt with in 7.2.
In some cases the size of the externally applied lateral or uplift loads may necessitate more
main steel than is required by lifting considerations. Lateral steel in the form of hoops and
links is provided to prevent shattering or splitting of the pile during driving. In hard driving
conditions it is advantageous to place additional lateral steel in the form of a helix at the
head of the pile. The helix should be about two pile widths in length with a pitch equal to
the spacing of the link steel at the head. It can have zero cover where the pile head is to be
cut down for bonding to the cap. A design for a precast concrete pile to comply with BS 8004
for easy driving conditions is shown in Figure 2.5a. A design for a longer octagonal pile suit-
able for driving to end bearing on rock is shown in Figure 2.5b. The design of a prestressed
concrete pile in accordance with the recommendations of BS 8110 is shown in Figure 2.6.
Prestressed concrete piles have certain advantages over those of ordinary reinforced
concrete. Their principal advantage is in their higher strength to weight ratio, enabling long
slender units to be lifted and driven. However, slenderness is not always advantageous since
a large cross-sectional area may be needed to mobilize sufficient resistance in shaft friction
and end bearing. The second main advantage is the effect of the prestressing in closing up
cracks caused during handling and driving. This effect, combined with the high-quality
concrete necessary for economic employment of prestressing, gives the prestressed pile
increased durability which is advantageous in marine structures and corrosive soils.
Prestressed concrete piles should be made with designed concrete mixes of at least
C35/45, but as noted above, account should be taken of the special exposure conditions
quoted in EC2-1-1 and BS 8500 when deciding on the concrete class to be used. Minimum
percentages of prestressing steel stipulated in BS EN 12794 are 0.1% of cross-sectional area
Table 2.5 BS
8004 requirements for longitudinal steel reinforcement, hoops, and links 
in precast piles
Longitudinal steel
Volume of steel at head 
Volume of steel in body
Other requirements
and toe of pile
of pile
To provide for 
0.6% gross volume over
0.2% of gross volume Lapping of short bars
lifting, handling, and
distance of 3  pile 
spaced at not more 
with main reinforcement
superstructure loads
width from each end
than 1⁄2  pile width
to be arranged to avoid
and for tensile forces
sudden discontinuity
caused by ground heave
6 φ M.S. links throughout
20 φ M.S. bars for
bonding to pile cap
1000
960
10 500
14 500
1000
1040
Links @ 40 crs
Links @ 120 crs
Spacing transition
Spacing transition
Links @ 40 crs
40 cover to links
300
300
25 chamfer
Lifting lug 2900 from toe
Cast steel shoe
1no. 7-wire 12.5dia. H.T.S. strand
in each corner
1no. 7-wire 12.5dia. H.T.S. strand
Lifiting lug 2 900 from head
40 cover
15000
10500
1150
1050
100
100
1120
Transition
Transition
Transition
Transition
40 cover to links
Lifting hole at 7700 from head
8 φ links
8 φ M.S. links throughout
8 φ Helix at 
50 pitch
B
25 φ M.S. main bars
25 φ H.T.S. main bars
8 φ M.S. links throughout
25 φ M.S. main bars
350
350
1500
17100
1450
1450
23000
1500
1075
Lifting point at 5000 from head
Links @ 70 crs
Links @ 175 crs
Links @ 70 crs
Links @ 50 crs
Cast steel body
A
A
Hardened steel point
90 dia.
Links @ 150 crs
Links @ 50 crs
500
500
SECTION A-A
SECTION B-B
(a) 
(b) 
B
Helix at 50 pitch
Figure 2.5 Design for precast concrete piles (a) 350 mm square pile 15 m long (b) 500 mm octagonal pile 23 m long.
Figure 2.6 Design for prestressed concrete pile.
Types of pile
27
in mm2 for piles not exceeding 10 m in length, 0.01% cross-sectional area  pile length
for piles between 10 and 20 m long and 0.2% for piles greater than 20 m long. It may be
desirable to specify a maximum load which can be applied to a precast concrete pile of any
dimensions. As in the case of timber piles this limitation is to prevent unseen damage to
piles which may be over-driven to achieve an arbitrary set given by a dynamic pile-driving
formula. BS EN 12699 limits the calculated stress (including any prestress) during driving
of precast piles to 0.8 times characteristic concrete strength in compression at the time of
driving; a 10% increase is permitted if the stresses are monitored during driving.
Concrete made with ordinary Portland cement (CEM I) is suitable for all normal exposure
conditions but sulphate-resisting cement may be needed for aggressive ground conditions as
discussed in Chapter 10.
Metal shoes are not required at the toes of precast concrete piles where they are driven
through soft or loose soils into dense sands and gravels or firm to stiff clays. A blunt pointed
end (Figure 2.7a) appears to be just as effective in achieving the desired penetration in these
soils as a more sharply pointed end (Figure 2.7b) and the blunt point is better for maintaining
alignment during driving. A cast-iron or cast-steel shoe fitted to a pointed toe may be used
for penetrating rocks or for splitting cemented soil layers. The shoe (Figure 2.7c) serves to
protect the pointed end of the pile.
Where piles are to be driven to refusal on a sloping hard rock surface, the ‘Oslo point’
(Figure 2.7d) is desirable. This is a hollow-ground hardened steel point. When the pile is
judged to be nearing the rock surface, the hammer drop is reduced and the pile point is seated
on to the rock by a number of blows with a small drop. As soon as there is an indication that
a seating has been obtained the drop can be increased and the pile driven to refusal or some
other predetermined set. The Oslo point was used by George Wimpey and Co. on the piles
as illustrated in Figure 2.5b, which were driven on to hard rock at the site of the Whitegate
Refinery, Cork. A hardened steel to BS 970 with a Brinell hardness of 400 to 600 was
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Cast iron
or cast steel
shoe
Hardened
steel point
M.S. straps
Figure 2.7 Shoes for precast (including prestressed) concrete piles (a) For driving through soft or
loose soils to shallow penetration into dense granular or firm to stiff clays (b) Pointed end
suitable for moderately deep penetration into medium-dense to dense sands and firm to
stiff clays (c) Cast-iron or cast-steel shoe for seating pile into weak rock or breaking
through cemented soil layer (d) ‘Oslo point’ for seating pile into hard rock.
28
Types of pile
employed. The 89 mm point was machined concave to 12.7 mm depth and embedded in a
chilled cast-iron shoe. Flame treatment of the point was needed after casting into the shoe
to restore the hardness lost during this operation.
Piles may be cast on mass concrete beds using removable side forms of timber or steel
(Figure 2.8). The reinforcing cage is suspended from bearers with spacing forks to maintain
alignment. Spacer blocks to maintain cover are undesirable. The stop ends must be set truly
square with the pile axis to ensure an even distribution of the hammer blow during driving.
Vibrators are used to obtain thorough compaction of the concrete and the concrete between the
steel and the forms should be worked with a slicing tool to eliminate honeycombed patches.
The casting beds must be sited on firm ground in order to prevent bending of the piles during
and soon after casting. After removing the side forms the piles already cast may be used as side
forms for casting another set of piles in between them. If this is done the side forms should be
set to give a trapezoidal cross-section in order to facilitate release. Piles may also be cast in
tiers on top of each other, but a space between them should be maintained to allow air to
circulate (Figure 2.9). Casting in tiers involves a risk of distortion of the piles due to settlement
of the stacks. In addition, the piles which are first to be cast are the last to be lifted which is in
the wrong order, since the most-mature piles should be the first to be lifted and driven.
Where piles are made in a factory, permanent casting beds can be formed in reinforced
concrete with heating elements embedded in them to allow a 24-hour cycle of casting and
lifting from the moulds. This method of construction was used by Soil Mechanics Ltd. to
cast prestressed concrete piles at Drax Power Station in Yorkshire(2.7) where the large num-
ber of piles cast (18 500) justified the establishment on site of an elaborate casting yard such
as would be used in a precast concrete factory. The reinforced concrete formwork is shown
in Figure 2.10. This type, which does not have removable side forms, necessitates the
embedment of lifting plugs or loops into the top of the piles.
The layout of the casting yard at Drax is shown in Figure 2.11. The strand reels were set
on carriers at one end of the four rows of casting beds, with the winches for tensioning the
strand at the opposite end. Each casting bed had five lines of forms. The provision of electric
heating elements enabled the concrete to achieve its release strength of 27.6 N/mm2 in 40 to
48 hours. An average of 300 piles per week, with a peak of 400 in a week, were manufactured.
Two coats of whitewash were used as a release agent, as it was found that mould oil did not
Spacer bolts
Spacer
blocks
Concrete casting bed
Steel angle
spacers
Steel angle bearer
Timber
sheathing
Timber fillet
Holding down
bolt
Folding
wedges
Figure 2.8 Timber formwork for precast concrete piles.
Types of pile
29
give a sufficiently thick coating to prevent the piles from occasionally ‘locking-in’ to the
moulds, in spite of a 1 in 10 taper on the sides. The oil also contaminated the prestressing strand.
When piles are cast within wooden side forms the latter should be removed as soon as
possible, and wet curing by water spray and hessian maintained for a seven-day period. As
soon as crushing tests on cubes indicate that the piles are strong enough to be lifted they
should be slightly canted by careful levering with a bar and packing with wedges to release
the suction between the pile and the bed. The lifting slings or bolt inserts may then be fixed
and the pile lifted for transporting to the stacking area. This operation of first canting and
lifting must be undertaken with great care since the piles have still only a comparatively
immature strength and any cracks or incipient cracks formed at this stage will open under
driving stresses.
The piles should be clearly marked with a reference number, length, and date of casting
at or before the time of lifting, to ensure that they are driven in the correct sequence.
Spacer bolts
Bearer
Piles already
cast
Spacer blocks
Concrete casting bed
Bottom
boards
Sheathing
Figure 2.9 Casting precast concrete piles in tiers.
108
394
(19–499)
(19–299)
(899)
102
394
356
102
108
394
1
10
Heating
elements
114
114
444
444
406
203
(4  99)
(4  99)
(19–3  99)
(19–3  99)
(19–3  99)
(19–5  99)
(19–5  99)
(499)
(499)
4
1
2
1
(4  99)
2
1
(4  99)
4
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
Figure 2.10 Heated concrete moulds for prestressed concrete piles.
Figure 2.11 Casting yard for prestressed concrete piles at Drax Power Station.
Types of pile
31
Timber bearers should be placed between the piles in the stacks to allow air to circulate
around them. They should be protected against too-rapid drying in hot weather by covering
the stack with a tarpaulin or polyethylene sheeting. Care must be taken to place the bearers
only at the lifting positions. If they are misplaced there could be a risk of excessive bending
stresses developing and cracking occurring, as shown in Figure 2.12.
Prestressed concrete piles of hollow cylindrical section are manufactured by centrifugal
spinning in diameters ranging from 400 to 1800 mm in lengths up to 40 m.
The precautions for driving precast concrete piles are described in Section 3.4.2, and the
procedures for bonding piles to caps and ground beams and lengthening piles are described
in Sections 7.6 and 7.7.
One of the principal problems associated with precast concrete piles is unseen breakage
due to hard driving conditions. These conditions are experienced in Sweden where the
widely used jointed or unjointed precast concrete piles are driven through soft or loose soils
onto hard rock. On some sites the rock surface may slope steeply, causing the piles to deviate
from a true line and break into short sections near the toe. Accumulations of boulders over
bedrock can also cause the piles to be deflected with consequent breakage. Because of these
experiences the Swedish piling code recommended the provision of a central inspection hole
in test piles and sometimes in a proportion of the working piles. A check for deviation of the
pile from line can be made by lowering a steel tube down the hole. If the tube can be lowered
to the bottom of the hole under its own weight the pile should not be bent to a radius which
would impair its structural integrity. If the tube jams in the hole, it is the usual practice to
bring an inclinometer to the site to record the actual deviation, and hence to decide whether
or not the pile should be rejected and replaced. The testing tube also detects deviations in
the position or alignment of a jointed pile.
Breakages are due either to tensile forces caused by driving with too light a hammer in
soft or loose soils, or to compressive forces caused by driving with too great a hammer drop
on to a pile seated on a hard stratum; in both cases the damage occurs in the buried portion
of the pile. In the case of compression failure it occurs by crushing or splitting near the pile toe.
Such damage is not indicated by any form of cracking in the undriven portion of the pile above
ground level. The provision of a central test hole will again enable crushing of the pile due
to failure in compression to be detected.
2.2.3
Jointed precast concrete piles
The disadvantages of having to adjust the lengths of precast concrete piles either by cutting
off the surplus or casting on additional lengths to accommodate variations in the depth to a
Cracks in pile due to excessive
bending stresses
Correctly placed
bearers
Lifting holes
Misplaced bearers
Figure 2.12 Misplaced packing in stacks of precast concrete piles.
32
Types of pile
hard bearing stratum will be evident. These drawbacks can be overcome by employing
jointed piles in which the adjustments in length can be made by adding or taking away short
lengths of pile which are jointed to each other by devices capable of developing the same
bending and tensile resistance as the main body of the pile. BS EN 12794 defines pile joints
in four classes, Class A to Class D, depending on whether the pile is used in compression,
tension, or bending and the impact load test to be applied to verify the static design calcu-
lations. If the pile joint satisfies the impact and bending tests then the ultimate capacity of
the joint is ‘identical’ to the calculated static bearing capacity. Annex ZA to this standard
deals with the CE marking of foundation pile units and the presumption of fitness for the
intended use.
The ‘Hercules’ pile, originally developed in Sweden, is available in the UK from Stent
Foundations Ltd in two square sizes with standard lengths of 6.1, 9.2, and 12.2 m, and
properties as shown in Table 2.6. C45/55 concrete is normally used. The precast concrete
units are locked together by a steel bayonet-type joint to obtain the required bending and
tensile resistance and a rock shoe incorporating an Oslo point may be used (Figure 2.7d).
A length is chosen for the initial driving which is judged to be suitable for the shallowest
predicted penetration in a given area. Additional lengths are locked on if deeper penetra-
tions are necessary, or if very deep penetrations requiring multiples of the standard lengths
are necessary.
Other types of jointed precast concrete piles include the ‘Centrum’ pile manufactured and
installed by Aarslef Piling in the UK using C40/50 concrete and rigid welded reinforcement
cages in varying lengths from 4 to 18 m in square sections from 200 to 600 mm. Lengths
greater than 4 m for the 200 and 250 mm sections can be jointed using a single locking pin
driven horizontally into locking rings in the joint box (four locking pins for the larger
sections), which are designed to provide a degree of pre-tensioning to the joint (Figure 2.13).
Depending on the length, section, and joint used and the ground conditions, working loads
up to 1200 kN in compression and 180 kN in tension are possible.
‘RB’ precast square concrete piles made and installed by Roger Bullivant Ltd are available
in four sizes with working load capabilities (depending on ground conditions) from 200 kN
for the nominal 150 mm square section to 1200 kN for the 355 mm square pile, in lengths
of 1.5, 3, and 4 m. The standard joint for the limited tensile and bending capability is a
Table 2.6 Dimensions and properties of square section ‘Hercules’ piles as
manufactured in the UK
Type of pile
S 550
S 730/750
Maximum safe working loada (kN)
600
1200
Side dimension (mm)
235
270/275
Cross-sectional area (mm2)
55225
72900/75625
Perimeter (mm)
940
1080/1100
Volume (m3/m)
0.055
0.073/0.076
Mass (kg/m)
137
182/190
Surface area (m2/m)
0.94
1.08/1.10
Note
a Safe working load is dependent on length of the pile and soil properties.
Types of pile
33
simple spigot and socket type bonded with epoxy resin with each pile length bedded on a
sand/cement mortar. Special joints and pile reinforcement can be provided as needed to
resist bending moments and tension forces.
Precast concrete piles which consist of units joined together by simple steel end plates
with welded butt joints are not always suitable for hard driving conditions, or for driving on
to a sloping hard rock surface. Welds made in exposed site conditions with the units held in
the leaders of a piling frame may not always be sound. If the welds break due to tension
waves set up during driving or to bending caused by any deviation from alignment, the pile
may break up into separate units with a complete loss of bearing capacity (Figure 2.14). This
type of damage can occur with keyed or locked joints when the piles are driven heavily, for
example, to break through thin layers of dense gravel. The design of the joint is, in fact, a
critical factor in the successful employment of these piles, and tests to check bending,
tension, and compression capabilities should be carried out for particular applications.
However, even joints made from steel castings require accurate contact surfaces to ensure
that stress concentrations are not transferred to the concrete.
The ‘Presscore’ pile developed and installed by Abbey Pynford plc is a jointed precast
concrete pile consisting of short units which are jacked into the soil. The concrete in the pile
units and precast pile cap is 60 N/mm2 and a reinforcing bar can be placed through the
centre of the units (Figure 2.15). On reaching the required bearing depth the annulus around
the pile is grouted through ports in the units. The use of jacked-in piles for underpinning
work is described in Chapter 9.
A high strength cylindrical precast pile, 155 mm diameter and 1m long, was developed
in Canada for underpinning a 90-year-old building in Regina(2.8). The segments were cast
using steel fibre reinforced concrete with a 28-day compressive strength of 90 N/mm2 and
Plan
Section
Locking pin
Bayonet plug
Reinforcing steel
Figure 2.13 Typical locking pin joint for precast concrete pile.
34
Types of pile
steel fibre content of 40 kg/m3. Each segment was reinforced with four steel wires (9 mm)
welded to a steel wire circumferential coil. Recesses were provided at each end of the
segment and stainless steel rods connected each segment to form the joint. Hydraulic jacks
with a capacity of 680 kN reacted against a new pile cap and as each segment was jacked
down the next segment was screwed and tensioned onto the connecting rod. The required
600 kN pile capacity was achieved at depths ranging from 11 to 13 m.
2.2.4
Steel piles
Steel piles have the advantages of being robust, light to handle, capable of carrying high
compressive loads when driven on to a hard stratum, and capable of being driven hard to a
deep penetration to reach a bearing stratum or to develop a high frictional resistance,
although their cost per metre run is high compared with precast concrete piles. They can be
designed as small displacement piles, which is advantageous in situations where ground
heave and lateral displacement must be avoided. They can be readily cut down and extended
Welded joints
Rockhead
Figure 2.14 Unseen breakage of precast concrete piles with welded butt joints.
Types of pile
35
where the level of the bearing stratum varies; also the head of a pile which buckles during
driving can be cut down and re-trimmed for further driving. They have a good resilience and
high resistance to buckling and bending forces.
Types of steel piles include plain tubes, box-sections, box piles built up from sheet piles,
H-sections, and tapered and fluted tubes. Hollow-section piles can be driven with open ends.
If the base resistance must be eliminated when driving hollow-section piles to a deep pene-
tration, the soil within the pile can be cleaned out by grabbing, by augers, by reverse
water-circulation drilling, or by airlift (see Section 3.4.3). It is not always necessary to fill
hollow-section piles with concrete. In normal undisturbed soil conditions they should have
an adequate resistance to corrosion during the working life of a structure, and the portion of
the pile above the sea bed in marine structures or in disturbed ground can be protected by
cathodic means, supplemented by bituminous or resin coatings (see Section 10.4). Concrete
filling may be undesirable in marine structures where resilience, rather than rigidity, is
required to deal with bending and impact forces.
Where hollow-section piles are required to carry high compressive loads they may be
driven with a closed end to develop the necessary end-bearing resistance over the pile base
area. Where deep penetrations are required they may be driven with open ends and with the
interior of the pile closed by a stiffened steel plate bulkhead located at a predetermined
height above the toe. An aperture should be provided in the bulkhead for the release of water,
Precast pile cap
Class 60/75 concrete
Backfill
Antiheave liner and membrane
as needed
Reinforcing bar as specified
grouted in
Precast 'Presscore' segments
Class 60/75 concrete
Grout as specified in
annulus
Precast nose cone
Grout holes in segments 
Existing foundation
Pressurized grout bag
to transfer load
Figure 2.15 Presscore pile (courtesy Abbey Pynford Foundation Systems Ltd).
36
Types of pile
silt or soft clay trapped in the interior during driving. In some circumstances the soil plug
within the pile may itself develop the required base resistance (Section 4.3.3).
The facility of extending steel piles for driving to depths greater than predicted from soil
investigation data has already been mentioned. The practice of welding-on additional
lengths of pile in the leaders of the piling frame is satisfactory for land structures where the
quality of welding may not be critical. A steel pile supported by the soil can continue to
carry high compressive loads even though the weld is partly fractured by driving stresses.
However, this practice is not desirable for marine structures where the weld joining the
extended pile may be above sea-bed level in a zone subjected to high lateral forces and
corrosive influences. Conditions are not conducive to first-class welding when the extension
pile is held in leaders or guides on a floating vessel, or on staging supported by piles swaying
under the influence of waves and currents. It is preferable to do all welding on a prepared
fabrication bed with the pile in a horizontal position where it can be rotated in a covered
welding station (Figure 2.16). The piles should be fabricated to cover the maximum
predicted length and any surplus length cut off, rather than be initially of only medium
length and then be extended. Cut-off portions of steel piles usually have some value as scrap,
or they can be used in other fabrications. However, there are many situations where in-situ
welding of extensions cannot be avoided. The use of a stable jack-up platform (Figure 3.7)
from which to install the piles is then advantageous.
Figure 2.16 Fabrication yard for steel tubular piles at Milford Haven.
Types of pile
37
Where very long lengths of steel tubular piles are required to be driven, as in the case of
offshore petroleum production platforms, they cannot be handled in a single length by
cranes. They can be driven by underwater hammers, but for top-driven piles a pile connector
is a useful device for joining such lengths of pile without the delays which occur when
making welded joints. The Frank’s Double Drive Shoulder Connector (Figure 2.17) was
developed in the USA for joining lengths of oil well conductor pipe and can be adapted for
making connections in piles upto 914 mm diameter. It is a pin and box joint which is flush
with the OD and ID of the pile, with interlocking threads which pull the pin and box surfaces
together. The joint is usually welded on to the steel pipe, not formed on the pipe ends. Long
steel tubular piles driven within the tubular members of a jacket-type structure are redundant
above their point of connection by annular grouting to the lower part of the tubular sleeve.
This redundant part of the pile, which acts as a ‘dolly’ or follower for the final stages of
driving, can be cut off for reuse when driving other piles.
Where large steel tubular piles are required to carry compressive loads only, the ‘Advance’
purpose-made splicing devices manufactured by the Associated Pile & Fitting Corporation of
USA can be used. The splicer consists of an external collar which is slipped on to the upper
end of the pile section already driven and is held in position by an internal lug. The next
length of pile is then entered into the collar and driven down. The APF ‘Champion’ splicer is
used for H-piles and consists of a pair of channel sections set on the head of the pile length
already driven to act as a guide for placing and then welding-on the next length.
Steel tubular piles are the preferred shape when soil has to be cleaned out for subsequent
placement of concrete, since there are no corners from which the soil may be difficult to
dislodge by the cleaning-out. They are also preferred for marine structures where they can
be fabricated and driven in large diameters to resist the lateral forces in deep-water structures.
The circular shape is also advantageous in minimizing drag and oscillation from waves and
currents (Sections 8.1.3 and 8.1.4). The hollow section of a tubular pile is also an advantage
when inspecting a closed-end pile for buckling. A light can be lowered down the pile and if
it remains visible when lowered to the bottom, no deviation has occurred. If a large deviation
Resilient O-ring seal
Shoulder compression due to
torque creates metal to metal seal
Self-aligning thread profile
is not cross-threadable
Steel tube 20"
to 36" diameter
The connector thread may be cut on a
1" wall tube or on a short section and
welded onto the tube – which can be 
retrieved after driving where required
Low thread helix angle
Mating press fit conical surface
at root & crest
Outside diameter of connector flush
with outside diameter of tube 
Figure 2.17 Schematic arrangement of Frank’s ‘Double Drive Shoulder Connector’.
is shown by complete or partial disappearance of the light, then measures can be taken to
strengthen the buckled section by inserting a reinforcing cage and placing concrete.
Steel tubes are manufactured in Britain in standard outside diameters ranging up to
2134 mm. The Japanese steel industry produces tubes in the standard range of 318.5 to
3048 mm OD. Tubes for piles are manufactured as seamless, spirally welded, and longitudi-
nally welded units. There is nothing to choose between the latter two types from the aspect
of strength to resist driving stresses. In the spiral welding process the coiled steel strip is
continuously unwound and spirally bent cold into the tubular. The joints are then welded
from both sides. In the longitudinally welding process a steel plate is cut and bevelled to the
required dimensions then pressed or rolled into tubular form and welded along the linear
joints. The spiral method has the advantage that a number of different sizes can be formed
on the same machine, but there is a limitation on the plate thickness that can be handled by
particular machines. There is also some risk of weld ‘unzipping’from the pile toe under hard
driving conditions. This can be prevented by a circumferential shoe of a type described later.
Piles driven in exposed deep water locations are fabricated from steel plate in thicknesses
up to 62 mm by the longitudinal welding process. Special large-diameter piles can be
manufactured by the process.
Economies in steel can be achieved by varying the wall thickness and quality of the steel.
Thus in marine structures the upper part of the pile can be in mild steel which is desirable
for welding on bracing and other attachments; the middle section can be in high-tensile steel
with a thicker wall where bending moments are greatest, and the lower part, below sea bed,
can be in a thinner mild steel or high-tensile steel depending on the severity of the driving
conditions. The 1.3 m OD steel tubular piles used for breasting dolphins for the Abu Dhabi
Marine Areas Ltd tanker berth at Das Island were designed by The British Petroleum
Company to have an upper section of 24 mm in thickness, a middle section of 30 mm in
thickness, and a lower section of 20 mm in thickness. The overall length was 36.6 m.
Light spirally welded mild steel tubular piles in the range of sizes and nominal working
loads listed in Table 2.7 are widely used for lightly loaded structures, usually driven by a
drop hammer acting on a plug of concrete in the bottom of the pile (see Section 3.2). These
piles, known as ‘cased piles’, are designed to be filled with concrete after driving. Extension
tubes can be welded to the driven length to increase penetration depth. Roger Bullivant Ltd
provides thicker wall tubes for cased piles from 125 to 346 mm diameter with up to 10 mm
wall section for top driving of the pile. If piles have to be spliced a special compression joint
is needed for driving. Working loads claimed range from 350 to 1250 kN depending on
ground conditions. In countries where heavy timbers are scarce, cased piles have to some
extent replaced timber piling for temporary stagings in marine or river work. Here, the end
of each pile is closed by a flat mild steel plate welded circumferentially to the pile wall.
Concrete-filled steel tubular piles need not be reinforced unless required to carry uplift or
bending stresses which would overstress a plain concrete section cast in the lighter gauges
of steel. Continuity steel is usually inserted at the top of the pile to connect with the ground
beam or pile cap.
Steel box piles are fabricated by welding together trough-section sheet piles (Krupp,
Hoesch, and Arcelor/Arbed combinations (CAZ, CAU)) or specially rolled trough plating
(Arcelor/Arbed and Peine types). The Larssen and Frodingham sections are no longer
produced by Corus. The types fabricated from sheet piles are useful for connection with
sheet piling forming retaining walls, for example to form a wharf wall capable of carrying
heavy compressive loads in addition to the normal earth pressure. However, if the piles
38
Types of pile
Types of pile
39
rotate during driving there can be difficulty in making welded connections to the flats. Plain
flat steel plates can also be welded together to form box piles of square or rectangular
section.
The MV pile consists of either a steel box section (100 mm) or H-section fitted with an
enlarged steel shoe to which a grout tube is attached. The H-pile is driven with a hammer or
vibrator while grout is injected at the driving shoe. This forms a fluidized zone along the
pile shaft and enables the pile to be driven to the deep penetration required for their principal
use as anchors to retaining walls. The hardened grouted zone around the steel provides the
necessary frictional resistance to enable them to perform as anchors.
H-section piles have a small volume displacement and are suitable for driving in groups
at close centres in situations where it is desired to avoid substantial ground heave or lateral
displacement. They can withstand hard driving and are useful for penetrating soils containing
cemented layers and for punching into rock. Their small displacement makes them suitable
for driving deeply into loose or medium dense sands without the ‘tightening’ of the ground
that occurs with large displacement piles. They were used for this purpose for the Tay Road
Bridge pier foundations, where it was desired to take the piles below a zone of deep scour
on the bed of the Firth of Tay. Test piles 305  305 mm in section were driven to depths of
up to 49 m entirely in loose becoming medium-dense to dense sands, gravels, cobbles and
boulders, which is indicative of the penetrating ability of the H-pile.
The ability of these piles to be driven deeply into stiff to very stiff clays and dense sands
and gravels on the site of the Hartlepools Nuclear Power Station is illustrated in Figure 2.18.
On this site driving resistances of 355  368 mm H-piles were compared with those of
precast concrete piles of similar overall dimensions. Both types of pile were driven by a
Delmag D-22 diesel hammer (see Section 3.1.4). Although the driving resistances of both
types were roughly the same to a depth of about 14 m (indicating that the ends of the H-piles
were plugged solidly with clay), at this level the heads of the concrete piles commenced to
spall and they could not be driven below 14.9 m, whereas the H-piles were driven on to 29 m
without serious damage, even though a driving resistance of 0.5 mm/blow was encountered.
Three of the H-piles were loaded to 3000 MN without failure but three of the precast
concrete piles failed at test loads of between 1100 and 1500 MN.
Table 2.7 Dimensions and nominal working loads for typical concrete-filled cased piles using
light-gauge tubes
Internal diameter
Area of concrete
Working load (kN)
Working load (kN)
(mm)
(mm)2
for ordinary soila
for rock, etc.b
254
50670
150
200
305
72960
300
350–450
356
99300
400
500–650
406
129700
500
600–850
457
164100
650
800–1000
508
202700
800
1000–1300
559
245200
1000
1250
610
291800
1200
1500
Notes
a Ordinary soil – sand, gravel, or very stiff clay.
b Rock, etc. – rock, very dense sand or gravel, very hard marl or hard shale.
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
25
50
75
100
Blows per 100 mm penetration
Penetration depth-feet
125
150
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
Loose fine
sand
Very soft to
soft sandy silty
clay
355 × 355 mm (1499sq)
precast concrete piles
(average of 6 piles)
Stiff to very stiff
sandy silty clay
with gravel
Stiff to very stiff
sandy silty clay
Penetration depth – m
Dense to very dense 
silty sand
(N 560)
Dense gravel
and cobbles 
(N 536)
Very stiff sandy
silty clay and
gravel
200
300
Blows per foot penetration
Note:
400
500
H-piles and precast concrete piles
driven by Delmag D-22 Hammer
Pile heads spalling
355 × 368 mm (1499 × 14½99) × 174 kg/m
H-piles (average of 6 piles)
Figure 2.18 Comparison of driving resistance of 355  355 mm precast concrete piles and
355  368 mm H-section piles driven into glacial clays, sands, and gravels in Hartlepools
Power Station.
Types of pile
41
Because of their relatively small cross-sectional area, H-piles cannot develop a high
end-bearing resistance when terminated in soils or in weak or broken rocks. In Germany
and Russia it is frequently the practice to weld short H-sections on to the flanges of the
piles near their toes to form ‘winged piles’ (Figure 2.19a). These provide an increased
cross-sectional area in end bearing without appreciably reducing their penetrating ability.
The bearing capacity of tubular piles can be increased by welding T-sections on to their
outer periphery when the increased capacity is provided by a combination of friction and
end bearing on the T-sections (Figure 2.19b). This method was used to reduce the penetration
depth of 1067 mm OD tubular steel piles used in the breasting dolphins of the Britoil
Marine Terminal in Cromarty Firth. A trial pile was driven with an open end through 6.5 m
of loose silty sand for a further 16 m into a dense silty sand with gravel and cobbles. The
pile was driven by a Menck MRB 1000 single acting hammer with a 1.25 m drop of the
10 tonne ram. It will be seen from Figure 2.20 that there was only a gradual increase in
driving resistance finishing with the low value of 39 blows/200 mm at 22.6 m penetration.
Tubular pile
(a)
(b)
T-sections cut from
H-section pile
Figure 2.19 Increasing the bearing capacity of steel piles with welded-on wings (a) H-section wings
welded to H-section pile (b) T-section wings welded to tubular pile.
42
Types of pile
The pile was then cleaned out and plugged with concrete but failed under a test load of
6300 kN.
It was evident from the driving records that the plain piles showed little evidence of
developing base resistance by plugging and would have had to be driven much deeper
to obtain the required bearing capacity. In order to save the cost and time of welding-on
additional lengths of pile it was decided to provide end enlargements in the form of six
0.451  0.303  7.0 m long T-sections welded to the outer periphery in the pattern
shown in Figure 2.19b. The marked increase in driving resistance of the trial pile
is shown in Figure 2.20. The final resistance was approaching refusal at 194
blows/200 mm at 19 m below sea bed. The winged pile did not fail under the test load
of 6300 kN.
A disadvantage of the H-pile is a tendency to bend about its weak axis during driving. The
curvature may be sharp enough to cause failure of the pile in bending. Bjerrum(2.9) recom-
mended that any H-pile having a radius of curvature of less than 366 m after driving should
Driving resistance (blows/200 mm)
1067 mm OD × 32 mm wall thickness
(50 mm at shoe) open-end steel
tube
1067 mm OD as TP3 but with
6 no. 0.451 × 0.303 × 7.0 m long
T-sections welded to outer
periphery at toe
TP3  –  
TP4  –  
50
0
100
150
200
Sea bed
Loose very silty
fine sand
(N 5 2 to 11)
6.5
22.6
160 blows/200 mm
Second re-drive
Depth below sea bed (m)
First re-drive
TP4
TP3
25
20
15
10
5
39 blows/200 mm
Piles driven by Menck MRB 1000 single – acting hammer (10 tonne ram, 1.25 m drop)
194 blows/200 mm
Dense slightly silty
fine sand with
gravel and cobbles
(N 5 50)
N denotes standard 
penetration resistance
in blows/300 mm
Figure 2.20 Comparison of driving resistance of open-end plain and winged tubular steel piles at
Britoil Tanker Terminal, Cromarty Firth.
Types of pile
43
be regarded as incapable of carrying load. A further complication arises when H-piles are
driven in groups to an end bearing on a dense coarse-grained soil (sand and gravel) or weak
rock. If the piles bend during driving so that they converge, there may be an excessive
concentration of load at the toe and a failure in end bearing when the group is loaded. The
authors observed a deviation of the toes of H-piles of about 500 mm after they had been
driven only 13 m through sands and gravels to an end bearing on sandstone at Nigg Bay in
Scotland.
The curvature of H-piles can be measured by welding a steel angle or channel to the web
of the pile. After driving, an inclinometer is lowered down the square-shaped duct to
measure the deviation from the axis of the pile. This method was used by Hanna(2.10) at
Lambton Power Station, Ontario, where 305 and 355 mm H-piles that were driven through
46 m of clay into shale had deviated 1.8 to 2.1 m from the vertical with a minimum radius
of curvature of 52 m. The piles failed under a test load, and the failure was attributed to
plastic deformation of the pile shaft in the region of maximum curvature.
In the UK H-piles are rolled to BS 4 Part 1: 1993 and BS EN 10056 as universal bearing
piles (Figure 2.21a). Peine piles are broad-flanged H-sections rolled by Hoesch. They are
rolled with bulbs at the tips of the flanges (Figure 2.21b). Loose clutches (‘locking bars’)
are used to interlock the piles into groups suitable for dolphins or fenders in marine struc-
tures. They can also be interlocked with the old Larssen sections to strengthen sheet-pile
walls. The Arbed-HZ and PU (Arcelor) piles are of similar design.
The Monotube pile fabricated by the Monotube Pile Corporation of USA is a uniformly
tapering hollow steel tube. It is formed from steel which is cold-worked to a fluted section
having a tensile yield strength of 345 N/mm2 or more. The strength of the fluted section is
adequate for the piles to be driven from the top by hammer without an internal mandrel or
concrete filling. The tubes have a standard tip diameter of 203 mm and the shaft diameter
increases to 305, 356, 406 or 457 mm at rates of taper which can be varied to suit the
required pile length. An upper section of uniform diameter can be fitted (Figure 2.22), which
is advantageous for marine work where the fluted section has satisfactory strength and
resilience for resisting wave forces and impact forces from small to medium-size ships. The
tubes are fabricated in 3, 5, 7 and 9 gauge steel and taper lengths can be up to 23 m. The
heavier gauges enable piles to be driven into soils containing obstructions without the tearing
or buckling which can occur with thin steel shell piles.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.21 Types of H-section steel piles (a) Universal bearing pile (UK, European, and USA
manufacture) (b) Peine pile (Hoesch).
44
Types of pile
The ‘Soilex’ system, developed in Sweden, uses the patented expander body to form an
enlarged bulb to displace and compact the soil. The expander body consists of a thin folded
sheet metal tube which, after insertion into the soil, is inflated by injecting concrete or grout
under controlled pressure to form a bulb 5 to10 times the original diameter. Installation may
be by conventional drilling, driving, jacking or vibration methods or placement in a pre-
formed hole, the pile shaft geometry above the bulb being determined by the method of
installation. The tube dimensions before expansion range from 70 to 110 mm square up to
3 m long which following inflation provides end-bearing areas of 0.12 to 0.5 m2. In
Borgasund, Sweden, fifty-seven 11 m long Soilex piles using a 110 mm expander body
welded to 168 mm diameter thick wall tube were installed by a vibrator in a predrilled hole
in medium dense sand below new railway bridge abutments. Approximately 0.5 m3 of con-
crete was used to inflate the expander body to form an 800 mm diameter bulb producing a
pile which had an estimated ultimate load capacity of 1100 kN, limited by the strength of the
concrete-infilled steel shaft. The system is also useful for underpinning where short piles are
appropriate and as tension ground anchors; in all cases the spacing of piles is critical to
avoid interference.
Uniform
section
Tapered
section
203 mm (8)
tip diameter
Figure 2.22 Union Monotube pile (Union Metal Manufacturing Co.).
Types of pile
45
2.2.5
Shoes for steel piles
No shoes or other strengthening devices at the toe are needed for tubular piles driven with
open ends in easy to moderately easy driving conditions. Where open-ended piles have to
be driven through moderately resistant layers to obtain deeper penetrations, or where they
have to be driven into weak rock, the toes should be strengthened by welding-on a steel ring.
The internal ring (Figure 2.23a) may be used where it is necessary to develop the full exter-
nal frictional resistance of the pile shaft. An external ring (Figure 2.23b) is useful for reduc-
ing the friction to enable end-bearing piles to be driven to a deep penetration, but the uplift
resistance will be permanently reduced. Hard driving through strongly resistant layers or to
seat a pile onto a rock may split or tear the ring shoe of the type shown in Figure 2.23a and b.
For hard driving it is preferable to adopt a welded-on thick plate shoe designed so that the
driving stresses are transferred to the parent pile over its full cross-sectional area
(Figure 2.23c).
A shoe of this type can be stiffened further by cruciform steel plates (Figure 2.24a).
Buckling and tearing of an external stiffening ring occurred when 610 mm OD steel tube
piles were driven into the sloping surface of strong limestone bedrock (Figure 2.24b).
Steel box piles can be similarly stiffened by plating unless they have a heavy wall
thickness such that no additional strengthening at the toe is necessary. Steel tubular or
box piles designed to be driven with closed ends can have a flat mild steel plate welded
to the toe (Figure 2.25a) when they are terminated in soils or weak rocks. The flat plate
can be stiffened by vertical plates set in a cruciform pattern. Where they are driven on to
a sloping hard rock surface, they can be provided with Oslo points as shown in
Figure 2.25b.
Steel H-piles may have to be strengthened at the toe for situations where they are to
be driven into strongly cemented soil layers, or soil containing cobbles and boulders. The
strengthening may take the form of welding-on steel angles (Figure 2.26a), or purpose-made
devices such as the ‘Pruyn Point’ manufactured in the USA by the Associated Pile and
Fitting Corporation (Figure 2.26b) or the ‘Strongshoe’ and ‘Jet shoe’ manufactured in the
UK by Dawson Construction Plant Ltd.
(a)
(b)
Welds
Bevelled end
Shoe
Weld
Welds
Main pile
(c)
Figure 2.23 Strengthening toe of steel tubular piles (a) Internal stiffening ring (b) External stiffening
ring (c) Thick plate shoe.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.24 (a) Strengthening shoe of tubular steel pile by cruciform plates (b) Buckling and tearing of
welded-on external stiffening ring to tubular steel pile driven on to sloping rock surface.
Types of pile
47
2.2.6
Working stresses for steel piles
BS 8004 requires steel for piles to conform to BS 4360 Grades 43A, 50B, ‘or other grades
to the approval of the engineer’. The code limits the compression working stresses on
tubular, box, and H-section piles, in steel conforming to BS 4360, to 30% of yield strength
Welds
M.S. plate
shoe
Tube or box pile
(a)
(b)
H-pile
‘Oslo’ point
Reinforcing plate
Plate and web
slotted to receive
point
Figure 2.25 Shoes for steel piles (a) Flat plate shoe for tubular or box pile (b) ‘Oslo’ point for 
H-section pile.
Welds
Weld
(a)
(b)
Guide
Unequal
angles
Figure 2.26 Strengthening toe of H-section pile (a) Welded-on steel angles (b) Pruyn Point (Associated
Pile and Fitting Corporation).
48
Types of pile
where the safety factor on driving resistance is not greater than 2. For jacked piles or where
end-bearing piles are driven through relatively soft soils on to very dense granular soils
or sound rock the limit is 50% of yield strength. Eurocodes are based on limit state
design, hence BS EN 1993 Part 5: Piling (EC3–5) makes no reference to working stresses.
BS EN 12699 allows for the peak calculated stress in steel piles during driving to be
0.9 times the characteristic yield strength of the steel; it is stated that this may be
increased by 20% if the stresses are monitored during driving. BS 5950-1: 2000, the current
code of practice for steelwork design in buildings simply states that foundation design
should be in accordance with BS 8004 and the design strength of steel may be taken as
the yield stress for steel thickness less than 16 mm. EC3 calls up a suite of EN codes for
the production and composition of steel and manufacture of steel sections by hot rolling
and cold forming which apply to bearing and sheet pile design. For example, unalloyed
hot rolled structural steels, grades, designations and strengths are defined in BS EN
10025: 2004. The Steel Construction Institute’s H-Pile Design Guide, 2005(2.11) is based
on limit state design as provided in the Eurocodes, and therefore does not consider
prescribed limits on steel working stresses. The Guide makes reference to the offshore
industry’s recommended practice for steel tubular piles based on North Sea experience
as described in the ICP Design Methods for Driven Piles in Sands and Clays (see
Chapter 4).
The American Petroleum Institute(3.5) states that the dynamic stresses during driving
should not exceed 80–90% of yield strength depending on specific circumstances such as
previous experience and confidence in the method of analysis.
The selection of a grade of steel for a particular task depends on the environmental
conditions as well as on the design working stresses. For piles wholly embedded in the
ground, or for piles in river and marine structures which are not subjected to severe
impact forces, particularly in tropical or temperate waters, a mild steel conforming to
Grade 43A (minimum yield strength 247 N/mm2) or a high-tensile steel to Grade 50
(minimum yield strength 355 N/mm2) should be satisfactory. The BS EN 10025-2: 2004
designated equivalent grades are S270GP (270 N/mm2) and S355GP (355 N/mm2) now
normally used for bearing piles. Corus tubular sections suitable for general piling corre-
spond to BS EN 10210 (hollow sections) grades S275J2H and S355J2H, both with
Charpy impact values of 27J at 20	C, (i.e. T27J), well above the BS 4360 requirement.
Cold-formed, welded tubes in accordance with BS EN 10219 (hollow sections) for
non-alloy steels have similar yield strength and impact designations. Steel sheet piles
should conform to the yield strengths in BS EN 10248 for hot rolled sections or to BS EN
10249 for cold-formed.
Piles for deep-water platforms or berthing structures for large vessels are subjected to
high dynamic stresses from berthing impact and wave forces. In water at zero or sub-zero
temperatures, there is a risk of brittle fracture under dynamic loading, and the effects of
fatigue damage under large numbers of load repetitions and also of salt water corrosion
need to be considered. Steels must be selected to have a high impact value when tested at
low temperatures. Corus produces a special steel tube for offshore applications, 335 NH
‘Modified’, with a yield strength of 355 N/mm2 and mechanical and chemical properties
superior to BS EN 10210 and BS 4360 grades 50E and 55E. The Charpy impact value is 60 J
at 50	C. Piles or bracing members for deep-water structures may be required to be
fabricated from plates 30 mm or more in thickness. The steel for such plates should have a
Types of pile
49
brittle fracture resistance at low temperatures similar to the above impact values and note
must be taken of the maximum thicknesses allowed in BS 5950 for each grade of steel at
normal and lower temperatures. High-tensile alloy steel conforming to Grades 55C or
E in BS 4360 or to grades above S460Q in BS EN 10137 High Yield Plates can meet
these requirements.
Steel designations to BS EN 10025, 10210, and 10219 are defined in BS EN 10027-1 with
the following nomenclature:
S
Structural steel
JR
Charpy impact value
27 J at 20	C
E
Engineering steel
J0
Charpy impact value
27 J at 0	C
275
Minimum yield strength 
J2
Charpy impact value
or
in N/mm2
27 J at 20	C
355
W
Improved atmospheric
K2
Charpy impact value
corrosion resistance
40 J at 20	C
N
Normalized
N
Charpy impact value
40 J at 20	C
NL
Charpy impact value
27 J at 50	C
Q
Quenched and tempered
H
Hollow section
Below are some steel grades for foundations as BS 4630 compared with nearest equivalent
grades in BS EN 10025(2.12):
For BS 8004 design
For BS EN 1993-5 (EC3-5) design
BS 4360 grades
Equivalent BS EN 10025-2: 2004 grades
40A
Equivalent not available
40B
Lowest grade available is S235JR in Part 2
of BS EN 10025 (non-alloy structural steels)
43A
Equivalent not available
43B
Lowest grade available is S270JR in Part 2
50
S355N (in Part 3 normalized fine grain structural steels)
50B
S355JR (in Part 2)
50EE
S355NL (in Part 3)
55C
S460N (in Part 3)
55EE
S460NL (in Part 3)
50
Types of pile
2.3
Driven and cast-in-place displacement piles
2.3.1
General
Driven and cast-in-place piles are installed by driving to the desired penetration a heavy-section
steel tube with its end temporarily closed. A reinforcing cage is next placed in a tube which
is filled with concrete. The tube is withdrawn while placing the concrete or after it has been
placed. In other types of pile, thin steel shells or precast concrete shells are driven by means of
an internal mandrel, and concrete, with or without reinforcement, is placed in the permanent
shells after withdrawing the mandrel.
Driven and cast-in-place piles have the principal advantage of being readily adjustable in
length to suit the desired depth of penetration. Thus in the withdrawable-tube types the tube
is driven only to the depth required by the ground conditions. In the shell types, the length
of the pile can be easily adjusted by adding or taking away the short units which make up
the complete shell. In conditions favourable for their employment, where the required pen-
etration depth is within the capability of the piling rig to pull out the tube, and there are no
restrictions on ground heave or vibrations, withdrawable tube piles can be installed more
cheaply than any other type of driven or bored pile for comparable capacities. They also have
the advantage, which is not enjoyed by all types of shell pile, of allowing an enlarged base
to be formed at the toe. However, some codes of practice, notably that of New York City,
forbid the use of a wholly uncased shaft for all forms of driven and cast-in-place pile, where
these are installed in soft to firm clays or in loose to medium-dense sands and materials such
as uncompacted fill. These restrictions are the result of unfortunate experiences resulting
from lifting of the concrete while pulling out the driving tube, and of squeezing (‘waisting’)
the unset concrete in the pile shaft where this is formed in soft clays or peat. The firms that
install these proprietary types of pile have adopted various techniques for avoiding these
troubles, such as inserting permanent light-gauge steel shells before placing the concrete.
However, such expedients increase the cost of the withdrawable-tube piles to the extent that
their advantage in price over shell piles may be wholly or partially lost. The soundness of
the uncased type of pile depends on the skill and integrity of the operatives manning the
piling rig.
Piling rigs have not yet been developed to install driven and cast-in-place piles of the very
large diameters which are possible with driven thick-walled steel tubes or bored and cast-
in-place piles. Thus the working loads are limited to the light to medium range. Also the
withdrawable-tube or thin-shell types are unsuitable for marine structures, but they can be
employed in marine situations if they are extended above the sea bed as columns or piers in
steel or precast concrete.
Problems associated with ground heave when installing driven and cast-in-place piles in
groups are discussed in Section 5.7.
2.3.2
Withdrawable-tube types
Descriptions of the various types of driven and cast-in-place piles are given in CIRIA report
A Review of bearing pile types(2.13). The methods of installing these piles are essentially the
same. A piling rig consisting of a mast, leaders and winch on a track or roller-mounted
frame (see Section 3.1) is used to support and guide the withdrawable tube. The original
Franki pile is now mainly available in Australia and Southeast Asia, for pile working loads
Types of pile
51
from 250 to 1500 kN (subject to ground conditions). This employs an internal drop hammer
acting on a plug of gravel at the bottom of the drive tube. The drive tube (248 to 600 mm
diameter with a wall thickness of 32 mm) is carried down with the plug until the required
toe level is reached when the tube is restrained from further penetration by rope tackle. Then
the gravel plug and batches of dry concrete are hammered out to form a bulb or enlarged
base to the pile. The reinforcing cage is then inserted, followed by placing a semi-dry
(no-slump) concrete in batches as the drive tube is pulled out in stages. After each stage of
withdrawal the concrete is compacted by the internal hammer (Figure 2.27). The operations
of driving by internal hammer and concreting in stages are slower than the top driving
method described above. Hence, these techniques are used only when there are economic
advantages, for example, when the enlarged base adds appreciably to the bearing capacity
of the pile.
Lifting ropes
Reinforcing cage
Hammer
Driving tube
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Gravel plug
Concrete base
Figure 2.27 Stages in installing an open-ended Franki pile (a) Driving piling tube (b) Placing concrete
in piling tube (c) Compacting concrete in shaft (d) Completed pile.
52
Types of pile
In the Cementation Foundations Skanska version of the withdrawal tube pile, the heavy
wall section tube has its lower end closed by an expendable steel plate or shoe and is driven
from the top by a five-tonne hydraulic hammer. On reaching the required toe level, as
predetermined by calculation or as determined by measurements of driving resistance, the
hammer is lifted off and a reinforcing cage is lowered down the full length of the tube. A
highly workable self-compacting concrete is then placed in the tube through a hopper,
followed by raising the tube by a hoist rope operated from the pile frame. The tube may be
filled completely with concrete before it is lifted or it may be lifted in stages depending on
the risks of the concrete jamming in the tube. The length of the pile is limited by the ability
of the rig to pull out the drive tube. This restricts the length to about 20 to 30 m. Pile
diameters range from 285 to 525 mm with working loads up to 1500 kN.
In a further variation of the Franki technique, the gravel plug (or dry concrete plug) can
be hammered out at several intermediate stages of driving to form a shell of compact material
around the pile shaft. This technique is used in very soft clays which are liable to squeeze
inwards when withdrawing the tube. Composite Franki piles are formed by inserting a
precast concrete pile or steel tube into the driving tube and anchoring it to the base concrete
plug by light hammer blows. The drive tube is then withdrawn.
A full-length reinforcing cage is always advisable in the driven and cast-in-place pile. It
acts as a useful tell-tale against possible breaks in the integrity of the pile shaft caused by
arching and lifting of the concrete as the tube is withdrawn. BS EN 12699 requires minimum
reinforcement of 0.5% of the pile cross-section or four 12 mm diameter bars over the top
4 m of all such piles; with minimum cover of 50 mm where the casing is withdrawn, 75 mm
where reinforcement is installed after concreting (or where subject to ground contaminants),
and 40 mm where there is permanent lining.
The problem of inward squeezing of soft clays and peats or of bulging of the shafts of
piles from the pressure of fluid concrete in these soils is common to cast-in-place piles both
of the driven and bored types. A method of overcoming this problem is to use a permanent
light gauge steel lining tube to the pile shaft. However, great care is needed in withdrawing
the drive tube to prevent the permanent liner being lifted with the tube. Even a small amount
of lifting can cause transverse cracks in the pile shaft of sufficient width to result in exces-
sive settlement of the pile head under the working load. The problem is particularly difficult
in long piles when the flexible lining tube tends to snake and jam in the drive tube. Also
where piles are driven in large groups, ground heave can lift the lining tubes off their seat-
ing on the unlined portion of the shaft. Snaking and jamming of the permanent liner can be
avoided by using spacers such as rings of sponge rubber.
In most cases the annulus left outside the permanent liner after pulling the drive tube will
not close up. Hence, there will be no frictional resistance available on the lined portion. This
can be advantageous because dragdown forces in the zone of highly compressible soils and
fill materials will be greatly reduced. However, the ability of the pile shaft to carry the work-
ing load as a column without lateral support below the pile cap should be checked. Problems
concerned with the installation of driven and cast-in-place piles are discussed further in
Section 3.4.5.
Allowable stresses on the shafts of these piles are influenced by the need to use easily
workable self-compacting mixes with a slump in the range of 130 to 180 mm and to make
allowances for possible imperfections in the concrete placed in unseen conditions. BS EN
12699 for driven displacement piles requires the rules on the concreting of bored piles (see
Section 2.4.2) using self-compacting concrete as recommended in BS EN 1536 to apply to
Types of pile
53
all cast-in-place displacement piles unless otherwise specified. BS 8004 limits the working
stress to 25% of the 28-day cube strengths, but BS EN 12699 specifies concrete strength
classes of C20/25 to C30/37 which are 25% stronger than the cube strengths usually adopted
in the UK under BS 8004, that is, a range of 20–30 N/mm2. EC2-1-1 Clause 3 refers to char-
acteristic cylinder strengths for the determination of design compressive strengths, and if
the 25% limit is applied the allowable stresses range from 5 to 7.5 N/mm2 (i.e. similar to the
BS 8004 limits, but for the stronger mixes). For these values, allowable loads for piles of var-
ious shaft diameters are as shown in the following table:
Nominal shaft
Allowable working
diameter (mm)
load (kN)
300
350–500
350
450–700
400
600–900
450
800–1000
500
1000–1400
600
1400–2000
The higher ranges in the above table should be adopted with caution, particularly in difficult
ground conditions.
Maximum working loads are as shown in the following table:
Nominal shaft
Nominal maximum
diameter (mm)
working load (kN)
350
440
400
590
450
740
500
930
550
980
600
1500
715
2000
The spacing of bars in the reinforcing cage should give ample space for the flow of
concrete through them. Bars of 5 mm diameter in the form of a spiral or flat steel hoops used
for lateral reinforcement should not be spaced at centres closer than 100 mm (80 mm when
using 
20 mm aggregate).
The Vibrex pile installed by Fundex Verstraeten BV employs a diesel or hydraulic hammer
to drive the tube which is closed at the end by a loose sacrificial plate. An external ring
vibrator is then employed to extract the tube after the reinforcement cage and concrete has
been placed. A variation of the technique allows an enlarged base to be formed by using the
hammer to drive out a charge of concrete at the lower end of the pile. The Vibrex pile is
formed in shaft diameters from 350 to 600 mm.
54
Types of pile
The Fundex pile also installed by Fundex group (versions of this and the other types are
available from American Piledriving Inc in the USA) is a form of screwpile (see Section
2.3.5). A helically screwed drill point is held by a bayonet joint to the lower end of the piling
tube. The latter is then rotated by a hydraulic motor on the piling frame and at the same time
forced down by hydraulic rams. On reaching founding level, a reinforcing cage and concrete
are placed in the tube which is then withdrawn leaving the sacrificial drill point in the soil.
This limits the disturbance at the pile base. The Tubex pile also employs the screwed drill
point, but the tubes are left in place for use in very soft clays when ‘waisting’ of the shaft
must be avoided. The tube can be drilled down in short lengths, each length being welded to
the one already in place. Thus the pile is suitable for installation in conditions of low head-
room, for example, for underpinning work. This pile can also be installed with simultaneous
grout injection which leaves a skin of grout around the tube and increases bearing capacity.
The speciality of the Vibro pile (from Terracon in the Netherlands) is the method used to
compact the concrete in the shaft by alternate upward and downward blows of a hammer on
the driving tube. The upward blow of the hammer operates on links attached to lugs on top
of the tube. This raises the tube and allows concrete to flow out. On the downward blow the
concrete is compacted against the soil. The blows are made in rapid succession which keeps
the concrete ‘alive’ and prevents its jamming in the tube.
2.3.3
Shell types
Types employing a metal shell generally consist of a permanent light gauge steel tube in
diameters from 150 to 500 mm with wall thickness up to 6 mm and are internally bottom
driven by a drop hammer acting on a plug of dry concrete (care being taken not to burst the
tube). The larger diameter tubes are usually fabricated to the estimated length and handled
into a piling frame with a crane. Smaller diameter, spirally welded tube can be manually
placed on the rig leader and welded in sections to produce the required depth during
installation. On reaching the bearing layer the hammer is removed, any reinforcement
inserted, and a high slump concrete placed to produce the pile. Working loads up to 1200 kN
are possible.
In France cased piles varying in diameter from 150 to 500 mm are installed by welding a
steel plate to the base of the tubular section to project at least 40 mm beyond the outer face
of the steel. As the pile is driven down, a cement/sand mortar with a minimum cement
content of 500 kg/m3 is injected into the annulus formed around the pile by the projecting
plate through one or more pipes having their outlet a short distance above the end plate. The
rate of injection of the mortar is adjusted by observing the flow of mortar from the annulus
at the ground surface. The working load is designed to be carried by the steel section. The
working stress permitted of 160 N/mm2 is higher than the value normally accepted for steel
piles using EN24-1 steel, because of the protection given to the steel by the surrounding
mortar. Steel H or box sections can be given mortar protection in a similar manner.
The well-known Raymond ‘Step-Taper’ Piles which consisted of helically corrugated
light-steel shells are no longer available. The ‘TaperTube’ pile (Figure 2.28), a steel shell
similar to the Monotube but without the flutes, has been developed by DFP Foundation
Products and Underpinning & Foundation Constructors of the USA. It uses a heavier wall
thickness of 9.5 mm in 247 N/mm2 grade hot-rolled steel to form a 12-sided polygon tapering
from 609 to 203 mm at the cast steel point over lengths of 3 to 10 m. Where tube extensions
are needed the top of the polygon can be formed into a circle for butt welding; this provides
Figure 2.28 The TaperTube pile.
56
Types of pile
improved axial uplift resistance. After top driving is completed the tapered shell pile is filled
with concrete. Ultimate bearing capacities up to 4000 kN and lateral resistance to 200 kN
have been determined in pile tests.
The West shell pile is no longer available in the UK, and this type of short precast
cylindrical concrete shell has generally gone out of favour with the development of
improved precast pile joints and CFA piling techniques.
2.3.4
Working stresses on driven and cast-in-place piles
It can be seen from the above brief descriptions that driven and cast-in-place piles encompass
a wide variety of shapes, combinations of materials and installation methods. A common
feature of nearly all types is an interior filling of concrete placed in-situ, which forms the
main load-carrying component of the pile. Whether or not any load is allowed to be carried
by the steel shell depends on its thickness and on the possibilities of corrosion or tearing of
the shell. As noted in Section 2.3.2, BS 8004 limits the working stress in the concrete to 25%
of the characteristic cube strength at 28 days with a minimum cement content of 300 kg/m3.
While the required strength classes in BS EN 12699 are apparently higher than BS 8004, the
working stresses are lower than for precast concrete piles to take account of possible
deficiencies in workmanship during placing the concrete, or reductions in section of the pile
shaft due to ‘waisting’ or buckling of the shells. When semi-dry concrete is tamped during
installation the concrete class should be at least C25/30 with a minimum cement content of
350 kg/m3.
Where steel tubes or sections are used as part of the load carrying capability or rein-
forcement of the pile, BS EN 12699 requires Eurocode 4 (EC4) BS EN 1994: 2004 Design
of Composite Steel and Concrete Structures Part 1-1 General rules to be applied.
Steel shell piles (‘pipe piles’) are more widely used in the USA than elsewhere and most
of the American codes require the shells to be at least 2.5 mm thick before they can be
permitted to carry a proportion of the load. Frequently a wall thickness of 3 mm is required.
2.3.5
Rotary displacement auger piles
Displacement auger piles and screw piles are drilled piles, but the soil is displaced and
compacted as the auger head is rotated into the ground to form the stable pile shaft, with
little soil being removed from the hole. The methods were mainly developed in the 1960s in
Belgium from continuous flight auger (CFA) techniques (see Section 2.4.2) and are now
widely available. The original system is the cast-in-place ‘Atlas’ pile in which the special
single flight auger head is screwed and jacked into the ground on a thick-walled steel tube
using a specially designed rotary high torque rig. The helical shape of the pile shaft
produced by screwing in the auger flange is maintained as the auger is back-screwed to form
a stable hole into which the reinforcement cage is placed prior to concreting. Other proprietary
displacement piles such as the ‘ScrewSol’ pile by Bachy Soletanche (Figure 2.29a and b)
which produces a helical flanged pile shaft in weak soils and the ‘Spire’ system by SEFI in
France for a straight shaft also use specially shaped augers on the end of the drill tube to
compact the soil and inject concrete. A helical ‘threaded’ shaft is also produced by Bachy
Soletanche with a reduced pitch and shorter flange for use in London Clay. The amount of
reinforcement which can be inserted is limited. The use of the thin-flanged hollow stem CFA
augers in short lengths to form the shaft helix has not been successful.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.29 (a) The ScrewSol tapered auger and tight-fit follower tube (b) Cleaned-off section of
an excavated ScrewSol pile.
58
Types of pile
Rigs are similar to the high torque, instrumented CFA pile units, but the power required to
install screw piles can be 20% greater than that required for equivalent CFA piles; additional
pull-down is usually necessary. As only a small amount of material is removed as the auger
is initially inserted, the screw pile is particularly useful for foundations in contaminated
ground. The method of concreting is either by injection through the auger tip during rotation
out of the hole, which can improve shaft friction, or by tremie depending on the system.
Design of displacement screw piles should be based on a detailed knowledge of the
ground using pressuremeter tests, CPTs and SPTs, and pile test data in the particular soil.
Care is required in selecting the effective diameter of the helical shaft for determination of
shaft friction and end-bearing capacity. Bustamante and Gianeselli(2.14) have provided a
useful simplified method of predetermining the carrying capacity of helical shaft piles
based on a series of tests and recommend that a design diameter of 0.9 times the outside
diameter of the auger flange should be used for calculating both base and shaft resistance
for ‘thin’ flanges. For thick flanges (say 40 mm deep 75 mm wide), the outside diameter of
the helix is appropriate. Depending on the ground conditions and the size of the helical
flanges formed, savings of 30% in concrete volume compared with the equivalent bored pile
are claimed. Typical pile dimensions are 500 mm outside auger diameter and 350 mm shaft diam-
eter and lengths of 30 m are possible. The technique is best suited to silty sands and sandy
gravels with SPT N-values between 10 and 30; above N  50 there is likely to be refusal with
currently available rigs, and unacceptable heave and shearing will occur in most clays.
An enlarged pile base can be formed with straight shafted displacement piles, such as the
Penpile by Pennine Vibropile Ltd, in granular soils and weak chalk to improve end-bearing
capacity.
Guidance on installation of displacement screw piles in BS EN 12699 is limited, but
comprehensive trials of different types of pile at Limelette(2.15) in Belgium during 2000 and
2002 in stiff dense sand, together with earlier trials in stiff clay, have produced significant
data on design, installation and performance of screw piles (including references to EC7
design procedures and CPT testing). Two main conclusions were that the bearing capacity is
of similar magnitude as that for full displacement piles, and the prediction of bearing capacity
was in good agreement with load tests, irrespective of the method used.
Solid steel shaft helical screw piles are used mainly in the USA for foundations in
collapsible and expansive soils as described by Black and Pack(2.16). The central shaft up to
57 mm2 has one or more circular steel plates up to 350 mm diameter, shaped into a single
helix, welded to it. As the shaft is rotated into the soil, the leading edge of the helix bites
into the soil, transferring the rotational force into axial thrust; extension shafts with plates
are added as needed. Reduced drag-down and ultimate load-carrying capacities of up to
890 kN in compression or tension are claimed in these soil conditions. In addition to selecting
soil parameters, care is needed during design and installation to consider the effects of
groundwater around the shaft, corrosion and buckling. (See also Section 9.2.2 for use in
underpinning.)
2.4
Replacement piles
2.4.1
General
Replacement piles are installed by first removing the soil by a drilling process and then
constructing the pile by placing concrete or some other structural element in the drilled hole.
Types of pile
59
The simplest form of construction consists of drilling an unlined hole and filling it with
concrete. However, complications may arise such as difficult ground conditions, the presence
of groundwater, or restricted access. Such complications have led to the development of
specialist piling plant for drilling holes and handling lining tubes, but unlike the driven and
cast-in-place piles, very few proprietary piling systems have been promoted. This is because
the specialist drilling machines are available on sale or hire to any organization which may
have occasion to use them. The resulting pile as formed in the ground is more or less the
same no matter which machine, or method of using the machine, is employed. There have
been proprietary systems such as the Prestcore pile, which incorporates precast units
installed in the pile borehole, but these methods are largely obsolete.
There are two principal types of replacement pile. These are bored and cast-in-place piles,
and drilled-in tubular (including caisson) piles. A general description of the two types now
follows. Mechanical plant for installing the piles and methods of construction are described
in Section 3.3.
2.4.2
Bored and cast-in-place piles
In stable ground an unlined hole can be drilled by hand or mechanical auger. If reinforcement
is required, a light cage is then placed in the hole, followed by the concrete. In loose or
water-bearing soils and in broken rocks casing is needed to support the sides of the bore-
hole, this casing being withdrawn during or after placing the concrete. In stiff to hard clays
and in weak rocks an enlarged base can be formed to increase the end-bearing resistance of
the piles (Figure 2.30). The enlargement is formed by a rotating expanding tool. Hand
excavation is now uneconomic because of stringent statutory health and safety regulations,
even in piles with a large shaft diameter. A sufficient cover of stable fine-grained soil must
be left over the top of the enlargement in order to avoid a ‘run’ of loose or weak soil into the
unlined cavity, as shown in Figure 2.30.
Bored piles drilled by hand auger are limited in diameter to about 355 mm and in depth
to about 5 m. They can be used for light buildings such as dwelling houses, but even for
these light structures hand methods are used only in situations where mechanical augers, as
described in Section 3.3.1, are not available.
Unstable soil
Stable soil
1 m (3.3 ft)
60°
Figure 2.30 Under-reamed base enlargement to a bored and cast-in-place pile.
60
Types of pile
The versatile, light cable percussion tripod rigs can bore piles up to 600 mm diameter
10 m deep with working loads up to 1200 kN in suitable ground conditions. Temporary
casing can be driven to cut off unstable ground and reinforcement inserted prior to concreting.
Bored piles drilled by mechanical spiral-plate or bucket augers or by grabbing rigs can
drill piles with a shaft diameter up to 7.3 m. Standard plate auger boring tools for use with
kelly bar rigs (see Section 3.3.4) range from 600 to 3650 mm. Rigs with telescopic kelly
bars can reach 70 m depth and 102 m exceptionally. Under-reaming tools can form enlarged
bases in stable soils up to 7.3 m in diameter. Rotary drilling equipment consisting of drill
heads with multiple rock roller bits have been manufactured for drilling shafts up to 8 m in
diameter.
In a stable dry bore, concreting is carried out from a hopper over the pile with a short
length of pipe to direct flow into the centre of the reinforcement, ensuring that segregation
does not occur. When concreting boreholes under flooded conditions or under stabilizing
fluid a full length tremie pipe (6 times the maximum diameter of the aggregate or 150 mm
diameter whichever is the greater) is essential. For reasons of economy and the need to
develop shaft friction, it is the normal practice to withdraw the casing during or after
placing the concrete. As in the case of driven and cast-in-place piles this procedure
requires care and conscientious workmanship by the operatives in order to prevent the
concrete being lifted by the casing, and resulting in voids in the shaft or inclusions of
collapsed soil.
The shafts of bored and cast-in-place piles are liable to ‘necking’ or ‘waisting’ in soft clays
or peats. Sometimes a permanent casing of light spirally welded metal is provided over the
portion of the shaft within these soil types, but this measure can cause problems in installa-
tion (see Section 3.4.6). EC2-1-1 Clause 2.3.4 recommends tolerances in cross-sectional
dimensions for cast-in-place piles (see Chapter 4). The design diameter for bored piles with
helical flanged shafts should be determined as noted in Section 2.3.5.
Reinforcement is not always needed in bored and cast-in-place piles unless uplift loads
are to be carried (uplift may occur due to the swelling and shrinkage of clays).
Reinforcement may also be needed in the upper part of the shaft to withstand bending
moments caused by any eccentricity in the application of the load, or by bending moments
transmitted from the ground beams (Section 7.9). However, it is often a wise precaution to
use a full-length reinforcing cage in piles where temporary support by casing is required
over the whole pile depth. As noted in Section 2.3.2, the cage acts as a warning against the
concrete lifting as the casing is extracted. The need to allow ample space between the bars
for the flow of concrete is again emphasized. EC2-1-1 Clause 4 specifies minimum cover in
respect of environmental conditions and BS EN 1536 requires 60 mm cover for piles greater
than 600 mm diameter and 50 mm for piles less than 600 mm. Where reinforcement is
required, BS EN 1536 follows EC2-1-1 Clause 9.8.5 rules for longitudinal reinforcement
areas for bored piles depending on the cross-sectional area.
Pile cross-section: Ac
Minimum area of longitudinal reinforcement: As
Ac  0.5 m2
As  0.005 Ac
0.5 m2 
 Ac  1.0 m2
As  25 cm2
Ac  1.0 m2
As  0.0025 Ac
Types of pile
61
Transverse reinforcement is also specified in BS EN 1536. Un-reinforced bored piles can
be considered as Clause 12 of EC2-1-1, subject to serviceability and durability requirements,
but BS EN 1536 requires minimum longitudinal reinforcement of four 12 mm diameter bars,
unless the design demonstrates otherwise.
Over 1100 large diameter bored piles were installed at Canary Wharf by Bachy
Soletanche in London Docklands ranging from 900 to 1500 mm and to depths of 30 m
through terrace gravels, Lambeth clays, sands and gravels, and Thanet sands. It was possible
to bore the piles without the aid of drilling fluids due to the low water table in the Thanet
beds. Once the piles had reached the required depth using temporary casing, the shaft was
filled with bentonite slurry to minimize the risk of pile collapse during concreting operations.
The reinforcement cage was inserted to which were attached tubes-à-manchette for pile base
grouting two days after concreting.
When using bentonite or other drilling fluids to support the sides of boreholes or
diaphragm walls, the bond of the reinforcement to the concrete may be affected. Research
by Jones and Holt(2.17) comparing the bond stresses in reinforcement placed under bentonite
and polymer fluids indicated that it is acceptable to use the BS 8110 values of ultimate bond
stress provided that the cover to the bar is at least twice its diameter when using deformed
bars under bentonite. The results for the polymers investigated showed that the code bond
stresses could be reduced by a divisor of 1.4. EC2-1-1 Clause 4 includes for a minimum
cover factor dependent on bond requirements and Section 8 gives a reduction factor of 0.7
to apply to the ultimate bond stress where ‘good’ bond conditions do not exist – compatible
with the Jones and Holt data for polymers. It also covers laps between bars using the reduced
bond stress as appropriate. BS EN 1536 states that only ribbed bars shall be used for main
reinforcement where a stabilizing fluid, bentonite or polymer, is used.
It is easier to remove drill cuttings from polymer stabilizing fluids for reuse compared
with bentonite slurries. They are also better suited for drilling large diameter piles and shafts
where the hole has to be stabilized for up to 36 hours of drilling time. The filter cake
formation on the sides of the hole is limited and the sides do not soften to the same extent
as with bentonite slurry support.
Barrettes can be an alternative to large diameter bored and cast-in-place piles where in
addition to vertical loads, high lateral loads, or bending moments have to be resisted. They
are constructed using diaphragm wall techniques to form short discrete lengths of rectangular
wall, and interconnected Ell-, Tee-shapes and cruciforms to suit the loading conditions in a
wide variety of soils and rock to considerable depths. The ‘Hydrofraise’ reverse circulation
rig (see Section 3.3.6) is particularly well adapted to form barrettes, as verticality is accurately
controlled and the time for construction is reduced compared with grab rigs thereby avoiding
the potential for the excavation to collapse. Barrettes are usually only economical when the
rig is mobilized for the construction of other basement walls.
Continuous flight auger or auger-injected piles, generally known as CFA piles, are
installed by drilling with a rotary continuous-flight auger to the required depth. In stable
ground above the water table the auger can be removed and a high slump concrete pumped
through a flexible pressure hose that has been fed down to the bottom of the unlined hole.
This type of pile is referred to as cast-in-place. In unstable or water-bearing soils a flight
auger is used with a hollow stem temporarily closed at the bottom by a plug. After reaching
the final level a high slump concrete is pumped down the hollow stem and, once sufficient
pressure has built up, the auger is withdrawn at a controlled rate, removing the soil and forming
a shaft of fluid concrete extending to ground level (Figure 2.31). Thus the walls of the borehole
62
Types of pile
are continually supported by the spiral flights and the soil within them, and by the concrete.
Reinforcing steel can be pushed into the fluid concrete to a depth of about 12 m.
Exceptionally, reinforcing cages up to 17 m long were pushed down into the 30 m long piles
for the foundations of the approach viaducts to the Dartford Bridge. Vibrators may be used
to assist penetration. The shaft diameters range from the minipile sections (about 100 mm
in which sand–cement grout may be injected in place of concrete) up to 1.5 m exceptionally.
Concrete is usually mixed with a plasticizer to improve its ‘pumpability’, and an expanding
agent is used in grout to counter the shrinkage while it is setting and hardening. Pile capacities
up to 7500 kN are possible depending on ground conditions and pile dimensions.
In granular soils a hollow-stem auger can be used in conjunction with wing drill bits to
mix the soil in place with a cement grout pumped down the stem. This process is well developed
for encapsulating contaminants in landfill.
The CFA pile has considerable advantages over the conventional bored pile in water-bearing
and unstable soils. Temporary casing is not needed, and the problems of concreting under-
water are avoided. The drilling operations are quiet and vibrations are very low making the
method suitable for urban locations. However, in spite of these considerable advantages the
CFA pile depends for its integrity and load-bearing capacity, as much as any other in-situ type
of pile, on strict control of workmanship. This is particularly required where a high proportion
of the load is carried in end-bearing. Because it is not possible to check the stratification and
quality of the soil during installation as with conventional bored piles, considerable research
and development has been undertaken by piling companies into the use of computerized
instrumentation to monitor the process and ensure the quality and integrity of CFA piles. For
example, a computer screen is positioned in the drilling rig cab in front of the operator which
continuously displays the boring and concreting parameters. During the boring operation the
depth of auger, torque applied, speed of rotation, and penetration rate are displayed. During
concreting a continuous record of concrete pumping pressure and flow rate is shown, and on
Hollow stem of
continuous flight
auger
Soil debris
Sand–cement grout
pumped down
hollow stem
Figure 2.31 Pumping grout to form an auger-injected pile.
Types of pile
63
completion the results are provided on a printout of the pile log which records the construction
parameters and under- or over-supply of concrete (Figure 2.32). Most specifications for CFA
piles require the rig to be provided with such instrumentation, although, because of anomalies
which inevitably exist in ground conditions, some authorities require all CFA piles to be
tested by non-destructive integrity tests. Regular calibration of the instrumentation is
essential(2.5). In certain ground conditions doubts may exist as to whether or not the injected
material has flowed-out to a sufficient extent to cover the whole drilled area at the pile toe.
For this reason it may be advisable either to assume a base diameter smaller than that of the
shaft or to adopt a conservative value for the allowable end-bearing pressure. In addition,
‘polishing’ of the shaft can occur in stiff clays due to over-rotation and ‘flighting’ (i.e.
vertical movement of the soil on the auger relative to the soil on the wall of the borehole)
in loose silty sands where over-rotation disturbs the surrounding soil and can reduce shaft
resistance by 30%.
The instrumentation systems which have been successfully used to record the pile
installation are now being applied to control the CFA process, taking some of the decision-
making away from the operator in the cab, particularly to ensure that the target volume
concrete is achieved throughout the pile length during withdrawal.
The CFA pile is best suited for ground conditions where the majority of the working load
is carried by shaft friction, and the ground is free from large cobbles and boulders. The stan-
dard CFA system may have difficulty in penetrating stiff clayey soils and glacial till, with
‘refusal’ encountered before reaching the design depth and problems of flighting, shaft
waisting and discontinuities occurring. Bustamante et al.(2.18) have shown that the double
rotary CFA system can overcome such conditions by installing a temporary casing using a
second rotary head on the rig while simultaneously drilling in the auger. The results indi-
cated that stiff marl could be effectively penetrated, the verticality was better controlled, and
the overall performance was similar to conventional bored and CFA piles. The shaft friction
capacity of CFA piles in chalk has been assessed by Lord et al.(2.19) It is considered that there
should be little difficulty in forming satisfactory CFA piles in better quality structured chalk,
but in chalks with low penetration resistance there may be problems of softening and hole
instability, particularly below water table.
Further information on installation and monitoring of CFA piles is given in a paper by
Fleming(2.20).
Concrete materials and mix proportions for cast-in-place piles generally are specified in
BS EN 1536 and strength grades should range between C20/25 and C30/37. Cement contents
equal to or greater than 325 kg/m3 are required for placement in dry conditions and equal to
or greater than 375 kg/m3 in submerged conditions; water/cement ratios are specified to be
less than 0.6 and have good flow and self-compaction properties. As noted in Section 2.3.2,
these mixes are stronger than BS 8004 requirements which limits the working stress in the
concrete to 25% of the characteristic cube strength at 28 days. Structural design stresses in
EC7 are specified to conform to EC2, EC3, and EC5 for the relevant material; for example,
EC2-1-1 Clause 3 defines the ultimate design compressive stress of concrete in piles as the
characteristic cylinder strength divided by a partial factor of 1.5  1.1.
2.4.3
Drilled-in tubular piles
The essential feature of the drilled-in tubular pile is the use of a tube with a medium to thick
wall, which is capable of being rotated into the ground to the desired level and is left
Swan-neck (bar)
0
–1
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Volume (m3/0.5 m)
0
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
12.5
16
8
16
19
19
16
2
19
17
21
20
16
22
19
21
16
20
19
16
22
18
19
20
21
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Oversupply (%)
0
20
40
–1
0
1
25s
30s
14s
14s
13s
15s
186s
14s
14s
13s
13s
14s
14s
14s
14s
13s
13s
14s
14s
14s
13s
14s
14s
13s
123s
0
1
4
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
1
2
3
Extr. Rot. (rev/0.5m)
Extr. Rate (m/min)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
22s
26s
30s
27s
29s
24s
28s
35s
31s
36s
36s
26s
30s
22s
16s
16s
15s
20s
17s
17s
14s
16s
15s
16s
19s
–1
–5
0
0
1
Boring Rot. (rev/0.5m)
Boring Rate (m/min)
System Pressure (bar)
0 10 20 3040 50 60 70 80
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Depth (m)
Rig: CM48
Pile: 04
Date: 07/02/2006
Diameter:
600mm
Bored length:
12.22m
Total bored revs: 26.0
Nominal volume: 3.46m3
Placed volume:
4.28m3
Av.oversupply:
24%
Boring start:
1:03pm
Boring finish:
1:12pm
Concrete start:
Concrete finish:
1:14pm
1:22pm
Key:
A - auger extension/section
C - waiting for concrete
O - obstruction or hard drilling
B - blockage
R - rebore
F - breakdown
Depth (m)
Contract:
SDO126
Pile: 04
Figure 2.32 Pile log for CFA pile (courtesy Stent Foundations Ltd).
Types of pile
65
permanently in the ground with or without an in-filling of concrete. Soil is removed from within
the tube as it is rotated down, by various methods including grabbing, augering and reverse
circulation, as described in Section 3.3.5. The tube can be continuously rotated by a hydraulically
powered rotary table or be given a semi-rotary motion by means of a casing oscillator.
The drilled-in tubular pile is a useful method for penetrating ground containing boulders
or other obstructions, heavy chisels being used to aid drilling. It is also used for founding in
hard formations, where a ‘rock socket’ capable of resisting uplift and lateral forces can be
obtained by drilling and grouting the tubes into the rock, under-reaming as necessary. In this
respect the drilled-in tubular pile is a good type for forming berthing structures for large
ships. These structures have to withstand high lateral and uplift loads for which a thick-
walled tube is advantageous. In rock formations the resistance to these loads is provided by
injecting a cement grout to fill the annulus between the outside of the tube and the rock
forming the socket. Code of practice requirements for these and other forms of drilled-in
tubular piles are as given in Section 2.3.4 for cast-in-place piles.
Where tubular steel piles have to be driven and sealed into a pre-formed hole ready to drill
a rock socket, care must be taken not to over-drive the pile. ‘Curtain folds’ and ovality can
occur, potentially compromising the load-bearing capacity and are difficult to rectify to
produce an acceptable pile. It is preferable to use an under-reamer or hole opener to match
the outside diameter of the pile before finally driving to seal the tube.
In the USA steel H-sections are lowered inside the drilled-in tubes and concrete is placed
within the tubes to develop full end bearing on the pile and to ensure full interaction between
tube, H-section ‘core’ and concrete. Because of the area of steel provided by the combined
steel and concrete sections, very high loads can be carried by these ‘caisson’ piles where
they are end bearing on a hard rock formation.
2.5
Composite piles
Various combinations of materials in driven piles or combinations of bored piles with driven
piles can be used to overcome problems resulting from particular site or ground conditions.
The problem of the decay of timber piles above groundwater level has been mentioned in
Section 2.2.1. This can be overcome by driving a composite pile consisting of a precast concrete
upper section in the zone above the lowest predicted ground-water level, which is joined to a
lower timber section by a sleeved joint of the type shown in Figure 2.3. The same method can
be used to form piles of greater length than can be obtained using locally available timbers.
Alternatively, a cased borehole may be drilled to below water level, a timber pile pitched
in the casing and driven to the required depth, and the borehole then filled with concrete.
Another variation of the precast concrete–timber composite pile consists of driving a hollow
cylindrical precast pile to below water level, followed by cleaning out the soil and driving a
timber pile down the interior.
In marine structures a composite pile can be driven that consists of a precast concrete upper
section in the zone subject to the corrosive influence of sea-water and a steel H-pile below the
soil line. The H-section can be driven deeply to develop the required uplift resistance from shaft
friction. EC4 requirements apply to the design of composite steel and concrete structures.
Generally, composite piles are not economical compared with those of uniform section,
except as a means of increasing the use of timber piles in countries where this material is
readily available. The joints between the different elements must be rigidly constructed to
withstand bending and tensile stresses, and these joints add substantially to the cost of the pile.
66
Types of pile
Where timber or steel piles are pitched and driven at the bottom of drilled-in tubes, the
operation of removing the soil and obtaining a clean interior in which to place concrete is
tedious and is liable to provoke argument as to the standard of cleanliness required.
2.6
Minipiles and micropiles
Minipiles are defined as piles having a diameter of less than 300 mm. Generally, they range
in shaft diameter from 50 to 300 mm, with working loads in the range of 50 to 500 kN. The
term ‘micropile’ is given to those in the lower range of diameter. Neither micropiles nor
minipiles are specifically mentioned in EC7, but if load bearing, it should be assumed that
the EC7 design rules apply. BS EN 14199: 2005 Execution of special geotechnical works –
Micropiles covers requirements for using steel bars or tubes for reinforcement, concrete and
grout materials, and the use of additives. They can be installed by a variety of methods.
Some of these are as follows:
(1) Driving small-diameter steel tubes followed by injection of grout with or without with-
drawal of the tubes
(2) Driving thin wall shells in steel or reinforced concrete which are filled with concrete
and left in place
(3) Drilling holes by rotary auger, continuous flight auger, or percussion equipment
followed by placing a reinforcing cage and in-situ concrete in a manner similar to
conventional bored pile construction (Section 2.4.2) and
(4) Jacking-down steel tubes, steel box-sections, or precast concrete sections. The sections
may be jointed by sleeving or dowelling.
One of the principal uses of minipiles is for installation in conditions of low headroom,
such as underpinning work (Section 9.2.2), or for replacement of floors of buildings dam-
aged by subsidence. Where minipiles are used for underpinning in clays susceptible to heave
and shrinkage, it is advisable to insert a sleeve into a pre-bored hole over the top 2 to 3 m of
the shaft. In this case the pile must be considered as a column over the sleeved length and
designed accordingly.
Pali radice or ‘root piles’ (Section 9.2.2) are a form of grouted minipile used mainly for
underpinning where the piles are installed at appropriate angles through the structure or
foundations to transfer load to competent strata.
2.7
Factors governing choice of type of pile
The advantages and disadvantages of the various forms of pile described in Sections 2.2 to
2.5 affect the choice of pile for any particular foundation project and these are summarized
in the following subsections:
2.7.1
Driven displacement piles
Advantages
(1) Material forming pile can be inspected for quality and soundness before driving
(2) Not liable to ‘squeezing’ or ‘necking’
Types of pile
67
(3) Construction operations not affected by groundwater
(4) Projection above ground level advantageous to marine structures
(5) Can be driven in very long lengths
(6) Can be designed to withstand high bending and tensile stresses
(7) Can be redriven if affected by ground heave
(8) Pile lengths in excess of 25 m are common and pile loads over 10000 kN are feasible
for large diameter piles.
Disadvantages
(1) Unjointed types cannot readily be varied in length to suit varying levels of bearing stratum
(2) May break during driving, necessitating replacement piles
(3) May suffer unseen damage which reduces carrying capacity
(4) Uneconomical if cross-section is governed by stresses due to handling and driving
rather than by compressive, tensile or bending stresses caused by working conditions
(5) Noise and vibration due to driving may be unacceptable
(6) Displacement of soil during driving may lift adjacent piles or damage adjacent structures
(7) End enlargements, if provided, destroy or reduce shaft friction over shaft length
(8) Cannot be driven in conditions of low headroom.
2.7.2
Driven and cast-in-place displacement piles
Advantages
(1) Length can easily be adjusted to suit varying levels of bearing stratum
(2) Driving tube driven with closed end to exclude groundwater
(3) Enlarged base possible
(4) No spoil to remove; important on contaminated sites
(5) Formation of enlarged base does not destroy or reduce shaft friction
(6) Material in pile not governed by handling or driving stresses
(7) Noise and vibration can be reduced in some types by driving with internal drop-hammer
(8) Reinforcement determined by compressive, tensile or bending stresses caused by working
conditions
(9) Concreting can be carried out independently of the pile driving
(10) Pile lengths up to 25 m and pile loads to around 1500 kN are common.
Disadvantages
(1) Concrete in shaft liable to be defective in soft squeezing soils or in conditions of artesian
water flow where withdrawable-tube types are used
(2) Concrete cannot be inspected after installation
(3) Concrete may be weakened if artesian groundwater causes piping up shaft of pile as
tube is withdrawn
(4) Length of some types limited by capacity of piling rig to pull out driving tube
(5) Displacement may damage fresh concrete in adjacent piles, or lift these piles or damage
adjacent structures
(6) Noise and vibration due to driving may be unacceptable
68
Types of pile
(7) Cannot be used in river or marine structures without special adaptation
(8) Cannot be driven with very large diameters
(9) End enlargements are of limited size in dense or very stiff soils
(10) When light steel sleeves are used in conjunction with withdrawable driving tube, shaft
friction on shaft will be destroyed or reduced.
2.7.3
Bored and cast-in-place replacement piles
Advantages
(1) Length can readily be varied to suit variation in levels of bearing stratum
(2) Soil or rock removed during boring can be inspected for comparison with site investi-
gation data
(3) In-situ loading tests can be made in large-diameter pile boreholes, or penetration tests
made in small boreholes
(4) Very large (up to 7.3 m diameter) bases can be formed in favourable ground
(5) Drilling tools can break up boulders or other obstructions which cannot be penetrated
by any form of displacement pile
(6) Material forming pile is not governed by handling or driving stresses
(7) Can be installed in very long lengths
(8) Can be installed without appreciable noise or vibration
(9) No ground heave
(10) Can be installed in conditions of low headroom
(11) Pile lengths up to 50 m over 3 m in diameter with working loads over 30000 kN are
feasible.
Disadvantages
(1) Concrete in shaft liable to squeezing or necking in soft soils where conventional types
are used
(2) Special techniques needed for concreting in water-bearing soils
(3) Concrete cannot be inspected after installation
(4) Enlarged bases cannot be formed in coarse-grained soils
(5) Cannot be extended above ground level without special adaptation
(6) Low end-bearing resistance in coarse-grained soils due to loosening by conventional
drilling operations
(7) Drilling a number of piles in a group can cause loss of ground and settlement of
adjacent structures.
2.7.4
Choice of pile materials
Timber is cheap relative to concrete or steel. It is light, easy to handle, and readily trimmed
to the required length. It is very durable below groundwater level but is liable to decay
above this level. In marine conditions softwoods and some hardwoods are attacked by wood-
boring organisms, although some protection can be provided by pressure impregnation.
Timber piles are unsuitable for heavy working loads, typical maximum being 600 kN.
Concrete is adaptable for a wide range of pile types. It can be used in precast form in
driven piles, or as insertion units in bored piles. Dense, well-compacted good-quality concrete
Types of pile
69
can withstand fairly hard driving and it is resistant to attack by aggressive substances in the
soil, or in sea water or groundwater. However, concrete in precast piles is liable to damage
(possibly unseen) in hard driving conditions. Concrete with good workability, using plasti-
cizers as appropriate, should be placed as soon as possible after boring cast-in-place piles.
Weak, honeycombed concrete in cast-in-place piles is liable to disintegration when aggres-
sive substances are present in soils or in groundwater.
Steel is more expensive than timber or concrete but this disadvantage may be outweighed
by the ease of handling steel piles, by their ability to withstand hard driving, by their
resilience and strength in bending, and their capability to carry heavy loads. Steel piles can
be driven in very long lengths and cause little ground displacement. They are liable to
corrosion above the soil line and in disturbed ground, and they require cathodic protection
if a long life is desired in marine structures. Long steel piles of slender section may suffer
damage by buckling if they deviate from their true alignment during driving.
2.8
Reuse of existing piled foundations
As the redevelopment of city sites continues, it is inevitable that many will be underlain with
deep and complex foundations from the previous buildings. A foundation system that has
already been tested and ‘proved’ by supporting the existing load could provide considerable
economic advantage for a new structure on the same site. Clearly the foundations must be
investigated thoroughly and shown to have an adequate factor of safety against failure and
settlement for the new loads. Where an increase in load is to be applied or where new foun-
dations have to be compatible with the old, the observational method can be adopted to
ensure robustness of design and construction.
A comprehensive investigation into the problems that may be posed by the existence of
old foundations and the potential solutions has been completed recently by a research
consortium co-ordinated by the Building Research Establishment (the ‘RuFUS project’) and
a Handbook published(2.21) giving guidance on the following:
G
Why and when to consider reusing foundations
G
Decision models to manage risk when reuse is considered
G
Investigation, assessment, and performance of old foundations
G
Upgrading performance and combining old foundations with new; and
G
Measurement of performance.
2.9
References
2.1 LOVE, J. P. The use of settlement reducing piles to support a flexible raft structure in West London,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 156, 2003,
pp. 177–81.
2.2 RAISON, C. A. North Morcambe Terminal, Barrow: pile design for seismic conditions, Proceedings
of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 137, 1999, pp. 149–63.
2.3 MARSH, E. and CHAO, W. T. The durability of steel in fill soils and contaminated land, Corus
Research, Development & Technology, Swindon Technology Centre, Report No. STC/CPR
OCP/CKR/0964/2004/R, 2004.
2.4 A corrosion protection guide for steel bearing piles in temperate climates, Corus Construction
and Industrial, Scunthorpe, 2005.
2.5 The Institution of Civil Engineers, Specification for Piling and Embedded Retaining Walls,
Thomas Telford Ltd, London, 1996. (2nd edition in preparation 2006)
70
Types of pile
2.6 BRE Special Digest 1: 2005, Concrete in aggressive ground, Building Research Establishment,
Watford, 2005.
2.7 GRABHAM, F. R., BRITT, G. B., and ROBERTS, W. K. Prestressed piles. Notes for Informal Discussion
held at Institution of Civil Engineers, 25 January 1971.
2.8 HASSAM, T., RIZKALLA, S., RITAL, S., and PARMENTIER, D. Segmental precast concrete piles – a solu-
tion for underpinning, Concrete International, August 2000, p. 41.
2.9 BJERRUM, L. Norwegian experiences with steel piles to rock, Geotechnique, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1957,
pp. 73–96.
2.10 HANNA, T. H. Behaviour of long H-section piles during driving and under load, Ontario Hydro
Research Quarterly, Vol. 18, No. 1, 1966, pp. 17–25.
2.11 BIDDLE, A. R. H-Pile Design Guide. SCI Publication P355. Steel Construction Institute, Ascot, 2005.
2.12 European structural steel standard EN 10025: 2004. Explanation and comparison to previous
standard, Corus Construction and Industrial, Scunthorpe, 2005.
2.13 WYNNE, C. P. A review of bearing pile types, Construction Industry Research and Information
Association, CIRIA Report PGI, 2nd ed., 1988.
2.14 BUSTAMANTE, M. and GIANESELLI, L. Installation parameters and capacity of screwed piles,
Proceedings of Third International Seminar on Deep Foundations on Bored and Augered Piles.
Van Impe W. F. and Haegeman (eds). AA Balkema, Rotterdam, 1998, pp. 95–108.
2.15 HOLEYMAN, A. and CHARUE, N. International pile capacity prediction event at Limelette in Belgian
screw pile technology design and recent developments. Proceedings of Second Symposium on
Screw Piles, Brussels. Maertens J. and Huybrechts N. (eds) Swets and Zeitlinger, Lisse, 2003,
pp. 215–34.
2.16 BLACK, D. R. and PACK, J. S. Design and performance of helical screw piles in collapsible and
expansive soils in arid regions of the United States, Proceedings of Ninth International
Conference on Piling and Deep Foundations. Presses du l’école natural des Ponts et Chaussées,
2002, pp. 469–76.
2.17 JONES, A. E. K. and HOLT, D. A. Design of laps for deformed bars in concrete under bentonite and
polymer drilling fluids, The Structural Engineer, Vol. 80, No. 18, 2004, pp. 32–8.
2.18 BUSTAMANTE, M., GIANESELLI, L., and SALVADOR, H. Double rotary CFA piles: performance in cohe-
sive soils, Proceedings of Ninth International Conference on Piling and Deep Foundations.
Presses de l’école nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, 2002, pp. 375–81.
2.19 LORD, J. A., HAYWARD, T., and CLAYTON, C. R. I. Shaft friction of CFA piles in chalk. CIRIA Project
Report 86. Construction Industry Research Information Association, London, 2003.
2.20 FLEMING, W. G. K. The understanding of continuous flight auger piling, its monitoring and control,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 113, 1995,
pp. 157–65.
2.21 Building Research Establishment. The ‘RuFUS Project’ Handbook and Conference Proceedings
on the Re-use of foundations, CRC, London, 2006.
Chapter 3
Piling equipment and methods
There was a world-wide increase in the construction of heavy foundations in the period from
1950 to the 1970s as a result of developments in high office buildings, heavy industrial
plants and shipyard facilities. The same period also brought the major developments of
offshore oilfields. A high proportion of the heavy structures required for all such develop-
ments involved piled foundations, which brought about a great acceleration in the evolution
of piling equipment. There were increases in the size and height of piling frames, in the
weight and efficiency of hammers, and in the capacity of drilling machines to install piles
of ever-increasing diameter and length. The development of higher-capacity machines of all
types was accompanied by improvements in their mobility and speed of operation.
The development of piling equipment proceeded on different lines in various parts of the
world, depending mainly on the influence of the local ground conditions. In Northern
Europe the precast concrete pile continued to dominate the market and this led to the
development of light and easily handled piling frames. These were used in conjunction with
self-contained diesel hammers and winches, with the minimum of labour and without the
need for auxiliary craneage, steam boilers, or air compressors. The stiff clays of the mid-
western states of America and the Great Lakes area of Canada favoured large-diameter
bored piles, and mobile rotary drilling machines were developed for their installation. In
contrast, the presence of hard rock at no great depth in the New York area favoured the
continuing development of the relatively slender shell piles driven by an internal mandrel.
The growth of the offshore oil industry in many parts of the world necessitated the develop-
ment of an entirely new range of very heavy single-acting steam and hydraulically powered
hammers designed for driving large-diameter steel piles, guided by tubular-jacket structures.
In the present day, the increasing attention which is being given to noise abatement is
influencing the design of pile hammers and the trend towards forms of pile that are installed
by drilling methods rather than by hammering them into the ground.
Great Britain has a wide variety of soil types and the tendency has been to adopt a range
of piling equipment selected from the best types developed in other parts of the world for
their suitability for the soil conditions in any particular region.
With the advances in the techniques of installing large-diameter bored piles, and the
increasing acceptance of these types for the foundations of heavy structures, it did appear at
one stage that the capability of the bored pile to carry very heavy loads would outstrip that
of the driven pile. However, with the stimulus provided by the construction of marine
facilities for large tankers and deep-water oil-production platforms, the driven type of pile
can now be installed in very large diameters that approach and in some cases exceed those
of the larger bored piles. Piles are also being used to support heavier loads and to deeper
penetrations in difficult environmental conditions where ground investigations have been
limited. This has resulted in on-the-job changes to techniques and equipment requiring a
high degree of geotechnical expertise from the employer and contractor to complete such
projects successfully.
The manufacturers of piling equipment and the range of types they produce are too
numerous for all makes and sizes to be described in this chapter. The principal types of
equipment in each category are described, but the reader should refer to manufacturers’
handbooks for the full details of their dimensions and performance. The various items of
equipment are usually capable of installing more than one of the many piling systems which
are described in Chapter 2. Installation methods of general application are described in the
latter part of this chapter.
All piling equipment should comply with the requirements in BS EN 996: 1996 Piling
equipment – Safety requirements and BS EN 791: 1996 Drill rigs – Safety.
3.1
Equipment for driven piles
3.1.1
Piling frames
The piling frame has the function of guiding the pile at its correct alignment from the stage
of first pitching in position to its final penetration. It also carries the hammer and maintains
it in position co-axially with the pile. The essential parts of a piling frame are the leaders or
leads, which are stiff members of solid, channel, box, or tubular section held by a lattice or
tubular mast that is in turn supported at the base by a moveable carriage and at the upper
level by backstays. The latter can be adjusted in length by a telescopic screw device, or by
hydraulic rams, to permit the leaders to be adjusted to a truly vertical position or to be raked
forwards, backwards, or sideways. Where piling frames are mounted on elevated stagings,
extension leaders can be bolted to the bottom of the main leaders in order to permit piles to
be driven below the level of the base frame.
The piling winch is mounted on the base frame or carriage. This may be a double-drum
winch with one rope for handling the hammer and one for lifting the pile. A three-drum
winch with three sheaves at the head of the piling frame can lift the pile at two points using
the outer sheaves, and the hammer by the central sheave. Some piling frames have multiple-
drum winches which, in addition to lifting the pile and hammer, also carry out the duties of
operating the travelling, slewing and raking gear on the rig.
Except in special conditions, say for marine work, stand-alone piling frames have largely
been replaced by the more mobile self-erecting hydraulic leaders on tracked carriages, or by
the crane-mounted fixed or hanging leaders offered by the major piling hammer manufac-
turers. In Europe the pile hammer usually rides on the front of the leader, whereas in the
USA the practice is to guide the pile between the leaders. The pile head is guided by a cap
or helmet which has jaws on each side that engage with U-type leaders. The hammer is
similarly provided with jaws. The leaders are capable of adjustment in their relative
positions to accommodate piles and hammers of various widths.
Self-erecting leaders on powerful hydraulic crawler carriages can be configured for a
variety of foundation work. Initial erection and changing from drilling to driving tools can
be rapidly accomplished and with the electronic controls now available the mast can be
automatically aligned for accurate positioning. Some crawlers have expandable tracks to
give added stability and can handle pile hammers with rams up to 12 tonne at 1:1 back rake.
72
Piling equipment and methods
Piling equipment and methods
73
A range of rigs (with leader extensions as available) are shown in the following table:
Maker
Type
Usable leader
Maximum
Capacity pile
length
capacity (pile
winch
(m)
plus hammer)
(tonne)
(tonne)
ABI ‘Mobilram’a
TM13/16
15.7
9
5
(Germany)
TM14/17V
16.7
10
5
TM16/20
19.7
9
5
TM18/22B
21.4
9
5
Banut
555
15.0
6
10
(Germany)
650
18.6
16
10
Junttanb
PM16
15.0
12.0
5
(Finland)
PM20
13.8
13.0
8
PM20C
12.6
16.0
10
PM23
12.6
14.0
8
PM25
12.6
18.0
10
Liebherr
LRB 125
12.5
12.0
5
(Austria)
LRB155
24.0
15.0
8
LRB 255
30.0
30.0
20
LRB 400
42.0
40.0
30
LRH 200c
40.0
20.0
25
LRH 400c
48.0
35.0
30
LRH 600c
60.0
65.0
35
Deiseko-PVE
3015
17.5
8.5
6
(Netherlands and
4017
21.8
13.0
6
USA)
5021
24.8
18.0
6
6025
27.2
20.1
10
8027
30.0
30.0
12.5
Notes
a Telescopic mast.
b Standard rigs, additional leader extensions available for pile lengths up to 30 m.
c Using swinging leader.
The ABI Mobilram TM series of telescopic leader masts (Figure 3.1) provide ‘crowd’
(pulldown) for driving piles up to 21 m long using vibratory drivers, but fold down for com-
pact transport. The Banut 555 and 650 piling rigs (Figure 3.2) are not only specially
designed for impact driving, primarily precast concrete piles but are also effective for most
bearing and sheet piles. The hydraulic stays attached to the crawler enable forward rakes of
up to 18o and 45o back rakes, together with lateral movement of up to 14o available on both
units. The usable length given for the 650 unit relates to the Banut superRAM 6000
hydraulic hammer (see Table 3.2).
The Junttan PM hydraulic piling rigs with fixed leaders can drive piles ranging from 18
to 36 m long (for HHK hydraulic hammers with leader extensions), using hammer rams
from 3000 to 12000 kg. Fore and aft rakes of 18o and 40o respectively and lateral raking up
to 12o are available on the PM25 unit. Liebherr provide fixed leaders mounted on their own
and others’ crawler carriages. The LRB series can operate as pile driving rigs and rotary
drills for CFA and kelly bored piles.
3.1.2
Crane-supported leaders
Although the hydraulic piling rig with its base frame and leaders supported by a stayed mast
provides a reliable means of ensuring stability and control of the alignment of the pile, there
are many conditions which favour the use of leaders suspended from a standard crawler
crane. Rigs of this type have largely supplanted the frame-mounted leaders for driving long
piles on land in the UK and the USA.
Fixed leaders are rigidly attached to the top of the crane jib by a swivel and to the lower
part of the crane carriage by a ‘spotter’ or stay. Hydraulic spotters can extend and retract to
control verticality and provide fore and aft raking; they can also move the leader from side
to side. The ICE heavy-duty spotter provides 6 m of hydraulic movement fore and aft and
74
Piling equipment and methods
Figure 3.1 ABI Mobilram with telescopic leader fully extended driving tubular pile (courtesy
ABI GmbH).
an optional 35o leader rotation (Figure 3.3). In ‘fixed extended’ arrangements, the leaders
extend above the top of the jib with a connector which allows freedom of movement.
Leaders are usually provided in top and intermediate sections about 5 and 2.5 m long jointed
together to provide the required leader height. As an alternative to spotters, simple hydraulic
telescopic rams are used to enable raking piles to be driven, with a bottom stabbing point
section bearing on the ground, levelled by hydraulic jack. BSP International Foundations
Ltd fixed extended leaders have lattice panel lengths of 7 m for the 610 mm square section
and 7.5 and 10 m for the 835 mm square section. The respective maximum lengths under
the cat-head are 22.5 and 38 m, subject to crane jib length; maximum load for pile and
hammer at a back rake of 1:12 with the 610 mm section is 12 tonne, and 21 tonne for the
835 mm section at a back rake of 1:3 using standard stays.
Piling equipment and methods
75
45° (with 2-point support)
4.095m
4.29 m
Adjustable stays
Box section leader with
lateral inclination
18°
Maximum height 26.32 m
Usable leader length with SuperRAM 6000 18.6m
Figure 3.2 Banut 650 piling rig (courtesy ABI GmbH).
Hanging and swinging leaders are suspended from the top of the crane jib with a head
block which allows free movement to fit over a stabbed pile where guides are provided.
Alternatively, there is a stabbing point at the bottom of the leader to fix the location for pile
driving, either hanging vertically or swung to the required rake. The Liebherr LRH 600,
50 m long hanging leader has a maximum capacity of 65 tonne when used with the Liebherr
HS 895 HD carriage, but account has to be taken of bending moments induced by the weight
of the piling hammer when driving raked piles (Figure 3.4). Delmag ‘European style’ box
leads constructed from tubular sections, lattice-braced, are light and stable and can be
attached to any make of crane for driving piles at rakes up to 1:1 subject to bending moment
considerations.
Backward and forward rakes in excess of 1:3 (Figure 3.5) are possible depending on the
stability of the crawler crane. There is a practical limit to the length of pile which can be
driven by a given type of rig and this can sometimes cause problems when operating the rig
in the conventional manner without the assistance of a separate crane to lift and pitch the
pile. The conventional method consists of first dragging the pile in a horizontal position
close to the piling rig. The hammer is already attached to the leader and drawn up to the
cat-head. The pile is then lifted into the leaders using a line from the cat-head and secured
by toggle bolts. The helmet, dolly and packing are then placed on the pile head (Figure 3.20)
and the assembly is drawn up to the underside of the hammer. The carriage of the piling rig
is then slewed round to bring the pile over to the intended position and the stay and angle of
the crane jib are adjusted to correct for verticality or to bring the pile to the intended rake.
In determining the size of leader whether rig-mounted, fixed or hanging it is always
necessary to check the available height beneath the hammer when it is initially drawn up to
the cat-head. Taking the example of leaders with a usable height of 20.5 m in conjunction
with a hammer with an overall length of 6.4 m, after allowing a clearance of 1 m between
the lifting lug on the hammer to the cathead and about 0.4 m for the pile helmet, the maximum
length of pile which can be lifted into the leaders is about 12.7 m.
76
Piling equipment and methods
Figure 3.3 ICE 225 spotter with optional front lead rotation (courtesy International Construction
Equipment).
Figure 3.4 Liebherr LRH 400 48 m long swinging leader on HS 885 HD crane (courtesy Liebherr
Great Britain Ltd).
Figure 3.5 US style 26 inch swinging leader supporting a Dawson HPH2400 hammer driving a
305 mm H-pile on 2:3 rake (courtesy Dawson Construction Plant Ltd).
78
Piling equipment and methods
Lifting point
Rollers
U.B bed frame
Tubular raking stays
Lifting points
Tubular raking struts
Two channels
Rollers
Pile
Rollers
Figure 3.6 Trestle guides for tubular raking pile.
Occasionally, it may be advantageous to use leaders independent of any base machine.
Thus if only two or three piles are to be driven, say as test piles before the main contract, the
leaders can be guyed to ground anchors and operated in conjunction with a separate petrol
or diesel winch. Guyed leaders are slow to erect and move, and they are thus not used where
many piles are to be driven, except perhaps in the confines of a narrow trench bottom where
a normal rig could not operate.
3.1.3
Trestle guides
Another method of supporting a pile during driving is to use guides in the form of a moveable
trestle. The pile is held at two points, known as ‘gates’, and the trestle is designed to be
moved from one pile or pile-group position to the next by crane (Figure 3.6). The hammer
is supported only by the pile and is held in alignment with it by leg guides on the hammer
extending over the upper part of the pile shaft. Because of flexure of the pile during driving
there is a greater risk, especially with raking piles, of the hammer losing its alignment with
the pile during driving than in the case of piling frames which support and guide the hammer
independently of the pile. For this reason the method of supporting the hammer on the pile
in conjunction with trestle guides is usually confined to steel piles where there is less risk
of damage to the pile head by eccentric blows. When driving long steel raking piles in guides
it is necessary to check that the driving stresses combined with the bending stress caused by
the weight of the hammer on the pile are within allowable limits.
Pile guides which are adjustable in position and direction to within very close limits
are manufactured in Germany. Their principal use is for mounting on jack-up barges for
marine piling operations. A travelling carriage or gantry is cantilevered from the side of the
barge or spans between rail tracks on either side of the barge ‘moon-pool’. The travelling
gear is powered by electric motor and final positioning is by hydraulic rams. Hydraulically
operated pile clamps or gates are mounted on the travelling carriage at two levels and are
moved transversely by electric motor, again with final adjustment by hydraulic rams allowing
the piles to be guided either vertically or to raking positions. Guides provided by hydraulic
clamps on a guide frame fixed to the side of a piling barge are shown in Figure 3.7.
Trestle guides can be usefully employed for rows of piles that are driven at close centres
simultaneously. The trestle shown in Figure 3.8 was designed by George Wimpey and Co.
for the retaining wall foundations of Harland and Wolff’s shipbuilding dock at Belfast(3.1).
Piling equipment and methods
79
Figure 3.7 Installing a 4 m dia monopile foundation for North Hoyle offshore wind farm with pile
top rig and specially designed leader leg pile frame (courtesy Seacore Ltd).
Three rows of five 356  368 mm H-piles were pitched into the guides and were driven by
a Delmag D22 hammer.
Guides can be used in conjunction with piling frames for a two-stage driving operation,
which may be required if the piles are too long to be accommodated by the available height
of frame. Guides are used for the first stage of driving, the piles carrying the hammer which
is placed and held by a crane. At this stage the pile is driven to a penetration that brings the
head to the level from which it can be driven by the hammer suspended in the piling frame.
The latter completes the second stage of driving to the final penetration (Figure 3.9).
3.1.4
Piling hammers
The simplest form of piling hammer is the drop hammer, which is guided by lugs or jaws
sliding in the leaders and actuated by the lifting rope. The drop hammer consists of a solid
mass or assemblies of forged steel, the total mass ranging from 1 to 5 tonne. The striking
speed is slower than in the case of single- or double-acting hammers, and when drop ham-
mers are used to drive concrete piles there is a risk of damage to the pile if an excessively
high drop of the hammer is adopted when the driving becomes difficult. There has been a
revival of interest in the simple drop hammer because of its facility to be operated inside a
sound-proofed box, so complying with noise abatement regulations (see Section 3.1.7).
80
Piling equipment and methods
Gate positions
152 × 76 (6" × 3")UC
5258
1524
1676
1676
(5'-6")
(5'-6")
(17'-3")
(5'-0")
2286
2565
(7'-6")
(8'-5")
356×368
(14" ×14½")UB
Bottom gate
Top gate
Figure 3.8 Trestle guides for multiple vertical piles.
Piling equipment and methods
81
Single-acting
hammer
Piling frame
Second-stage
driving completed
Leg guides
Diesel hammer
Ready for driving
First stage driving
complete
Pitching
pile
Trestle
guide
with gates
for 7 piles
Figure 3.9 Driving piles in stages in conjunction with trestle guides.
Drop hammers are not used efficiently when operated from a pontoon-mounted piling frame
working in open waters, since the height of the drop cannot be controlled when the pontoon
is rising and falling on the waves. However, they can be used effectively in sheltered waters.
The American Vulcan hammer, which has been designed to operate within the leaders, is
shown in Figure 3.10.
The single-acting hammer is operated by steam or compressed air, which lifts the ram and
then allows it to fall by gravity. BSP single-acting hammers of the type shown in Figure 3.11
range in mass from 2.5 to 6 tonne with a maximum height of fall of 1.37 m; a solenoid
system can be used to control the drop of the hammer to avoid the operator fatigue of manual
operation. The single-acting hammer is best suited to driving timber or precast concrete
piles, since the drop of each blow of the hammer is limited in height and is individually
controlled by the operator. The single-acting hammer is suitable for driving all types of pile
in stiff to hard clays, where a heavy blow with a small drop is more efficient and less
damaging to the pile than a large number of lighter blows. The steam or air supply for both
single-acting and double-acting hammers should be at least 125% of the nominal consumption
stated by the hammer manufacturer. The Menck MRBS offshore hammers (Figure 3.12)
have masses ranging from 8.6 to 125 tonne with a maximum stroke of 1.75 m. They are fully
automatic with infinitely variable stroke. By adding a belled out section beneath the
hammer, Seacore have developed a rig capable of driving piles up to 4 m diameter into pre-
drilled holes for the ‘monopile’ foundations for offshore wind turbine towers as in
Figure 3.13.
The characteristics of the various types of single-acting hammer are shown in Table 3.1.
The ram of hydraulic hammers is raised by hydraulic fluid under high pressure to a
predetermined height, and then allowed to fall under gravity or is forced down onto the pile
head. In the BSP CX and CG hydraulic hammers (Figure 3.14), a hydraulic actuator is
activated by a solenoid-operated control valve which raises the piston rod. At the required
stroke height the flow of the hydraulic fluid is cut off. Pressures within the actuator then
equalize allowing the ram to decelerate as it approaches the top of its stroke. The hammer
then falls freely under gravity and repositions the piston rod for the next stroke. Using a
remote control panel these hammers can deliver an infinitely variable stroke and blow rate
within the limits stated. BSP also manufacture two double-acting hammers for driving steel
sheet piles and bearing piles with blow rates of 84 blows per minute.
82
Piling equipment and methods
Figure 3.10 Vulcan drop hammer.
571
159
Sling hooks
for packing
Jaws engaging
with leaders
Lifting hole
457
(18")
1016
(40")
(6   )
1
4
"
(22   )
1
2
"
Steam or air supply
Hollow piston rod
Lifting lug
Ram
Guides for
engaging leaders
Figure 3.11 BSP International Foundations Ltd single-acting piling hammer.
Figure 3.12 MRBS air/steam single-acting hammer with stabilizing cage driving 54 inch diameter piles
in legs of offshore jacket platform (courtesy Menck GmbH).
Some free-fall hammers, for example, the Menck MHF series and the BSP CX series,
have the option of additional acceleration by pressurizing the ‘equalizing housing’ above the
piston, thereby increasing the energy by up to 20%.
The characteristics of various makes of hydraulic hammer are listed in Table 3.2. It is
possible that the driving energy of hydraulic hammers may exceed the rated energy and this
must be considered when analysing stresses during driving (see Section 2.2.6). Generally,
these hammers have the advantage of being able to operate underwater, and because there is
no exhaust they can be operated inside a sound-proofed box. Most modern hydraulic ham-
mers can be fitted with electronic instrumentation giving a continuous display of depth, driving
resistance and set. The largest APE hammers are equipped with digital radio GRL velocity
sensing and energy monitoring control system.
84
Piling equipment and methods
Figure 3.13 Driving a 4 m dia monopile foundation for North Hoyle offshore wind farm using a Menck
MHU 500T hammer with large diameter pile sleeve and anvil adapter (courtesy Seacore Ltd).
Underwater hydraulic hammers were developed specially for driving piles in deep water
locations. The Menck MHU double-acting hammer range in Table 3.2 is designed specifically
for underwater work; the S hammer series is for water depth up to 400 m, the T series for 2000 m
and the U series for deep water to 3000 m. The MHU 3000 S with a ram weight of 280 tonne
is the largest piling hammer ever constructed. A nitrogen shock absorber ring protects the hammer
Piling equipment and methods
85
Table 3.1 Characteristics of some single-acting piling hammersa
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Maximum
(kg)
energy per blow
striking rate
(kJ)
(blows/min)
BSP International
3–21⁄2 ton
2540
34
50
Foundations 
2–3 ton
3050
41
50
Limited (UK)
4–4 ton
4060
54
50
1–5 ton
5080
68
50
1–6 ton
6110
82
50
MKT (USA)
MS-350
3500
42
40–50
MS-500
5000
59
40–50
MENCK (Germany)
MRBS 850
8600
129
45
MRBS 1100
11000
170
40
MRBS 1800
17500
263
44
MRBS 3000
30000
450
42
MRBS 5000
50000
750
40
MRBS 8800
88000
1320
36
MRBS 12500
125000
2190
36
Vulcan (USA)
1
2270
20
60
306
2950
26
60
505
2270
34
46
506
2950
44
46
08
3630
35
50
010
4540
44
50
012
5443
53
50
508
3630
54
41
510
4540
68
41
512
5440
81
41
014
6350
57
59
016
7370
66
58
320
9070
81
55
330
13610
122
54
520
9070
135
42
530
13610
203
42
540
18550
277
48
560
28350
424
47
5100
45360
678
48
5110
49900
746
39
5150
68060
1012
46
6300
136100
2440
42
Note
a Note that the information given in Tables 3.1 to 3.6 does not necessarily represent the full range of equipment
by each maker.The makers listed in these tables should be contacted for full details and when making assessments
of performance for particular applications. Because of market changes, some equipment will be obsolescent, but
well-maintained used hammers not in current production may be available.
86
Piling equipment and methods
from rebound forces and shock loads and will largely eliminate a tension wave in the pile (see
Section 7.3). The MHU hammers are designed to operate either as free-riding units mounted on
the pile with a slack lifting line, or to reduce weight on the guides they can be suspended from
the floating crane with a heave compensator to maintain constant tension in the lifting line.
Slender hammers can operate inside the pile or with a follower attached to the pile.
Double-acting (or differential-acting) hammers are steam- or air-operated both on the
upstroke and downstroke, and are designed to impart a rapid succession (up to 300 blows
per minute) of small-stroke blows to the pile. The double-acting hammer exhausts the steam
or air on both the up- and down-strokes. In the case of the differential acting hammer,
however, the cylinder is under equal pressure above and below the piston and is exhausted
only on the upward stroke. The downward force is a combination of the weight of the ram
and the difference in total force above and below the piston, the force being less below the
piston because of the area occupied by the piston rod. These hammers are most effective in
granular soils where they keep the ground ‘live’ and shake the pile into the ground, but they
Figure 3.14 BSP CX110 hydraulic piling hammer on Hitachi crane-mounted leader (courtesy BSP
International Foundations Ltd).
Table 3.2 Characteristics of some hydraulic hammers
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Striking rate at
(kg)
energy per blow
maximum stroke
(kJ)
height (blows/min)
American Piledriving
13
3629
38
40–100
Equipment (APE)a 
14
4990
45
40–80
(USA)
H-5.4MT
5445
34
40–75
H-7.2MT
7350
68
40–75
225U
36287
305
30–60
400U
36287
488
30–72
750U
54431
847
20–40
BSP International
CX40
3000
40
45–100
Foundations Limited 
CX50 
4000
51
45–100
(UK)
CX85
7000
83
40–100
CX110
9000
106
36–100
CG180
12000
180
34–100
CG210
14000
210
32–100
CG240
16000
240
31–100
CG270
18000
270
31–100
CG300
20000
300
29–100
Banut SuperRAM
3000
3000
35
100
(Germany)
4000
4110
47
100
5000
5060
58
100
6000
6075
70
100
6000XL
6110
82
100
8000XL
8010
109
100
10000XL
10020
117
100
12000XL
12025
141
100
Dieseko PVE
3L
3050
36
45
(Netherlands and USA)
4L
4060
48
42
5L
5080
60
40
7L
7110
84
40
10L
10160
120
40
13L
13210
156
35
16
16260
192
35
20
20320
240
32
ICE (Netherlands
75
3401
41
48
and USA)
115
5215
62
45
160
7256
87
45
220
9977
119
45
275
12471
149
45
IHC Hydrohammer
S30
1625
30
65
(Netherlands)
S35
3048
35
60
S70
3556
70
50
S90
4572
90
50
S150
7620
150
44
S200
10160
200
45
S280
13818
280
45
S500
25400
500
45
S600
30480
600
36
S900
45720
900
30
(Table 3.2 continued)
are not so effective in clays. Double-acting hammers have their main use in driving sheet
piles and are not used for bearing piles in preference to diesel hammers. However, unlike the
diesel hammer they can operate underwater, provided that the ram is fully enclosed. Leaders
are usually necessary. The characteristics of various makes are shown in Table 3.3.
Diesel hammers are suitable for all types of ground except soft clays. They have the
advantage of being self-contained without the need for separate power-packs, air compressors
or steam-generators. They work most efficiently when driving into stiff to hard clays, and
with their high striking rate and high energy per blow they are favoured for driving all types
of bearing piles up to about 2.5 m in diameter. The principle of the diesel hammer is that as
the falling ram compresses air in the cylinder, diesel fuel is injected into the cylinder and
this is atomized by the impact of the ram on the concave base. The impact ignites the fuel
88
Piling equipment and methods
Table 3.2 Continued
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Striking rate at
(kg)
energy per blow
maximum stroke
(kJ)
height (blows/min)
S1200
60960
1200
30
S1800
76200
1800
30
S2300
116840
2300
30
SC50b
3353
50
50
SC75b
5791
75
50
SC110b
8026
110
40
SC150b
11176
150
40
SC200b
13818
200
40
Junttanc (Finland)
HHK 4AL
4000
31
40–100
HHK 5AL
5000
39
40–100
HHK 5A
5000
59
40–100
HHK 7A
7000
82
40–100
HHK 9A
9000
106
40–100
HHK 12A
12000
141
40–100
HHK 14A
14000
164
40–100
HHK 18A
18000
212
40–100
HHK 5S
5000
74
30–100
HHK 9S
9000
132
30–100
HHK 14S
14000
206
30–100
HHK 18S
18000
265
30–100
HHK 25S
20000
294
30–100
MENCK (Germany)
MHF3-4
4000
40
50
MHF3-5
5000
50
50
MHF3-6
6000
60
45
MHF3-7
7000
70
45
MHF5-8
8000
80
45
MHF5-10
10000
100
40
MHF5-12
12000
120
40
MHF10-15
15000
150
45
MHF10-20
20000
200
40
Notes
a Free-fall hammer (many hammers now have assisted acceleration).
b SC series more suited to driving concrete piles.
c AL series hammers: 0.8 m stroke, A hammers: 1.2 m stroke, S hammers: 1.5 m stroke.
Piling equipment and methods
89
and the resulting explosion imparts an additional ‘kick’ to the pile, which is already moving
downwards under the blow of the ram. Thus the blow is sustained and imparts energy over
a longer period than the simple blow of a drop or single-acting hammer. The ram rebounds
after the explosion and scavenges the burnt gases from the cylinder. The well-known
Delmag series of hammers (Figure 3.15) ranges from the D6 with a ram mass of 600 kg for
driving piles up to 2000 kg to the 20 tonne ram of the D200 with a drop height of 3.4 m for
piles up to 250 tonne. ICE and MKT manufacture double-acting diesel hammers with a
striking rate of 70 to 90 blows per minute compared with the rates of 40 to 60 blows per
minute attained by the comparable makes of single-acting diesel hammers. The characteristics
of various makes of diesel hammer are shown in Table 3.4.
Table 3.3 Characteristics of some double-acting and differential-acting piling hammers
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Maximum
(kg)
energy per blow
striking rate
(kJ)
(blows/min)
BSP International
600Na
227
4
250
Foundations Limited (UK)
700Na
385
7
225
SL20da
1500
20
84
SL30da
2500
30
84
Dawson Construction 
HPH1200
1040
12
80–120
Plant (UK)
HPH1800
1500
19
80–120
HPH2400
1900
24
80–120
HPH4500
3500
45
80–120
HPH6500
4650
65
80–120
HPH10K
6500
100
80–120
MKTa (USA)
9B3
725
12
145
10B3
1360
18
105
11B3
2270
25
95
MENCK (Germany)
MHU220Sb
11500
230
38
MHU300S
16000
305
40
MHU440S
24000
440
38
MHU550S
30000
550
38
MHU660S
36000
660
32
MHU800S
45000
800
38
MHU1000S
57600
1000
38
MHU1700S
94000
1730
35
MHU2100S
116500
2140
32
MHU3000S
168000
3050
32
Vulcana, c (USA)
30C
1360
10
133
50C
2270
21
117
65C
2950
27
117
80C
3630
33
109
85C
3670
35
111
100C
4340
44
103
140C
6350
49
101
Notes
a Air/steam operated.
b S denotes use in shallow water or onshore use;T version is for deep water.
c Differential acting.
90
Piling equipment and methods
A difficulty arises in using the diesel hammer in soft clays or weak fills, since the pile
yields to the blow of the ram and the impact is not always sufficient to atomize the fuel.
Berminghammer have developed a high injection pressure, ‘smokeless’ diesel hammer
which virtually eliminates the problem. The more resistant the ground, the higher the
rebound of the ram, and hence the higher the energy of the blow. This can cause damage to
precast concrete piles when driving through weak rocks containing strong bands. Although
the height of drop can be controlled by adjusting, by a rope-operated lever, the amount of
fuel injected, this control cannot cope with random hard layers met at varying depths, partic-
ularly when these are unexpected. The diesel hammer operates automatically and continu-
ously at a given height of drop unless the lever is adjusted, whereas with the single-acting
hammer every blow is controlled in height.
Figure 3.15 Delmag D30–20 diesel hammer on American style leaders with helmet for driving steel
H-piles.
Table 3.4 Characteristics of some diesel piling hammers
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Maximum
(kg)
energy per blow
striking rate
(kJ)
(blows/min)
Berminghammer
B2005
900
31
36–60
(Canada)
B23a
1270
31
82
B3505
1800
62
36–60
B4005
2300
78
36–60
B4505
3000
103
36–60
B5005
3400
118
36–60
B5505
4182
146
36–60
B6005
6000
212
35–60
B6505
7990
273
36–60
B6505C
10000
238
35–60
BSP International
DE30C
1360
36
42–54
Foundations 
DE50C
2260
60
42–54
Limited (UK)
Delmag (Germany)
D6-32
600
19
38–52
D8–32
800
27
36–52
D12-42
1280
46
35–52
D16-32
1600
54
36–52
D19-42
1820
66
35–42
D21-42
2100
75
35–50
D25-32
2500
90
35–52
D30-32
3000
103
36–52
D36-32
3600
123
36–53
D46-32
4600
166
35–53
D62-22
6200
224
35–50
D100-13
10000
360
35–45
D150-42
15000
512
36–52
D200-42
20000
683
36–52
MKT (USA)
DE33/30/20C
1810
54
40–50
DE-70/50C
3180
95
40–50
DE-150/110
6800
203
40–50
DA-35Ca
1270
32
78–82
DA-45a
1810
46
82
DA-55Ca
2270
57
78–82
ICE International
WICE 8
800
23.9
38–52
Construction Equipment
WICE 30
3000
94.8
37–52
(Netherlands and USA)
WICE 80
8000
266.8
36–45
WICE 100
10000
333.5
36–45
WICE 128
12500
426.5
36–45
WICE 160
16000
550.0
36–45
WICE 220
22000
733.0
36–45
32S
1364
43.0
41–60
60S
3175
98.9
41–59
100S
4535
162.7
38–55
120S
5440
202.0
38–55
205S
9072
284.7
40–55
I-12
1280
41.0
37–52
I-30
3000
102.3
35–53
I-46
4600
146.0
36–53
(Table 3.4 continued)
92
Piling equipment and methods
Because of difficulties in achieving a consistent energy of blow, due to temperature and
ground resistance effects, the diesel hammer is being supplanted to a large extent by the
hydraulic hammer, particularly when being used in conjunction with the pile-driving
analyser (see Section 7.3) to determine driving stresses.
3.1.5
Piling vibrators
Vibrators consisting of pairs of exciters rotating in opposite directions can be mounted on piles
when their combined weight and vibrating energy cause the pile to sink down into the soil
(Figure 3.16). The two types of vibratory hammers, either mounted on leaders or as free hanging
units, operate most effectively when driving small displacement piles (H-sections or open-ended
steel tubes) into loose to medium-dense granular soils. Ideally a pile should be vibrated at or near
to its natural frequency, which requires 100 Hz for a 25 m steel pile. Thus only the high-frequency
vibrators are really effective for long piles,(3.2) and while resonant pile driving equipment is costly,
high penetration rates are possible. Most types of vibrators operate in the low-frequency to
medium-frequency range (i.e. 10 to 39 Hz). Vibrators mounted on the dipper arm of hydraulic
excavators have high power to weight ratios and are useful for driving short lengths of small
section tubular and H-piles, limited by the headroom under the bucket, say 6 m at best.
Rodger and Littlejohn(3.3) proposed vibration parameters ranging from 10 to 40 Hz at
amplitudes of 1 to 10 mm for granular soil when using vibrators to drive piles with low point
resistance, to 4 to 16 Hz at 9 to 20 mm amplitude for high point resistance piles. In fine soils
frequencies in excess of 40 Hz and high amplitude will be needed but care must be exer-
cised because of the potential changes in soil properties such as liquefaction and thixotropic
transformation. Predicting the performance of vibratory pile driving is still not very reliable.
Where specific test data are not available for the vibrator installing bearing piles or the pile
is not bearing on a consistent rockhead, it may be advisable (as is common in the USA) to
use the vibrator to install the pile to within 3 m of expected penetration and then use an
impact hammer to drive to the bearing layer. Vibrators are not very effective in firm clays
and cannot drive piles deeply into stiff clays. They are frequently used in bored pile
construction for sealing the borehole casing into clay after pre-drilling through the granular
overburden soils. After concreting the pile the vibrators are used to extract the casings and
are quite efficient for this purpose in all soil types (see Section 3.4).
Vibrators have an advantage over impact hammers in that the noise and shock wave of the
hammer striking the anvil is eliminated. They also cause less damage to the pile and have a
Table 3.4 Continued
Maker
Type
Mass of ram
Maximum
Maximum
(kg)
energy per blow
striking rate
(kJ)
(blows/min)
I-62
6623
223.7
35–50
I-80
8030
288.0
35–45
I-100
10000
360.0
35–45
422a
1810
30.5
76–82
520a
2300
40.6
80–84
640a
2722
54.2
74–77
Note
a Double acting.
Piling equipment and methods
93
very fast rate of penetration in favourable ground. It is claimed that a rate of driving
averaging 18 m per minute may be achieved in loose to medium-dense granular soils. If the
electric generator used to power the exciter motors is mounted in a well-designed acoustic
chamber, the vibrators can be used in urban areas with far lower risk of complaints arising
due to noise and shock-wave disturbance than when impact hammers are used. However,
standard vibrators with constant eccentric moment have a critical frequency during starting
and stopping as they change to and from the operating frequency, which may resonate with
the natural frequency of nearby buildings. This can cause a short period of high amplitude
vibrations which are quite alarming to the occupants. The development of high frequency
(greater than 30 Hz), variable moment vibrators with automatic adjustment has virtually
eliminated this start-up and shut-down ‘shaking zone’, reducing peak particle velocity to
levels as low as 3 mm/s at 2 m (see Section 3.1.7). These are not as powerful as the standard
units. Although there are limitations in respect of the soil types in which they can be used
and notwithstanding the complexity of the machinery and its maintenance, the new range of
resonant-free vibrators will generate greater driving force and displacement amplitude to
overcome the toe resistance when driving longer and larger displacement piles(3.4).
Depth vibrators or ‘poker’ vibrators are used extensively for improving the bearing capacity
and settlement characteristics of weak soils by vibro-compaction or vibro-replacement tech-
niques. For vibro-compaction (or ‘flotation’) the vibrator is either flushed to the required
depth using water jets or vibrated dry with air jets in partially saturated soil. As the poker is
withdrawn the horizontal vibrations cause a compact cylinder of soil to be formed at depth
as the soil particles are rearranged during densification, producing a depression at the surface
which has to be filled with granular material during the process. In the vibro-displacement
Figure 3.16 Driving a pile casing with a PVE 200 m free hanging vibrator.
Table 3.5 Characteristics of some pile-driving and extracting vibrators
Maker
Type
Frequency
Mass
Minimum
range
(kg)
power supply
(Hz)
(KVA)
ABI (Germany)
MRZV 400
45
1800
160
MRZV 500
46
1900
160
MRZV 600
44
2300
190
MRZV 800S
41
2750
290
MRZV 925S
38
3800
330
MRZV 600VS
44
1980
220
MRZV 800VS
41
2550
290
MRZV 925/16VS
38
2710
330
MRZV 925/18VS
36
2730
360
MRZV 1000/20VS
35
2750
400
American Piledriving Equipment
50
0–30
2630
194
(APE) (USA)
150
0–30
3084
261
200
0–28
6167
470
120V
6–33
2836
261
170V
6–38
2900
339
250V
6–33
4309
470
400B
6–23
7260
745
600B
6–23
10890
745
Bauer (Germany)
MR60V
0–24
179
MR70V
0–24
209
MR90V
0–24
336
MR100V
0–24
370
Dawson Construction 
EMV70
50
410
12
Plant Ltda (UK)
EMV300
40
625
52
EMV400
41
910
80
EMV525
42
1150
120
Dieseko PVE (Netherlands
23M
27
2300
234
and USA)
38M
28
3400
392
52M
28
4000
564
110M
22
7000
784
200M
23
19000
1130
1420
33
1210
194
2315
38
1880
234
2520
33
3050
290
2310VM
38
1450
290
2332VM
38
4300
397
2335VM
38
4400
784
50VM
33
4750
564
38VMRb
35
11500
20VMRb
35
6000
ICE – International Construction
416
27
2350
193
Equipment (USA and
3220
33
3850
278
Netherlands)
815C
26
3950
346
1412C
23
6400
470
250NF
24
6415
657
625
42
685
113
1223
38
1400
184
Piling equipment and methods
95
Table 3.5 Continued
Maker
Type
Frequency
Mass
Minimum
range
(kg)
power supply
(Hz)
(KVA)
1423C
38
1700
209
423
38
3750
320
14RF
38
2420
213
23RF
38
3900
287
28RF
38
3800
417
36RF
33
3900
431
64RF
32
5000
663
44-50
27
5487
429
1412Btandem
22
13900
1193
P.T.C. (France)
7H5
33
650
50
15H1
28
1250
108
25H1A
29
2200
153
30H1A
28
4120
193
50HD1
25
3100
255
60HD
28
4900
305
75HD
25
11800
410
100HD
23
8200
451
175HD
23
13000
611
265HD
23
19500
988
7HF3
38
900
92
15HF3
38
1300
210
30HF3
38
2400
292
46HF3
38
7400
447
10HFV
38
1500
95
15HFVS
38
2210
200
23HFV
38
3610
222
34HFV
38
5000
405
60HFV
38
6360
425
60HFVS
38
6360
662
Soilmec (Italy)
VS-4
30
1138
135
VS-8
30
1901
277
VS-16
30
3500
554
Notes
V Generally denotes variable moment vibrator.
a Mounted on excavator dipper arm.
b Ring vibrators with variable moment (total weight).
technique the vibrator forms a hole by compacting the soil to the required depth which is
filled with graded stone and then compacted in lifts by the vibrator to form ‘stone columns’.
This process has been extended whereby concrete is injected into the hole at the tip of the
poker and vibrated as it is withdrawn to provide a form of ‘pile’ (or ‘vibro-concrete column’)
capable of carrying light loading when taken down to a competent stratum.
Types of vibrators suitable for driving bearing piles are shown in Table 3.5.
3.1.6
Selection of type of piling hammer
The selection of the most suitable type of hammer for a given task involves a consideration
of the type and weight of the pile, and the characteristics of the ground into which the pile
96
Piling equipment and methods
is to be driven. Single and double-acting hammers, hydraulic and diesel hammers are
effective in all soil types and the selection of a particular hammer for the given duty is based
on a consideration of the value of energy per blow, the striking rate and the fuel consumption.
The noise of the pile-driving operation will also be an important consideration in the
selection of a hammer. This aspect is discussed in Section 3.1.7.
A knowledge of the value of energy per blow is required to assess whether or not a hammer
of a given weight can drive the pile to the required penetration or ultimate resistance without
the need for sustained hard driving or risk of damage to the pile or hammer. The safety of
operatives can be endangered if sustained hard driving causes pieces of spalled concrete or
mechanical components to fall from a height. The employment of a dynamic pile-driving
formula can, with experience, provide a rough assessment of the ability of a hammer with a
known rated energy value to achieve a specific ultimate pile resistance to the time of driving
(see Sections 1.4 and 7.3 for a further discussion of these formulae). However, the manufac-
turer’s rated energy per blow is not always a reliable indication of the value to be used in a
dynamic pile equation. The efficiency of a hammer can be very low if it is poorly maintained
or improperly operated. Also the energy delivered by the hammer to the pile depends on the
accuracy of alignment of the hammer, the type of packing inserted between the pile and the
hammer, and on the condition of the packing material after a period of driving.
The increasing use of instruments to measure the stresses and acceleration at the head of
a pile as it is being driven (see Section 7.3) has provided data on the efficiencies of a wide
range of hammer types. Some typical values are as shown in the following table:
Hammer type
Efficiency of hammer/cushioning system (%)
Hydraulic
65–90
Drop (winch-operated)
40–55
Diesel
20–80
The wide range in values for the diesel hammer reflects the sensitivity to the type of soil
or rock into which the pile is driven and the need for good maintenance. Present-day practice
is to base the selection of the hammer on a driveability analysis using the Smith wave
equation (see Section 7.3) to produce curves of the type shown in Figure 3.17. They show
the results of an investigation into the feasibility of using a D100 diesel hammer to drive 2.0
m OD by 20 mm wall thickness steel tube piles through soft clay into a dense sandy gravel.
The piles were to be driven with closed ends to overcome a calculated soil resistance of 17.5
MN at the final penetration depth. Figure 3.17 shows that a driving resistance (blow count)
of 200 blows/250 mm penetration would be required at this stage. This represents a rather
severe condition. A blow count of 120 to 150 blows/250 mm is regarded as a practical limit
for sustained driving of diesel or hydraulic hammers. However, 200 blows/250 mm would
be acceptable for fairly short periods of driving. Commercial computer programs based on
wave equation models enable the piling engineer to predict driveability, optimize the
selection of hammer, select energy level which will not damage the pile, and ensure that the
correct dolly and adapters are used.
The American Petroleum Institute(3.5) states that if no other provisions are included in the
construction contract, pile-driving refusal is defined as the point where the driving resistance
exceeds either 300 blows per foot (248 blows/250 mm) for 1.5 consecutive metres or 800
blows per foot (662 blows/250 mm) for 0.3 m penetration. Figure 3.17 also shows the driving
Piling equipment and methods
97
resistance curves for a 25 tonne drop hammer with drops of 1.5 or 2.0 m to be used as a standby
to achieve the required soil resistance if this could not be obtained by the diesel hammer.
Vibratory hammers are very effective in loose to medium-dense granular soils and the
high rate of penetration of low-displacement steel piles driven by vibratory hammers may
favour their selection for these conditions.
3.1.7
Noise and vibration control in pile driving
The control of noise in construction sites is a matter of increasing importance in the present
drive to improve environmental conditions, and the Noise at Work Regulations 2005 implement
the latest European Directive for the protection of workers from the risks related to the expo-
sure to noise. The requirements for employers to make an assessment of noise levels and take
action to eliminate and control noise are triggered by three action levels: daily or weekly
(5 days of 8 hours) personal noise exposures of 80 dBA as the lower level, 85 dBA as the upper
level and a peak (single loud noise) of between 135 and 137 dBA. The exposure limit values
are 87 and 140 dBA at peak; the method of calculating the various exposure levels is defined
in the Regulations. Employers are required to reduce noise at source to a minimum by using
appropriate working methods and equipment, but if noise levels cannot be controlled below the
upper action level by taking reasonably practicable measures, hearing protectors which eliminate
the risk must be provided. As these Regulations do not apply to control of noise to prevent
annoyance or hazards to the health of the general public outside the place of work, the
Environment Protection Act (EPA) and Control of Pollution Act provide the general statutory
requirements to control noise and vibrations which are considered to be a legal nuisance.
100
200
300
400
500
600
Driving resistance (blows/250 mm penetration)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Soil resistance to driving (MN)
D.100 Diesel hammer
Required ult. soil resistance
25 tonne drop hammer
2.0 m drop
1.5 m drop
Figure 3.17 Pile driveability curves.
98
Piling equipment and methods
Under the BS Code of Practice 5228 recommendations on noise exposure levels, no person
(employee or the general public) should be exposed to a noise level of more than 85 dBA for
eight hours a day in a five-day week (now superseded by the 2005 Regulations). It is
recognized that the noise from many pile-driving methods will exceed 85 dBA but as the
operations are not continuous through the working day, the observed noise level (or ‘basic
sound power level’as given in the Code) can be converted to an ‘equivalent continuous sound
pressure level’ that takes into account the duration of the noise emission, distance from the
source, screening and reflection.(3.6) Methods for predicting the impact of noise and the pro-
cedures for obtaining consent from the local authority under section 61 of the Control of
Pollution Act for proposed noise control measures are detailed in BS 5228. EC3-5 does not
now include recommendations on noise and vibration levels from piling.
Local authorities are empowered under the EPA and Control of Pollution Act to set their
own standards of judging noise nuisance, and maximum day-time and night-time noise lev-
els of 70 and 60 dBA respectively are frequently stipulated for urban areas (and as low as
40 dBA in sensitive areas). The higher of these values can be compared with field obser-
vations of pile-driving noise obtained from a number of sources and shown in Figure 3.18.
Tables in Part 1 of BS 5228 also provide sound level data on various piling methods. Other
information has shown that the attenuation of pile-driving impact noise to the 70 dBA level
from the noisiest of the hammers requires a distance of more than 1000 m from the sound.
Thus if a maximum sound level of 70 dBA is stipulated by a local authority, it is necessary
to adopt some means of controlling noise emission in order to protect the general public
whose dwellings or place of work are closer to the construction operations(3.7). One method
of doing this is to enclose the hammer and pile with a sound absorbent box. The Hoesch
noise-abatement tower is formed of sandwiched steel plate/plastics construction and
5
10
15
20
25
30
Distance from source (m)
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Noise level dB(A)
Diesel hammer
Double-acting air
hammer (unsilenced)
Sound insulated
hydraulic hammer
Semi-hush piling
Hush piling
Figure 3.18 Typical noise levels for various pile-driving techniques.
Piling equipment and methods
99
consists of an outer 2 mm steel plate, a plastics layer 0.4 mm thick, and an inner 1.5 mm
steel plate. The plates making up the box are jointed by a rubber insertion material, and the
lid incorporates a sound-proofed air exhaust. A hinged door allows the pile and hammer to
be pitched into the tower. The Hoesch tower reduced the noise from a Delmag D12 diesel
hammer driving a sheet pile from 118 to 119 dBA at 7 m to 87 to 90 dBA at the same
distance.
A tower of similar construction is shown in Figure 3.19. Shelbourne(3.8) described the use
of the tower for driving 24 m steel H-piles by means of a 3-tonne drop hammer. Sound level
measurements of 60 to 70 dBA were recorded 15 m from the tower, compared with values
of 100 dBA before the noise-abatement system was adopted.
Surrounding only the lower part of the hammer by a shroud is not particularly effective.
A reduction of only 3 to 4 dBA was obtained by shrouding a Delmag D22 hammer in this
way. As noted in Section 3.1.4, the hydraulic hammer is a suitable type for enclosing in a
sound-proof shroud.
Crane-mounted augers using kelly bars for bored piles (see Section 3.3.4) and large CFA
rigs can produce sound power levels as high as 110 dBA, and are usually operated between
85% and 100% of the shift. This results in equivalent continuous sound pressure levels in
excess of 80 dBA at 10 m. Acoustic enclosures are essential for the engines and power
packs. The use of vibratory hammers for steel bearing piles has increased, but basic sound
levels can still be around 120 dBA and even with conversions to equivalent sound, noise-
abatement measures are necessary.
Figure 3.19 Noise-abatement tower used for ‘Hush piling’ system.
There is little evidence to show that ground-borne vibrations cause structural damage to
buildings(3.9). However, if there is concern then steps must be taken to survey buildings and
measure vibrations induced by construction activity. BS 7385 describes methods of assessing
vibrations in buildings and gives guidance on potential damage levels. The recommended
thresholds in BS 5228 to avoid non-structural (‘cosmetic’) damage in residential property are
peak particle velocity (ppv) of 10 mm/s for intermittent vibration and 5 mm/s for continuous
vibrations at frequencies between 10 and 50 Hz. For heavy and stiff buildings the thresholds
are 30 and 15 mm/s respectively. Protected buildings, buildings with existing defects and
statutory services undertakings will be subject to specific lower limits. The human response
to vibration should also be considered. Transmission of vibrations during piling depends on
the strata, size, and depth of pile and hammer type, and predictions of the resulting ground
frequency and ppv at distance from the source are difficult.
‘Press-in’ drivers such as the Dawson ‘push–pull’ unit with 2078 kN pressing force are
becoming more common particularly for sheet piling, but many of the units can be adapted
for installing box-type bearing piles and H-pile groups, particularly in clays. The advantages
of these powerful, high pressure hydraulic drivers using 2 to 4 cylinders are the low noise
levels (around 60 dBA) and the speed and vibration-less installation and extraction of piles.
The drivers can be suspended from a crane or mounted on a hydraulic crawler rig with
more than 20 tonnes of pulldown available on a rigid leader such as the Liebherr piling rig
to assist the installation; hanging leaders are not suitable. The Giken press-in rig operates
without a separate fixed leader relying on reaction from adjacent installed sheet piles; a
service crane is needed to pitch the piles. In addition, in hard ground this unit can pre-drill
a hole or apply water jets to assist in sheet piling.
3.1.8
Pile helmets and driving caps
When driving precast concrete piles, a helmet is placed over the pile head for the purpose
of retaining in position a resilient ‘dolly’ or cap block that cushions the blow of the hammer
and thus minimizes damage to the pile head. The dolly is placed in a recess in the top of the
helmet (Figure 3.20). For easy driving conditions it can consist of an elm block, but for
rather harder driving a block of hardwood such as oak, greenheart, pynkado or hickory is set
in the helmet end-on to the grain. Plastic dollies are the most serviceable for hard-driving
concrete or steel piles. The Micarta dolly consists of a phenolic resin reinforced with lami-
nations of cross-grain cotton canvas. Layers of these laminates can be bonded to aluminium
plates, or placed between a top steel plate and a bottom hardwood pad. The helmet should
not fit tightly onto the pile head but should allow for some rotation of the pile, which may
occur as it strikes obstructions in the ground.
Packing is placed between the helmet and the pile head to cushion further the blow on the
concrete. This packing can consist of coiled rope, hessian packing, thin timber sheets,
coconut matting, wallboards or asbestos fibre. The last-mentioned material has the advan-
tage that it does not char when subjected to heat generated by prolonged driving. The packing
must be inspected at intervals and renewed if it becomes heavily compressed and loses its
resilience. Softwood packing should be renewed for every pile driven.
Williams(3.10) has described severe conditions for driving precast concrete piles at
Uskmouth Power Station. He states that plastic dollies were used up to 40 times, compared
with elm blocks which only lasted for a very few piles. The packing consisted of up to 125 mm
of sawdust in jute bags, covered with two dry cement sacks placed at right-angles to each other
100
Piling equipment and methods
Piling equipment and methods
101
Precast concrete pile
6 layers of 25 mm (1")
hardwood strips
as packing
Helmet
Lifting lugs
M.S. plate
Plastics
Hardwood
Dolly
Figure 3.20 Dolly and helmet for precast concrete pile.
over the pile head. More recently, a thick cushion block of softwood, further softened by
soaking, has been used for each pile to avoid damage when driving prestressed concrete piles.
Driving caps are used for the heads of steel piles but their function is more to protect the
hammer from damage than to protect the pile. The undersides of the caps for driving box or
H-section piles have projecting lugs to receive the head of the pile. Those for driving steel
tubular piles (Figure 3.21) have multiple projections that are designed to fit piles over a
range of diameters. They include jaws to engage the mating hammers.
Plastic dollies of the Micarta type have a long life when driving steel piles to a deep
penetration into weak rocks or soils containing cemented layers. However, for economy
contractors often cushion the pile heads with scrap wire rope in the form of coils or in short
pieces laid cross-wise in two layers. These are replaced frequently as resilience is lost after
a period of sustained driving. If dollies have to be changed while driving a pile, it should be
noted that the blow count could change significantly.
3.1.9
Jetting piles
Water jets can be used to displace granular soils from beneath the toe of a pile. The pile
then sinks down into the hole formed by the jetting, so achieving penetration without the use
of a hammer. Jetting is a useful means of achieving deep penetration into a sandy soil in
conditions where driving a pile over the full penetration depth could severely damage it.
Jetting is ineffective in firm to stiff clays, however, and when used in granular soils
containing large gravel and cobbles the large particles cannot be lifted by the wash water.
Nevertheless, the sand and smaller gravel are washed out and penetration over a limited
depth can be achieved by a combination of jetting and hammering. Air can be used for
jetting instead of water, and bentonite slurry can be also used if the resulting reduced shaft
friction is acceptable.
102
Piling equipment and methods
For jetting piles in clean granular soils a central jetting pipe is the most effective method,
as this helps to prevent the pile from deviating off line. A 25 to 50 mm nozzle should be used
with a 50 to 75 mm pipe (Figure 3.22). The quantity of water required for jetting a pile of
250 to 350 mm in size ranges from 15 to 60 l/s for fine sands through to sandy gravels.
A pressure at the pump of at least 5 bars is required. The central jetting pipe is connected to
the pump by carrying it through the side of the pile near its head. This allows the pile to be
driven down to a ‘set’ on to rock or some other bearing stratum immediately after shutting
down the jetting pump.
A central jetting pipe is liable to blockage when driving through sandy soils layered with
clays, and the blockage cannot be cleared without pulling out the pile. A blockage can result
in pipe bursting if high jetting pressures are used. An independent jetting pipe worked down
outside the pile can be used instead of a central pipe, but the time spent in rigging the pipe
and extracting it can cause such delays to pile driving as to be hardly worth the trouble
involved. Open-ended steel tubular piles and box piles can be jetted by an independent pipe
worked down the centre of the pile, and H-piles can be similarly jetted by a pipe operated
between the flanges. Large-diameter tubular piles can have a ring of peripheral jetting pipes,
but the resulting pile fabrication costs are high. Gerwick(3.11) has described the system for
jetting 4 m diameter tubular steel piles for a marine terminal at Cook Inlet, Alaska. Sixteen
100 mm pipes were installed around the inner periphery of the pile. The nozzles were cut
away at each side to direct the flow to the pile tip. Gerwick recommends that jetting nozzles
Lifting lugs
Jaws to mate with
hammer and
leaders
Recess for
cushion block
Steps to enlarge
steel tubular piles
Figure 3.21 Vulcan driving cap for steel tubular pile.
Piling equipment and methods
103
should terminate about 150 mm above the pile tip. He gives the following typical requirements
for jetting large diameter piles:
Jet pipe diameter
—
40 mm
Pressure
—
20 bar (at pump)
Volume
—
13 l/s per jet pipe
The large volume of water used in jetting can cause problems by undermining the pil-
ing rig or adjacent foundations as it escapes towards the surface. It can also cause a loss
of shaft friction in adjacent piles in a group. Where shaft friction must be developed in a
granular soil the jetting should be stopped when the pile has reached a level of about 1 m
above the final penetration depth, the remaining penetration then being achieved by
hammering the pile down. The jetting method is best suited to piles taken down through
a granular overburden to end-bearing on rock or some other material resistant to erosion
by wash water.
Water jetting is also used in conjunction with press-in and vibratory piling techniques
to assist penetration of sheet piles in dense granular soil. A lance is fitted inside the pile
pan and both are driven simultaneously into the ground. On reaching the required depth
the lance is removed for reuse. Low injection rates are used at high pressure (5 l/s at
150 bar).
Standard
elbow bend
Detachable
screwed nozzle
Figure 3.22 Centrally placed jetting pipe.
104
Piling equipment and methods
3.2
Equipment for installing driven and cast-in-place piles
The rigs used to install driven and cast-in-place piles are similar in most respects to the types
described in Sections 3.1.1 to 3.1.3 but the firms who install proprietary types of pile usu-
ally make modifications to the rigs to suit their particular systems. The piling tubes are of
heavy section, designed to be driven from the top by drop, single-acting, or diesel hammers,
but the original Franki piles (Figure 3.23 and Section 2.3.2) are driven by an internal drop
hammer. The leaders of the piling frames are often adapted to accommodate guides for a
concreting skip (Figure 3.24).
Steel cased piles designed to be filled with concrete are driven more effectively by a hammer
operating on the top, than by an internal drop hammer acting on a plug of concrete at the base.
Figure 3.23 Franki pile-driving rig.
Figure 3.24 Discharging concrete into the driving tube of a withdrawable tube pile. Concreting skip
travelling on pile frame leaders.
This is because a hammer blow acting on top of the pile causes the tube to expand and push
out the soil at the instant of striking, followed by a contraction of the tube. This frees the
tube from some of the shaft friction as it moves downward under the momentum of the
hammer. The flexure of the pile acting as a long strut also releases the friction at the moment
of impact. However, when using an internal drop hammer, tension is induced in the upper
part of the pile and the diameter contracts, followed by an expansion of the soil and an
increase in friction as the pile moves downwards. Flexure along the piling tube does not
occur when the hammer blow is at the base, and thus there is no reduction in friction from
this cause. Tension caused by driving from the bottom can cause the circumferential cracking
of reinforced concrete and thin-wall steel tubular piles.
Top driving has another advantage in allowing the pile to be driven with an open end, thus
greatly reducing the end-bearing resistance during driving, but the soil plug will have to be
drilled out if the concrete pile is to be cast in place as the tube is withdrawn. The bottom-driven
pile demands a solid plug at the pile base at all stages, but produces a dry open shaft for con-
creting. In easy driving conditions bottom driving will give economy in the required thickness
of the steel and considerable reduction in noise compared with top driving. For example,
Cementation Foundations Skanska installed 508 mm diameter bottom-driven thin wall (6 mm)
steel piles up to 15 m long in Cardiff Bay in preference to thicker-walled, top-driven, cased
piles to reduce disturbance to residents. A 4 tonne drop hammer was used to drive the bottom
plug to found in Mercia Mudstone; concreting was direct from the mixer truck or by skip.
Great care is necessary to avoid bursting of the tube by impact on the concrete when
bottom driving through dense granular soil layers or into weak rocks containing bands of
stronger rock. The concrete forming the plug should have a compacted height of not less
than 2.5 times the pile diameter. In calculating the quantity of concrete required, allowance
should be made for a volume reduction of 20% to 25% of the uncompacted height. The 1:2:4
concrete should be very dry with a water/cement ratio not exceeding 0.25 by weight. A hard
aggregate with a maximum size of 25 mm should be used.
At least 10 initial blows should be given with hammer drops not exceeding 300 mm then
increasing gradually. The maximum height of drop should never exceed the maximum
specified for the final set which is usually between 1.2 and 1.8 m. Driving on a plug should
not exceed a period of 11⁄2 hours. After this time, fresh concrete should be added to a height
of not less than the pile diameter and driving continued for a period of not more than 11⁄2 hours
before a further renewal. For prolonged hard driving it may be necessary to renew the plug
every three-quarters of an hour.
3.3
Equipment for installing bored and 
cast-in-place piles
3.3.1
Power augers
Power-driven rotary auger drills are suitable for installing bored piles in clay soils. A wide
range of machines is available using drilling buckets, plate and spiral augers, and continuous
flight augers, mounted on trucks, cranes, and crawlers to bore open holes. The range of
diameters and depths possible is considerable, from 300 to over 5000 mm and down to 100 m.
Hydraulic power is generally used to drive either a rotary table, a rotating kelly drive on a
mast or a top-drive rotary head; some tables are mechanically operated through gearing.
Most units have additional pulldown or crowd capability. The soil is removed from spiral
106
Piling equipment and methods
Piling equipment and methods
107
plate augers by spinning them after withdrawal from the hole and from buckets either by
spinning or through a single or double bottom opening. It is an EU mandatory safety
requirement that spoil from an auger should be removed at the lowest possible level during
extraction to ensure that debris from the flights cannot fall onto personnel or damage
machinery and to avoid rig instability. Hydraulically operated cleaners which can be rapidly
adjusted to suit CFA diameters from 400 to 2000 mm are available.
The Calweld drilling machines comprise lorry-mounted bucket drills, with either hydraulic
or mechanical drives, crane attachments and plate augers. The lorry-mounted hydraulic
bucket drills range in size from the 42 LH with a 914 mm diameter bucket capable of drilling
to about 29 m with a triple telescoping kelly or to 60 m with extensions, to the 5200 LH capa-
ble of operating a 3650 mm bucket and reaming gear to drill shafts to depths up to 52 m with
a triple telescoping kelly. The mechanical drive models, 150C to 250C, have capabilities
ranging from 914 mm diameter at 21 m depth to 3350 mm at 26 m. The ADL and ADM auger
rigs are also lorry-mounted with rigid rotary tables producing 88 kNm torque for drilling
1800 mm diameter holes to 30 m using double telescoping kellys. Calweld crane attachment
drills range in size from the 125 CH providing 169 kNm torque to the 400 CH 540 kNm
torque all with large opening (686 mm) rotary tables. These rigs can operate with square or
round quadruple kellys 21 m long and have standard bridge frames up to 5.18 m drilling
radius. Watson produce drills for mounting on trucks, crawlers and as crane attachments
(Figures 3.25 and 3.26) capable of producing shafts up to 3650 mm diameter to depths of 41 m
also using quadruple kellys. The Casagrande RM21 mechanical rotary table crane attachment
can drill a maximum diameter of 2500 mm to a depth of 82 m using maximum torque of
220 kNm. The Soilmec RT3 and R25 rigs are crane-mounted, mechanical and hydraulic
Figure 3.25 Watson 5000 crane attachment power auger on elevated platform on a 40 tonne
crane with 200 mm telescopic kelly for installing 2440 mm casings.
108
Piling equipment and methods
drives respectively; maximum depth with mechanical drive is 102 m at 2500 mm diameter
using maximum torque of 226 kNm. Soilmec truck-mounted rigs produce 100 kNm torque
for drilling to 43 m at 1800 mm diameter.
Bauer has developed a powerful bucket auger unit (the ‘Flydrill System’) which integrates
the hydraulic power packs and the rotary drive on one platform for mounting on top of a
partially driven tubular pile. The rotary drive produces a torque of 462 kNm at 320 bar and
two hydraulic crowd cylinders provide a pulldown of 40 tonne. The clamping device can
exert a total force of 90 tonne to resist the torque and apply the pulldown. The system oper-
ates a triple telescope kelly with 3 and 4.4 m diameter buckets and was used for cleaning out
and reaming below 4.75 m diameter tubular monopile foundations to allow driving to be
completed to a depth of 61 m at the offshore wind farm in the Irish Sea off Barrow in
Furness (Figure 3.27).
The range and capabilities of crawler-mounted hydraulic rotary piling rigs have increased
significantly in recent years. The rigs in Table 3.6 are usually capable of installing CFA and
rotary displacement piles as well as standard bored piles, but the height of the mast and
stroke available may limit the depth achievable, hence the major manufacturers produce
special long stroke rigs for CFA piles up to 34 m deep. For bored piles many rigs can accom-
modate casing oscillators and most have rams or winches to provide additional crowd and
extraction forces, requiring robust masts and extendable tracks for stability. The major
manufacturers produce double rotary heads (usually capable of rotating in opposite direc-
tions) as attachments for the more powerful piling rigs which enable casing up to 1000 mm
diameter to be installed with the lower drive while augering with the top drive. The
dual-rotary system from Foremost Industries of Canada operating on their DR 40 crawler
Figure 3.26 Watson 2100 truck-mounted auger drill.
Piling equipment and methods
109
Figure 3.27 ‘Flydrill 5500’ with bucket auger removing spoil from 4.75 m dia monopiles at the Barrow
offshore wind farm site (courtesy Bauer Maschinen GmbH).
rig provides 30 kNm torque through the top drive for boring and 339 kNm torque on the
lower rotary table for simultaneous casing up to 1000 mm diameter. The Liebherr pile driving
rigs (see Section 3.1.1) have the option of running double rotary top drive or kelly tools for
bored and CFA piles. In-cab electronic instrumentation and read-out to control positioning
and drilling parameters is standard on most rigs.
Table 3.6 Some hydraulic self-erecting crawler boring rigs
Maker
Type
Standard
Main
Maximum
Typical
Maximum
stroke
winch
diameter
maximum
torque
(m)
capacity
(mm)
depth
(kNm)
(kN)a
(m)
Bauer
BG 15H
12
110
1500
40
151
(Germany)
BG 18H
14
140
1500
45
176
BG 20H
15
170
1500
53
200
BG 24
15.7
200
2000
57
233
BG 24H
15.4
200
1700
54
233
BG 28
19.3
250
2100
71
275
BG 28H
18.4
250
1900
71
275
BG 36
18.7
250
2500
68
367
BG 40
19.7
300
3000
80
390
BG 48
8.8
600
3000
100
482
Casagrande
B80
3.5
105
1300
38
100
(Italy)
B80 as CFA
11.15
105
600
16
100
B125
3.8/11b
135
1500
50
112
B125 as CFA
14.23
135
800
20
112
B180HD
6/13.7b
200
1800
68
180
B180HD as CFA
17.13
200
1000
22.7
180
B250
6/12.5b
220
2000
68
217
B250 as CFA
19.75
220
1200
23.7
217
B300
6/12.5b
250
2000
68
250
C600HD.H40 as CFA
21.25
280
1200
28.5
358
C600HD HT H40
14b
280
2200
87
358
C800 H50
14
280
2200
87
546
C800 as CFA
28
280
1600
34
358
C800DH
28/19.1
280
900
25/18.5
358/421
C6c/M6A-1c
4
13.5
C8c
8
17.9
C14c
12
55
CFA 425
19.4
135
900
25
112
CFA 26
21.5
150
1200
27
137
Delmag
RH10
9.5
160
1450
15
100
(Germany)
RH12
12
200
1450
18
120
RH14
12.5
200
1580
23
144
RH20
14.2
300
1830
30
206
RH26
15
420
1960
36
265
RH32
15
420
1960
36
320
Foremost
DR 24
7.9
380
610
13/282 Dual
Industries
DR 40
8.4
380
1016
30/339 Dual
(Canada)
DR 610C
13.4
181
610
28/282 Dual
Soilmec
R 210
9
103
1200
40
100
(Italy)
R 312/200
10.5
133
1500
48
130
R 416
11.4
150
1500
55
161
R 516 HD
11.5
170
2000
61
180
R 620
14.5
192
1800
66
201
R 625
15.2
240
2500
77
240
R 725
16.3
240
2000
77
240
R 825
240
2500
77
240
R 930
290
3000
77
305
Piling equipment and methods
111
Various types of equipment are available for use with rotary augers. The standard and rock
augers (Figure 3.28a and b) have scoop-bladed openings fitted with projecting teeth. The
coring bucket is used to raise a solid core of rock (Figure 3.28c) and the bentonite bucket
(Figure 3.28d) is designed to avoid scouring the mud cake which forms on the wall of the
borehole. The buckets on some Calweld machines can be lifted through the ring drive gear
and swung clear to discharge the soil. Grabs can also be operated from the kelly bar.
Enlarged or under-reamed bases can be cut by rotating a belling-bucket within the
previously drilled straight-sided shaft. The bottom-hinged bucket (Figure 3.29a) cuts to a
hemispherical shape and because it is always cutting at the base it produces a clean and
stable bottom. However, the shape is not so stable as the conical form produced by the
top-hinged bucket (Figures 3.29b and 3.30), and the bottom-hinged arms have a tendency to
jam when raising the bucket. The arms of the top-hinged type are forced back when raising
the bucket, but this type requires a separate cleaning-up operation of the base of the hole
after completing the under-reaming. Belling buckets normally form enlargements up to 3.7 m
in diameter but can excavate to a diameter of 7.3 m with special attachments. Belling buckets
require a shaft diameter of at least 0.76 m to accommodate them.
The essential condition for the successful operation of a rotary auger rig is a fine-grained
soil which will stand without support until a temporary steel tubular liner is lowered down
the completed hole, or a granular soil supported by a bentonite slurry or other stabilizing
suspensions (also known as ‘drilling muds’ see Section 3.3.8). In these conditions fast
drilling rates of up to 7 m per hour are possible for the smaller shaft sizes. Methods of
installing piles with these rigs are described in Section 3.4.6.
3.3.2
Boring with casing oscillators
For drilling through sands, gravels, and loose rock formations, the pile boreholes may require
continuous support by means of casing. For these conditions it is advantageous to use a
casing oscillator which imparts a semi-rotating motion to the casing through clamps. Vertical
Table 3.6 Continued
Maker
Type
Standard
Main
Maximum
Typical
Maximum
stroke
winch
diameter
maximum
torque
(m)
capacity
(mm)
depth
(kNm)
(kN)a
(m)
R 940
320
3000
92
469
CM 50 (CFA)
19.5
102
900
25
100
CM 70 (CFA)
22.3
170
1000
28
154
CM 700 (CFA)
22.5
80
1000
29
165
CM 120 (CFA)
24.5
290
1400
30.5
305
CM 1200 (CFA)
27.9
290
1400
33.5
305
Wirth
13-SV
13.5
120
1500
45
130
(Germany)
18
6.8
190
2500
45
176
22-ZV
6.8b
180
1800
56
220
22-SV
13.8
180
1800
56
220
40
7.7
290
3000
36
400
Notes
a Pulling force.
b With pull-down winch.
c Various masts and rotary heads for these hydraulic crawlers.
 Hinged cutters
Profile of 
completed base
Housing
Borehole
casing
Kelly
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.28 Types of drilling tools (a) Standard auger (b) Rock auger (c) Coring bucket (d) Bentonite
bucket (e) Chisel.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.29 Under-reaming tools (a) Bottom hinge (b) Top hinge.
Piling equipment and methods
113
Figure 3.30 Top-hinged under-reaming bucket.
rams attached to the clamps enable the casing to be forced down, as the hole is deepened or
raised as necessary. The semi-rotating motion is continuous, which prevents the casing from
becoming ‘frozen’ to the soil, and it is continued while extracting the casing after placing the
concrete. The essential feature of pile boring with a casing oscillator is that the special double-
wall casing is always kept tight against the bottom of the hole. For this purpose the casing is
jointed. The typical casings (e.g. the Bauer and Casagrande types) have male/female joints
which are locked by inserting and tightening bolts manually (which can have safety implications)
or by an automatic adapter lock to resist the high rotating or oscillating forces.
Hydraulic casing oscillators are available from most of the large rig manufacturers to attach
to crane-mounted rigs or to rotary drills with diameters from 1000 to 3000 mm and torque
capability up to, for example, 8350 kNm from the Soilmec VRM 3000, which has a clamping
force of 4780 kN and lifting force of 7250 kN (Figure 3.31). Typically the rotation angle is 25	,
but Soilmec and Leffer also manufacture 360	 full rotation units with torque up to 7400 kN,
designed to reduce friction losses and capable of depths to 70 m using carbide casing shoes. The
material is broken up and excavated from the pile by hammer grabs hanging from a crane or
attached to the drill rig, or removed by augers, grabs and down-the-hole hammers using crawler
or crane attachment rigs. The German Hochstrasser-Weise oscillator system which operates on
compressed air has been used to install casing up to 3000 mm vertically, and 2400 mm casing
114
Piling equipment and methods
24 m deep at a 1 in 4 rake, but difficulties can occur when extracting the casing during
concreting. The German Bade oscillators are used for piles up to 2500 mm in diameter.
Drilling and installing casing simultaneously (‘duplex’ drilling) through cobbles,
boulders and rubble using special casing shoes and casing under-reamers attached to top
drive, down-the-hole compressed air hammers has advanced significantly. For example,
Numa Hammers of USA manufacture a range of drills capable of installing casing up to
1219 mm diameter to 15 m deep using a rotary percussive under-reamer which can be
retracted to allow concreting of the pile as the casing is withdrawn (Figure 3.32).
3.3.3
Continuous flight auger drilling rigs
A typical continuous flight auger rig is shown in Figure 3.33. Drilling output with the rigs
in Table 3.6 is greater than achievable for standard bored piles as the pile is installed in one
continuous pass, hence the mast must have an adequate stroke for the auger under the rotary
head. A kelly may be inserted through the rotary head to increase depth on some rigs. Most
CFA rigs have crowd capability to assist in penetrating harder formations, and augers should
be designed to suit the high torques available. Possible diameters range from 500 to 1400 mm
to a maximum depth of 34 m.
Displacement auger piling is carried out with rigs similar to the high torque CFA
equipment, but the diameter is limited to less than 600 mm by the shape of the displacement
tool; maximum depth is around 28 m.
3.3.4
Drilling with a kelly
The kelly is a square or circular drill rod which is driven by keying into a rotary table either
fixed to the rig near the ground surface, to the crane attachment or by a moveable drive head on
the mast. The full range of drilling tools, plate and bucket augers, drag bits, compound rotary
Figure 3.31 Soilmec casing oscilator.
Piling equipment and methods
115
Figure 3.32 Numa hammer with extending under-reaming drill bit for simultaneously drilling and
inserting casing (courtesy Numa Hammers).
drill plate bits and tricone bits can be rotated by the kelly in most drillable ground conditions,
subject to the available power. The kelly may be in sections, or more usefully, telescopic to make
up the required length of drill string. Boreholes can be drilled as open holes, or supported by
either excess hydrostatic head using drilling fluids (see Section 3.3.8) or by casing. The casing
can be installed by oscillators or by the rotary drive with some of the larger rigs. Under-reamers
and belling tools are expanded by an upward or downward force from the rotating kelly.
116
Piling equipment and methods
3.3.5
Reverse-circulation drilling rigs
Reverse-circulation drilling rigs operate on the principle of the airlift pump. Compressed air
is injected near the base of the centrally placed discharge pipe. The rising column of air and
water lifts the soil which has been loosened by rotating cutters, and the casing tubes are also
rotated to keep them freely moving in the soil as they sink down while the boring advances.
The reverse-circulation rig manufactured by Alfred Wirth and Co. of Germany is shown in
Figure 3.34. The casing tubes and airlift riser pipe are rotated together or separately by means
of a hydraulic rotary table or power swivel. Dual airlift drill pipes, maximum bore 300 mm,
either flange jointed or flush, inject air through the annulus between the inner and outer tubes.
The riser pipe is maintained centrally in the casing by one or more stabilizers, and the soil
boring is effected by rock roller bits on a cutter head. The diameters of the latter range from
0.76 to 8.0 m. The injected air-flow and pressure and the point of injection all affect the
efficiency of cuttings removal; air injection rate is up to 130 m3 per minute at a pressure of
12 bar, requiring large air compressors. For offshore work the hole will be kept full of
seawater, but on land drilling mud is used to convey the cuttings necessitating the use of mud
tanks and cleaners (see Section 3.3.8). Also on land the reverse circulation system with mud
may maintain a stable hole without the use of casing for cast-in-place piles. The more
powerful self-erecting crawler rigs in Table 3.6 can be rigged for reverse circulation for holes up
to 3300 mm diameter to 100 m depth. The Calweld reverse circulation rigs are manufactured
to drill without reaming to diameters of up to 2.1 m and to depths up to 230 m.
Piletop rigs such as the Wirth PBA range (Figure 3.35) and the ‘Teredo’units built and oper-
ated by Seacore Limited (Figure 3.36) using powerful top-drive swivels are more versatile than
large rotary tables. The Wirth 1238 rig has a maximum power swivel torque of 380 kNm for
Figure 3.33 Installation of CFA piles in chalk with crane handling reinforcement cage (courtesy
Cementation Foundations Skanska).
Piling equipment and methods
117
drilling 4000 mm diameter holes with a drill string weighing 130 tonne. The largest Teredo rig,
equipped with a 460 kNm power swivel, is capable of rock drilling up to 7000 mm diameter. The
Bauer power auger in Figure 3.27 can be classified as a pile top rig, but has to be handled off
the pile to discharge the bucket, requiring continuous service by a suitable crane.
Reverse-circulation rigs can drill at a fast rate in a wide range of ground conditions
including weak rocks. They are most effective in granular soils and the large diameter of the
airlift pipes enables them to lift large gravel, cobbles, and small boulders when drilling in
glacial soils, or in jointed rocks which are broken up by the rock roller bits. Under-reamed
bases can be provided in stiff clays or weak rocks by means of a hydraulically operated
rotary enlarging tool mounted above the cutter head.
3.3.6
Large grab rigs
The use of diaphragm wall grabs to form barrettes in preference to large-diameter bored
pile groups is well established. The grabs may be suspended from cranes or mounted on
Rotary table
Air hose
Hydraulic motor
Hydraulic 
power pack
Hydraulic 
hoses
Airlift
drill pipe
Pile casing
Water level
Stabilizer
Drill collar
Rock roller bit
assembly
Figure 3.34 Wirth rotary table and rotating cutter.
118
Piling equipment and methods
purpose-built crawlers and excavate a square hole, Ell-, Tee-, or rectangular slots under
bentonite or other support fluid. The ‘Hydromill’ or ‘Hydrofraise’ rig developed by Bachy-
Soletanche is a reverse circulation down-the-hole milling machine with two contra-rotating
cutter drums powered by hydraulic motors mounted on a heavy steel frame. The cuttings are
removed from the slot in a bentonite or polymer slurry by a pump fitted above the drums to
the de-sanding and cyclone plant at the surface for reconditioning and reuse. Over-break is
minimal and the absence of vibration makes the system suitable for urban sites and close to
existing buildings. Standard width is 600 mm but greater widths are possible for depths to
60 m. Walls have been constructed to 150 m deep, and a low head-room version is available.
3.3.7
Tripod rigs
Small-diameter piles with diameters of up to 600 mm installed in soils which require con-
tinuous support by lining tubes can be drilled by tripod rigs. The drilling is performed in
clays by a clay-cutter, which is a simple tube with a sharpened cutting edge, the tube being
driven down under the impact of a heavy drill stem. The soil which jams inside the tube is
Figure 3.35 Wirth PBA pile top rig (courtesy Wirth Maschinen und Bohrgerate-Fabrik GmbH).
Piling equipment and methods
119
prised out by spade when the cutter is raised to the surface. Drilling is effected in coarse-grained
soils by means of a baler or ‘shell’, which is again a simple tube with a cutting edge and flap
valve to retain the soil, the soil being drawn into the baler by a suction action when the tool
is raised and lowered. If no groundwater is present in the pile borehole, water must be poured
in, or a bentonite slurry may be used. This suction action inevitably causes loosening of the soil
at the base of the pile borehole, thus reducing the base resistance. The loosening may be
Figure 3.36 Pile top rig drilling 3.8 m dia piles for foundation strengthening to the Richmond-San
Raphael bridge, California (courtesy Seacore Ltd).
accompanied by settlement of the ground surface around the pile borehole. Rocks are drilled
by chiselling and using a baler to raise the debris.
Tripod rigs are not as suitable as the spiral-plate or continuous auger types for drilling
small-diameter piles in clays, except in situations where low headroom or difficult access
would prevent the deployment of lorry-mounted or track-mounted augers. Methods of
operating tripod rigs have been described by North-Lewis and Scott(3.12).
3.3.8
Drilling for piles with bentonite slurry
Lining tubes or casings to support the sides of pile boreholes are a requirement for most of
the bored-pile installation methods using equipment described in Sections 3.3.1 to 3.3.7.
Even in stiff fine-grained soils it is desirable to use casings for support since these soils are
frequently fissured or may contain pockets of sand which can collapse into the boreholes,
resulting in accumulations of loose soil at the pile toe, or discontinuities in the shaft.
Casings may be avoided by providing support to the pile borehole in the form of a slurry
of bentonite clay. However, BS EN 1536 requires that an excavation under support fluid shall
be protected by a lead-in tube or guide wall (for a barrette); a length of casing will also be
required to carry a pile-top rig. Bentonite, or other montmorillonite clay with similar
characteristics, has the property of remaining in suspension in water to form a stiff ‘gel’
when allowed to become static. When agitated by stirring or pumping, however, it has a
mobile fluid consistency – i.e. it is ‘thixotropic’. In a granular soil, the slurry penetrates the
walls of the borehole and gels there to form a strong and stable ‘filter-cake’. In a clay soil
there is no penetration of the slurry but the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid, which has a
density of around 1040 kg/m3, prevents collapse where the soil is weakened by fissures.
Recommended rheological characteristics are provided in BS EN 1536.
When used in conjunction with auger or grab-type rigs the slurry is maintained in a state
of agitation by the rotating or vertical motion of the drilling tools. When it becomes heavily
contaminated with soil or diluted by groundwater it can be replaced by pumping-in fresh or
reconditioned slurry. Toothed or bladed augers with double helix configurations and a flap
in the carriage area help to retain spoil as the auger is withdrawn through the bentonite.
Bentonite slurry is used most efficiently in conjunction with reverse-circulation rigs (see
Section 3.3.5). The slurry is pumped into the outer annulus and the slurry–soil mixture that
is discharged from the airlift riser pipe is allowed to settle in lagoons or tanks to remove soil
particles. It is then further cleaned in a cyclone, and chemicals to aid gelling are added
before the reconditioned slurry is pumped into a holding tank and then returned to the pile
borehole.
Bentonite slurry is used in a simple and rather crude way in conjunction with rotary auger
equipment when drilling pile boreholes through sands and gravels to obtain deeper penetration
into stiff fine-grained soils. The hole must be augered through the sands and gravels without
support, and then the casing is lowered down. It is uneconomical to provide screwed joints
in large-diameter lining tubes and all joints are made by welding. To save time and cost in
welding, the holes are drilled to the maximum possible depth before installing the first
length of casing. In these conditions support may be provided while drilling by means of a
bentonite slurry. Where the depth of coarse-grained soil is relatively small it is uneconomical
to bring in high-speed mixers, slurry tanks, pumps and reconditioning plant for the normal
employment of bentonite techniques. Instead, a few bags of the dry bentonite are dumped
into the pile borehole and mixed with the groundwater or by adding water to form a crude
120
Piling equipment and methods
slurry which is adequate to smear the wall of the borehole and give it the necessary short-term
support. After drilling with this support through the granular overburden, the casing is lowered
in one or more lengths and pushed down to seal it into the stiff fine-grained soil below. The
thrust is provided either by the hydraulically operated crowd mechanism on the kelly-bar of
the drilling machine or by means of a vibrator (see Section 3.1.5) mounted on the casing.
This technique is known as ‘mudding-in’ the casing.
The use of a bentonite slurry to aid drilling with or without temporary lining tubes may
cause some difficulties when placing concrete in the pile. The nature of these problems and
the means of overcoming them are described in Section 3.4.8, and the effects of a bentonite
slurry on shaft friction and end-bearing resistance of piles are discussed in Sections 4.2.3
and 4.3.6. For example, if the slurry becomes overloaded with solids from the excavation, a
thick filter cake will be formed and may not be removed by scouring during concreting. In
such cases it may be necessary to use a mechanical scraper to remove the excess filter cake
prior to concreting. Reese et al.(3.13) recommend a minimum diameter of 600 mm for piles
installed using slurry techniques, to avoid some of the problems associated with the method.
Polymer support fluids are more expensive than bentonite as an initial cost, but because
they can be recycled without the frequent de-sanding required for bentonite, polymers can be
economical for use on large projects and congested sites. Also the filter cake is much thinner
and more easily scoured when placing concrete. When used for piling work on land or in river
works, waste bentonite slurry has to be treated as ‘hazardous’ under pollution control regula-
tions and disposed of accordingly, whereas polymers can be neutralized and, subject to
desanding and approval from the water company, can be disposed of to existing drains.
3.3.9
Base and shaft grouting of bored and cast-in-place piles
When bored and cast-in-place piles are installed in granular soils, the drilling operation may
loosen the soil surrounding the shaft and beneath the base of the pile borehole. Such loos-
ening below the base can cause excessive working load settlements when the majority of the
load is carried by end bearing. Base grouting is a means of restoring the original in-situ
density and reducing settlements. Bolognesi and Moretto(3.14) described the use of stage
grouting to compress the soil beneath the toes of 1.00 to 2.00 m bored piles supporting two
bridges over the Parana River in Brazil, the piles being drilled with the aid of a bentonite
slurry. The soil beneath the pile toes loosened by the drilling operations was subjected to a
grouting pressure of up to 10 MN/m2. The cement grout was introduced through a cylindrical
metal basket pierced by a number of holes and filled with uniform gravel (Figure 3.37). The
basket, with its upper surface covered by a rubber sheet, was lowered into the borehole
suspended from the pile reinforcing cage. The pile was then concreted, followed by the
injection of the grout into the basket through a 38 mm pipe set in the concrete of the shaft.
The uplift caused by the grouting pressure was usually resisted by the shaft friction in the
pile shaft, but in some cases the pile cap was constructed to provide additional dead-load
resistance. Although Bolognesi and Moretto did not mention any weakening at the pile toe
caused by the entrapment of bentonite slurry, as described by Reese et al.(3.13), the stage-
grouting technique would be a useful method of expelling any slurry from beneath the toe
of a pile.
The ‘flat-jack’ method of pressure grouting to compact soil beneath the base of a bored
pile is similar. After completing the drilling, which can be performed underwater in
favourable conditions, the reinforcing cage with a circular plate welded to the base is
Piling equipment and methods
121
122
Piling equipment and methods
lowered to the bottom of the borehole. A flexible metal sheet covers the whole of the underside
of this base plate. A grout injection pipe is connected to the space between the plate and the
sheet, and a peripheral ring of grout pipes is attached to the reinforcing bars for a predeter-
mined height above the pile base. All grout pipes are extended to a pump and metering unit
at the ground surface. The pile is then concreted. After a waiting period to allow the concrete
to harden a cement grout is injected into the peripheral injection pipes with the object of
bonding the lower part of the pile shaft to the surrounding soil. A further period of a few
days is allowed for the grout to harden, then the space between the metal sheet and steel
plate is injected with grout under high pressure. The uplift on the steel plate is resisted by
the peripheral grout–soil bond stress on the shaft and the soil beneath the flexible sheet is
thus compressed. The height of the peripheral grouting above the pile base depends on the
required base pressure and hence on the design base resistance of the pile. The important
control criteria are the grout pressure (a function of the required ultimate pile capacity), an
upward displacement limit to minimize degradation of the side friction, and a minimum
grout injection volume to ensure lines are not clogged.
Direct injection of cement grout beneath the pile base was used to re-compress sand
disturbed by drilling 1.2 m diameter bored piles supporting an office building at Blackwall
Yard, London. Yeats and O’Riordan(3.15) described the installation of a 38.2 m deep test pile.
The shaft was drilled by rotary auger under a bentonite slurry through the alluvium and stiff
to hard clays of the London Clay and Woolwich and Reading formation (Lambeth group)
into very dense Thanet Sands. The upper 31 m of the shaft were supported by casing. After
completing the drilling four separate grout tube assemblies as shown in Figure 3.38 were
lowered to the base of the borehole. The injection holes in the tubes were sleeved with rubber
(tubes-à-manchette). The pile shafts were then concreted under bentonite, and 24 hours after
this water was injected to crack the concrete surrounding the grout tubes. Base grouting
commenced 15 days after concreting. The injections were undertaken in stages with pressures
up to 60 bar and frequent checks to ensure the pile head did not lift by more than 1 mm.
Reinforcing
cage for pile
Uniform size gravel
Rubber or neoprene sheet
Bottom plate and rubber
sheet perforated
Lifting rope
6.4 mm (¼)
steel plates
25 mm (1)
spacer
38 mm (1½) grout
injection pipe
Basket fabricated
from 14 mm (    ) bars
25 mm (1) circumferential
bars
9 16
Figure 3.37 Preloading cell for compressing loosened soil beneath base of bored piles by grouting
(after Bolognesi and Moretto(3.14)).
Piling equipment and methods
123
Similar base grouting techniques were used at six sites in the Docklands area of London
beneath piles with diameters in the range of 0.75 to 1.5 m(3.16).
Part of the internal plugs to the 2.50 and 3.13 m OD driven tubular steel piles for the
Jamuna River Bridge(3.17) were cleaned out by airlifting which loosened the soil at the base.
In order to reconsolidate the remaining plug of sand a grid of tubes-à-manchette was placed
in the hole above the plug and a layer of gravel placed by tremie to cover the grout tubes.
A 7 m plug of concrete was placed over the gravel and 12 hours later, water was injected at
a pressure of 20 bar to lift the sleeves. Cement grout (40 litres of water, 50 kg cement, 0.35 kg
bentonite, and 0.5 kg plasticizer) was then injected into the gravel plug. Grouting was
terminated when the pressure reached 50 bar, in order to ensure that uplift of the pile would
Pile head
Pile base
500 mm
Tube à manchettes
Outside of
reinforcing cage
Perimeter
of pile
12 000 mm
Grout circuit
Inside of
reinforcing cage
PLAN OF PILE BASE
Steel tubing
64 mm internal diameter
Rubber sleeve
2 holes ∅ 4 mm
SECTION OF INDIVIDUAL
GROUT CIRCUIT
Figure 3.38 Arrangement of circuits for base-grouting of piles (after Yeats and O’Riordan(3.15)).
not occur, or when 1000 litres of fluid had been injected to limit hydrofracture of the soil
below the gravel.
Shaft grouting of cast-in-place piles and barrettes entails rupturing the outer skin of the
pile and pushing it against the surrounding soil. This increase in lateral pressure is intended
to cause local increases in the soil density which had become loosened or softened by the
pile construction and thereby enhance the shaft resistance of the pile. When shaft grouting
in granular soils, cementation of the soil particles may occur and voids and fissures become
filled giving improved contact between pile and soil. The usual technique is to install 50 mm
diameter steel tubes-à-manchette around the perimeter of the reinforcement cage for the
depth to be treated, with non-return connections to the surface. The manchettes on the tubes
at 1 m centres are cracked at pressures up to 80 bar and flushed with water after allowing the
concrete to cure for 24 hours and each sleeve pressure grouted 10 to 15 days thereafter.
Littlechild et al.(3.18) report on a series of tests on 20 shaft grouted, cast-in-place piles in soft
marine clay underlain by alluvial deposits of stiff clay and dense to very dense sand in
Bangkok. The measured shaft resistances for the shaft grouted piles, ranging from 150 to
320 kN/m2, were approximately double those without shaft grouting. The test piles were
reloaded more than one year after grouting and showed no loss of resistance in either
the clay or sands. Core samples along the pile/grout interface showed grout infilling cracks
and fissures in the concrete and a grout zone 20 to 30 mm around the pile with some
cementation of the sands.
3.4
Procedure in pile installation
Each class of pile employs its own basic type of equipment and hence the installation methods
for the various types of pile in each class are the same. Typical methods are described below
to illustrate the use of the equipment described in the preceding sections of this chapter.
Particular emphasis is given to the precautions necessary if piles are to be installed without
unseen breakage, discontinuities or other defects. The installation methods described in this
section are applicable mainly to vertical piles. The installation of raking piles whether driven
or bored is a difficult operation and is described in Section 3.4.11.
BS EN 1536 and BS EN 12699 deal with the execution of bored and displacement piles
respectively. However, in many respects the guidance on installation in these new codes is
not as comprehensive as that contained in BS 8004. For example, BS EN 12699 does not
comment on appropriate penetration, stroke, drop or weight of hammer, simply requiring
that a suitable hammer or vibrator be used to achieve the required depth or resistance
without damage to the pile.
3.4.1
Driving timber piles
Timber piles are driven by drop hammer or single-acting hammer after pitching them in a
piling frame, in crane-suspended leaders or in trestle guides. The Swedish piling code
requires the hammer to weigh at least 1.5 times the weight of the pile and helmet with a min-
imum of 1 tonne. Diesel hammers, unless they are of the light type used for driving trench
sheeting, are too powerful and are liable to cause splitting at the toe of the pile. The heads
of squared piles are protected by a helmet of the type shown in Figure 3.20. Round piles are
driven with their heads protected by a steel hoop. A cap is used over the pile head and hoop,
or packing can be placed directly on the head.
124
Piling equipment and methods
Care should be taken to prevent damage to the creosote protection by avoiding the use of
slings or hooks which gouge the pile deeply. The damage caused by minor incisions is no
more than the scratching caused by stones encountered while driving the piles.
3.4.2
Driving precast (including prestressed) concrete piles
The methods of handling the piles after casting and transporting them to the stacking area
are described in Section 2.2.2. They must be lifted from the stacking positions only at the
prescribed points. If designed to be lifted at the quarter or third points, they must not at any
stage be allowed to rest on the ground on their end or head. Particular care should be taken
to avoid over-stressing by impact if the piles are transported by road vehicles. Additional
support points should be introduced if necessary.
A helmet of the type shown in Figure 3.20 and its packing are carefully centred on the
pile, and the hammer position should be checked to ensure that it delivers a concentric blow.
The hammer should preferably weigh not less than the pile. BS 8004 requires that the weight
or power of the hammer should be sufficient to ensure a final penetration of about 5 mm per
blow unless rock has been reached. Damage to the pile can be avoided by using the heavi-
est possible hammer and limiting the stroke. BS 8004 states that the stroke of a single-acting
or drop hammer should be limited to 1.2 m and preferably to not more than 1 m. The
Swedish piling code requires a drop hammer to weigh at least 3 tonne, except that 2-tonne
hammers can be used for piles with a maximum length of 10 m and a maximum load of
450 kN, but a 4-tonne hammer should be used for long piles in compact materials. This code
recommends that the drop of the hammer should be limited to 300 to 400 mm in soft or loose
soils to avoid damage by tensile stresses. The drop should be limited to 300 mm when
driving through compact granular soils.
The driving of the piles should be carefully watched, and binding by toggle bolts due to
the pile rotating or moving off line should be eased. The drop of the hammer should be
reduced if cracking occurs, and if necessary the hammer should be changed for a heavier
one. After the completion of driving the pile heads should be prepared for bonding into the
pile caps as described in Section 7.7. Hollow piles with a solid end may burst under the
impact of the hammer if they become full of water, and holes should therefore be provided
to drain off accumulated water. Where a soil plug is formed at the toe of an open-ended pile,
water accumulation or arching of the soil within the pile may also result in bursting during
driving. Further guidance is given in CIRIA Report PG8(3.19).
3.4.3
Driving steel piles
Because of their robustness steel piles can stand up to the high impact forces from a diesel
hammer without damage other than the local distortion of the pile head and toe under hard
driving. Open-ended tubular or box piles or H-piles can be driven to a limited penetration by
a vibrator. By using rolled steel corner sections, plugged tube-bearing piles can be formed
by driving a number of interlocking U-section sheet piles sequentially. As the resistance to
driving is less than for welded box piles, vibrators or press-in pilers can be used to install
high capacity piles to greater depths at sensitive sites where impact driving cannot be tolerated.
To achieve the required depth of penetration it is sometimes necessary to reduce the base
resistance by removing the soil plug which forms at the bottom of an open-ended tubular or
box pile. A sandy-soil plug can be removed by simple water jetting. A plug of clay or weak
Piling equipment and methods
125
126
Piling equipment and methods
broken rock can be removed by lowering the airlift device shown in Figure 3.39 down the
tube, the soil or broken rock in the plug being loosened by dropping or rotating the riser
pipe. A reverse-circulation rig with a rotating cutter (Figure 3.34) is an efficient means of
removing soil if justified by the number and size of the piles. Crane-mounted power augers
of the type shown in Figure 3.25 can only be used for cleaning after the pile has been driven
down to its final level where there is space for the crane carrying the auger to be manoeu-
vred over the pile head. The self-erecting crawler rigs are more manoeuvrable and with the
other methods described above can be used to drill below the pile toe and so ease the driving
resistance. However, drilling below the toe also reduces the shaft friction and the method
may have to be restricted to end-bearing piles. This aspect is discussed further in the section
on piling for marine structures (Section 8.3). Because of the delays involved in alternate
drilling and driving operations, it is desirable that any drilling to ease the driving resistance
should be restricted to only one operation on each pile.
Difficulties arise when it is necessary to place a plug of concrete at the toe of the cleaned-out
pile to develop high end-bearing resistance, or to transfer uplift loads from the superstructure
to the interior wall of the hollow pile through a reinforcing cage. In such cases a good bond
must be developed between the concrete filling and the interior of the steel pile. This
requires any adherent soil which remains after removing the soil plug to be cleaned off the
pile wall. A sandy soil can be effectively removed by water jetting or by airlifting, but an
adherent clay may require high-pressure water jets to remove it. A rig can be used for this
purpose that comprises a central airlift pipe and a base plate with jetting nozzles around the
periphery. The assembly can be half-rotated as necessary and wire strand ‘brushes’ can be
attached to the plate. However, the process is tediously slow since the jets tend to drill
Lifting ring
Spider
Riser pipe
Air or water
Compressed
air
Manifold
Air inlet holes
Jetting nozzle
Cutter head
Spider
Discharge
pipe
Figure 3.39 Airlift for cleaning-out soil from steel tubular piles.
small-diameter holes in the clay. Equipment has yet to be devised which will quickly and
effectively remove the clay adhering to the wall of a pile to a sufficient standard of cleanliness
to achieve a good bond with a concrete plug. The procedure for placing the concrete plug in
the cleaned-out pile or for completely filling a steel tubular or box pile is similar to that
described below for shell piles.
3.4.4
Driving and concreting steel shell piles
Steel shell piles are driven by drop hammers or single-acting hammers acting on the head of
an internal mandrel or core which is collapsed to allow it to be withdrawn before placing the
concrete. Problems arise with heave when driving shell piles in groups, and distortion or
collapse of the shells when driving past obstructions. Shell piles have the advantage that the
interior of the shell can be inspected before concrete is placed. This can be done with the aid
of light reflected down the pile by a mirror, or by a narrow beam lamp. Distortion of the
shells can be detected by lowering a lamp down to the toe. If it disappears wholly or partially
then distortion has occurred. This can be corrected by pulling up the shells and redriving
them or, in the case of tapered shells, by inserting and redriving a new tapered shell assembly.
The problem of heave is discussed in Sections 5.7 to 5.9.
Sometimes some leakage of groundwater occurs through shells in quantities which do not
justify replacing the damaged units. The water can be removed from the shells before
placing the concrete by pumping (if the depth to the pile toe is within the suction lift of the
available pump), by an air lift or by baling. If, after removing the water, the depth of inflow
is seen to be less than a few centimetres in 5 minutes the collected water can again be
removed and concrete placed quickly to seal off the inflow. For higher rates of seepage
the water should be allowed to fill the pile up to its rest level, and the concrete should then
be placed by tremie-pipe as described in Section 3.4.8.
Concrete placed in ‘dry’ shell piles is merely dumped in by barrow or chute. It should be
reasonably workable with a slump of 100 to 150 mm to avoid arching as it drops down a
tapered shell or onto the reinforcing cage. The cement content should be such as to comply
with the requirements in BS EN 1536 or with any special requirements for durability (see
Section 10.3.1). The American Concrete Institute(6.13) states that vibration due to driving
adjacent piles has no detrimental effect on fresh concrete in shell piles. Therefore concreting
can proceed immediately after driving the shell even though adjacent shells are being driven,
provided there are no detrimental effects due to ground heave or relaxation (see Section 5.7).
3.4.5
The installation of withdrawable-tube types of 
driven and cast-in-place piles
There are no standard procedures for installing driven and cast-in-place piles of the types
which involve the driving and subsequent withdrawal of a casing tube. However, BS EN
12699 requires that cast-in-place displacement piles shall be concreted in the dry using high
workability concrete or semi-dry concrete as appropriate to the methods for each type of pile
as described in Section 2.3.2. Where the concrete is compacted by internal drop hammer a
mix is required that is drier than that which is suitable for compaction by vibrating the
piling tube. The workability and mix proportions of the concrete should be left to the piling
contractor, subject to compliance with the requirements of BS EN 1536 and the needs regarding
durability (see Section 10.3.1).
Piling equipment and methods
127
The procedures to be adopted for avoiding ‘waisting’ or ‘necking’ of the shaft, or the
inclusion of silt pockets and laitance layers, are similar to those adopted for bored and cast-
in-place piles and are described in the following section of this chapter. Precautions against
the effects of ground heave are described in Section 5.8. Because the casing tube is, in all
cases, driven down for the full length of the pile, it is essential to ensure that the interior of
the tube is free of any encrustations of hardened concrete. Even small encrustations can
cause the concrete to arch and jam as the tube is withdrawn. If the reinforcing steel is lifted
with the tube the pile shaft is probably defective and should be rejected. Further guidance is
given in CIRIA Report PG8(3.19).
3.4.6
The installation of bored and cast-in-place piles by 
power auger equipment
The employment of a power auger for the drilling work in bored and cast-in-place piles
presupposes that the soil is sufficiently cohesive to stand unsupported, at least for a short
time. Any upper soft or loose soil strata or water-bearing layers are ‘cased-off’ by drilling
down a casing or pushing the tubes down into the pre-drilled hole by vibrator or the crowd
mechanism on the kelly bar. If necessary, ‘mudding-in’ techniques are used at this stage (see
Section 3.3.8). After the auger has reached the deeper and stiffer fine-grained soils, the bore-
hole is taken down to its final depth without further support, until the stage is reached when
a loosely fitting tube is lowered down the completed hole. This loose liner may be required
for safety purposes when inspecting the pile base before placing the concrete; or if an
enlarged base is required, the lining prevents the clay collapsing around the shaft over the
period of several hours or more required to drill the under-ream. The loose liner may not be
needed for straight-sided piles in weak rocks, or in stable unfissured clays, where there is no
risk of collapse before or during the placing of the concrete. However, if the clays are in any
degree fissured there is a risk of the walls collapsing during concreting, and thus leading to
defects of the type shown in Figure 3.40. Lining tubes must be inserted in potentially
unstable soils if a visual inspection is to be made of the pile base. Where it is required to
lower inspection personnel into a shaft (which should be greater than 750 mm diameter)
the requirements of BS 8008: 1996 (safety precautions and procedures for the construction
and descent of machine-bored shafts for piling and other purposes) must be followed.
Particular care is needed if an enlarged base has to be inspected or if concrete spreading has
to be carried out by hand. The support can be in the form of a ‘spider’, consisting of a number
of hinged arms mounted on a ring. The assembly is lowered down the shaft with the arms in
a near-vertical closed position. They are then lifted upwards and outwards and locked in
position to form a cone which is pulled up against the clay surface.
Favourable conditions for stability of the borehole are given by care in setting up the rig
on a firm level base and attention to maintenance of verticality. Tilting of the rig or violent
operation of the auger leads to misalignment and the need for corrective action by reaming
the sides. ‘Working Platforms for Tracked Plant’(3.20) provides guidance for the design and
construction of ground-supported platforms for piling plant, although selection of design
parameters to provide realistic mat thicknesses is still a problem. The requirements for the
safety of operatives should be rigorously followed as detailed in the British Drilling
Association Health and Safety Manual(3.21). Casings protecting open pile boreholes should
extend above ground level and should be provided with a strong cover.
The final cleaning-up operation before placing concrete in a bored pile consists of removing
large crumbs of soil or trampled puddled clay from the pile base. Any lumps of clay adhering
128
Piling equipment and methods
Piling equipment and methods
129
to the walls of the borehole or to the lining tubes should be cleaned off. The reinforcing cage
can then be placed and concreting commenced. The time interval between the final
cleaning-up and placing concrete should not exceed 6 hours. If there is any appreciable
delay the depth of the pile bottom should be checked against the measured drilled depth before
placing the concrete to ensure that no soil has fallen into the hole. If the reinforcing cage
extends only part-way down the hole it should be suspended from the top of the pile shaft
before commencing to place the concrete.
The concrete used in the pile base and shaft should be easily workable with a slump of
100 to 180 mm as recommended in BS 1536. Such a mix is self-compacting and does not
Figure 3.40 Defective shaft of bored pile caused by collapse of clay after lifting casing.
require ramming or vibrating. The mix proportions should be such as to ensure compliance
with the requirements regarding strength and minimum cement content of BS EN 1536 or
with any special requirements for durability (see Section 10.3.1). A dry mix should be used
for the first few charges of concrete if the pile base is wet. The concrete in the shaft is fed
through a hopper or chute placed centrally over the pile to direct it clear of the sides and the
reinforcement. After completing concreting, the lining tubes are withdrawn. If a loose liner
is used inside an upper casing, the former is lifted out as soon as the concrete extends above
the base of the outer tube. A vibrator of the type described in Section 3.1.5 is a useful expe-
dient for extracting the upper casings used to support soft clays or loose sand. The quantity
of concrete placed in the shaft should allow for the outward slumping which takes place to
fill the space occupied by the tube and any overbreak of the soil outside it. At this final stage
there is inevitably some laitance which has risen to the top of the concrete. The laitance may
be diluted and contaminated with water and silt expelled from around the casing as the
concrete slumps outwards to fill the gap. Thus the level of the concrete should be set high
so that this weak laitance layer can be broken away before bonding the pile head onto its cap.
The terms of the contract should make it clear whether or not this removal should be
performed by the piling contractor.
The concrete in a pile shaft may be required to be terminated at some depth below ground
level, for example, when constructing from ground surface level, piles designed to support
a basement floor. It is a matter of some experience to judge the level at which the concrete
should be terminated, and it is difficult to distinguish between fluid concrete and thick
laitance when plumbing the level with a float. Fleming and Lane(3.22) recommend the following
tolerances for all conditions:
Concrete cast under water:
1.5 to 3 m
Concrete cast in dry uncased holes:
75 to 300 mm
Concrete cast in cased holes:
the greater of
(a) 75 to  300 min  cased length/15
or
(b) 75 to  300 mm  [depth to casting
level  900 mm/10]
The Institution of Civil Engineers Specification for Piling(2.5) specifies casting tolerances
for three conditions of placing concrete in pile boreholes with and without temporary
casing. The ground surface or piling platform level is defined as the ‘commencing surface’.
The three conditions refer to a situation where the cut-off level is at a depth Hm below the
commencing surface such that H is from 0.15 to any depth for condition (a) and below or
between 0.15 and 10 m for (b) and (c). The conditions are as follows:
(a) Concrete placed in dry boreholes using permanent casing or cut-off level in stable ground
below base of casing: the casting tolerance in metres is specified to be 0.3  H/10
(b) Concrete placed in dry boreholes using temporary casing other than as (a) above: the
casting tolerance in metres is specified to be 0.3  H/12  C/8, where C is the length
of temporary casing below the commencing surface
(c) Concrete placed under water or a drilling fluid: the casting tolerance in metres is
specified to be 1.0  H/12  C/8 where C is the length of temporary casing below the
commencing surface.
130
Piling equipment and methods
The reader is referred to the ICE Specification for the various qualifications to the above
tolerances. It will be noted that the casing length rather than the diameter is a factor which
influences casting tolerances. This reflects the problems which occur when extracting the
temporary casing.
The use of a permanent casing in the form of a light-gauge metal sleeve surrounding a
pile shaft in soft clays or peats was described in Section 2.4.2. This sleeving cannot be used
within a temporary lining tube where the latter has to be withdrawn in a long length by
means of a vibrator or by jacking. This involves the risk of distortion or jamming of
the sleeve, which is then lifted while raising the temporary tube with disastrous effects on the
concrete in the pile shaft. The sleeve can be used within an outer temporary liner where the
depth of soft clay is shallow, and it can be used in conjunction with a casing oscillator which
keeps the outer tube free of any jamming by the sleeve. There are no problems of using the
light-gauge sleeve where power auger drilling can be performed to produce a stable hole
without employing a temporary outer lining tube.
Unfortunately, defects in a pile shaft of the type shown in Figure 3.41 are by no means
uncommon, even when placing a workable concrete in the dry open hole of a large-diameter
bored pile. Defects can take the form of large unfilled voids, or pockets of clay and silt in
the concrete. Some causes of these defects are listed below:
(1) Encrustations of hardened concrete or soil on the inside of the lining tubes can cause
the concrete to be lifted as the tubes are withdrawn, thus forming gaps in the concrete.
Remedy: The tubes must be clean before they are lowered down the bore-hole.
(2) The falling concrete may arch and jam across the lining tube or between the tubes and
the reinforcement. Remedy: Use a concrete of sufficient workability to slump easily
down the hole and fill all voids.
Piling equipment and methods
131
Figure 3.41 Defective shaft of bored pile caused by cement being washed out of unset concrete.
132
Piling equipment and methods
(3) The falling concrete may jam between the reinforcing bars and not flow outwards to the
walls of the borehole. Remedy: Ensure a generous space between the reinforcing bars.
The cage should be stiff enough to prevent it twisting or buckling during handling and
subsequent placing of concrete. Widely spaced stiff hoops are preferable to helical
binding. Check that the bars have not moved together before the cage is lowered down
the hole.
(4) Lumps of clay may fall from the walls of the borehole or lining tubes into the concrete
as it is being placed. Remedy: Always use lining tubes if the soil around the borehole is
potentially unstable and do not withdraw them prematurely. Ensure that adhering lumps
of clay are cleaned off the tubes before they are inserted and after completing drilling.
(5) Soft or loose soils may squeeze into the pile shaft from beneath the base of the lining
tubes as they are withdrawn, forming a ‘waisted’ or ‘necked’ shaft. Remedy: Do not
withdraw the casing until the placing of the concrete is complete. Check the volume of
concrete placed against the theoretical volume and take remedial action (removal and
replacement of the concrete) if there is a significant discrepancy.
(6) If bentonite has been used for ‘mudding-in’, the hydrostatic pressure of the bentonite in
the annulus, which is disturbed on lifting the casing, may be higher than that of the fluid
concrete, thus causing the bentonite to flow into the concrete. This is a serious defect
and is difficult to detect. It is particularly liable to happen if the concrete is terminated
at some depth below the top of the ‘mudded-in’ casing. Remedy: Keep a careful watch
on the level and density of the bentonite gel when the casing is lifted. Watch for any
changes in level of the concrete surface and for the appearance of bentonite within the
concrete. If inflow of the bentonite has occurred the defective concrete must be
removed and replaced and the ‘mudding-in’ technique must be abandoned.
(7) Infiltration of groundwater may cause gaps, or honeycombing of the concrete.
Remedy: Adopt the techniques for dealing with groundwater in pile boreholes
described in Section 3.4.8.
Further guidance on the installation procedures is given in CIRIA Report PG2(3.23).
3.4.7
Installing continuous flight auger piles
CFA piles can be installed in a variety of soils, dry or waterlogged, loose or cohesive, and
through weak rock. The soil is loosened on insertion of the auger and the borehole walls are
supported by the auger flights filled with drill cuttings; bentonite support slurry is not used.
The pile is concreted through a bottom or side exit at the tip of the hollow stem auger (100 or
127 mm bore) using a concrete pump connected by hose to a swivel on the rotary head as
the auger is slowly rotated and withdrawn. Soil is brought to the surface on the auger blades.
The concrete flow rate and feed pressure are continuously measured at the tip; reinforcement
is pushed or vibrated into the fresh concrete. In order to avoid the problems of flighting and
polishing (see Section 2.4.2) which reduce pile capacity, reliable instrumentation and expe-
rienced operators are essential.
For rotary displacement auger piles the displacement tool, which is mounted at the bot-
tom of a drill tube, is rotated by the high torque top drive and forced into the ground by the
rig crowd thereby compacting the wall of the hole. The pile is concreted through the auger
tip as the tool is rotated out of the hole maintaining the profile. To form the various types of
screw piles, discussed in Section 2.3.5, the thick-flanged continuous auger is screwed into
the ground with limited crowd applied, although for less cohesive soil more thrust will be
necessary to reach the required depth. The auger is rotated out of the hole as concrete is
pumped through the tip to fill the helical profile of the pile, with only minimal soil being
brought to the surface.
3.4.8
Concreting pile shafts under water
Groundwater in pile boreholes can cause serious difficulties when placing concrete in the
shaft. A depth of inflow of only a few centimetres in, say, 5 minutes which has trickled down
behind the lining tubes or has seeped into the pile base can be readily dealt with by baling
or pumping it out and then placing dry concrete to seal the base against any further inflow.
However, larger flows can cause progressive increases in the water content of the concrete,
weakening it, and forming excess laitance.
A strong flow can even wash away the concrete completely. The defective piles shown in
Figure 3.41 were caused by the flow of water under an artesian head from a fissured rock
on which the bored piles were bearing after the boreholes had been drilled through a soft
clay overburden. The lined boreholes were pumped dry of water before the concrete was
placed, but the subsequent ‘make’ of water was sufficiently strong to wash away some of the
cement before the concrete has set. The remedial action in this case was to place dry
concrete in bags at the base of the pile borehole and then to drive precast concrete sections
into the bags.
In all cases of strong inflow the water must be allowed to rise to its normal rest level and
topped up to at least 1.0 m above this level to stabilize the pile base. BS EN 1536 requires
that a tremie pipe be used for concreting in submerged conditions (water or slurry); the
tremie bore must be 6 times the maximum size of the aggregate or 150 mm whichever is the
greater. The maximum outside diameter of the pipe including joints should be less than 0.35
times the pile diameter or inner diameter of the casing. The tremie pipe must be clean and
lowered to the bottom of the pile and lifted slightly to start concrete flow. A flap valve should
be used on the end of the tremie pipe rather than a plug or polyethylene ‘go-devil’. During
concreting, the tremie tip must always be immersed in the concrete; 1.50 m below concrete
surface for piles less than 1200 mm diameter and 2.50 m for piles greater than 1200 mm. If
immersion is lost during concreting, special precautions are required before placement can
continue; for example, steps must be taken to re-immerse the tremie so that any
contamination will be above the final cut-off level. Other limits for the tremie are given for
concreting barrettes.
Although a bottom-opening bucket is sometimes used instead of a tremie pipe for placing
concrete in pile boreholes, the authors as a general rule condemn this practice. This is
because the crane operator handling the bucket cannot tell, by the behaviour of the crane
rope, whether or not he has lowered the bucket to the correct level into the fluid concrete
before he releases the hinged flap. If he releases the bucket flap prematurely, the concrete
will flow out through the water and the cement will be washed out. On the other hand, if
he plunges the bucket too deeply it will disturb the concrete already placed when it is lifted
out. The bottom-dumping bucket method has no advantage over the tremie pipe and the
authors would use it only if a pile were large enough for the lowering and dumping to be
controlled by a diver.
BS EN 1536 provides guidance for piles formed using the technique known as ‘prepacked
concrete’ for underwater concreting, but it is not recommended here in preference to placing
Piling equipment and methods
133
concrete by tremie pipe. This is because the water in a bored pile is rarely clean, and the silt
stirred up by dumping the aggregate tends to get dispersed on to the surface of the stones.
It is then displaced by the rising column of grout and tends to form layers or pockets of
muddy laitance.
The procedure for drilling pile boreholes with support by a bentonite slurry is described in
Section 3.3.8 and in CIRIA Report PG3(3.24). Problems can be caused when placing concrete in
a bentonite-filled hole. A tremie pipe must be used, and there must be a sufficient hydrostatic
pressure of concrete in the pipe above bentonite level to overcome the external head of the
slurry, to rupture the gel and to overcome friction in the tremie pipe. Sometimes a dispersing
agent is added to the bentonite to break down the gel before placing the concrete. Where the
mud becomes flocculated and heavily charged with sand (i.e. has a density greater than 1350
to 1400 kg/m3) it should be replaced by a lighter mud before placing the concrete and the base
of the pile cleaned of any debris. Circumferential steel should be kept to a minimum. The con-
crete in the piled foundations for the Wuya Bridge, Nigeria(3.25) was placed under bentonite.
The piles were 18 to 21 m deep and a mud density of 1600 kg/m3 was necessary to prevent
the sides from collapsing. The concrete failed to displace the gel which was stiffened by the
high ground temperatures and jamming occurred, especially when placing was suspended to
remove each section of the tremie pipe. The problem was finally overcome by increasing the
workability of the concrete by means of a plasticizer together with a retarder. The tremie pipe
was lifted out as a single unit to avoid the delays in breaking the pipe joints.
3.4.9
The installation of bored and cast-in-place piles by
grabbing, vibratory, and reverse-circulation rigs
The use of either grabbing, vibratory or reverse-circulation machines for drilling pile
boreholes can involve continuous support by lining tubes which may or may not be with-
drawn after placing the concrete. In all three methods the tubes may have to follow closely
behind the drilling in order to prevent the collapse of the sides and the consequent weaken-
ing of shaft friction. The boreholes must be kept topped up with water in order to avoid
‘blowing’ of the pile bottom as a result of the upward flow of the groundwater. This is
particularly necessary when drilling through water-bearing sand layers interbedded with
impervious clays.
Grabbing in weak rocks can cause large accumulations of slurry in the boreholes which
make it difficult to assess the required termination level of the pile in sound rock. The slurry
should be removed from time to time by baling or by airlift pump with a final cleaning-up
before placing the concrete.
The techniques of placing concrete in ‘dry’ holes or under water, are exactly the same as
described in Sections 3.4.6 and 3.4.8.
3.4.10
The installation of bored and cast-in-place piles 
by tripod rigs
Pile boreholes in clays are drilled by a clay cutter operated from a tripod rig. Water should
not be poured down the hole to soften a stiff clay, or used to aid removal of the clay from
the cutter as this causes a reduction in shaft friction. When drilling in granular soils the
lining tubes should follow closely behind the drilling to avoid overbreak, and the addition of
water is needed to prevent ‘blowing’ and to facilitate the operation of the baler or shell.
134
Piling equipment and methods
Piles drilled by tripod rigs are relatively small in diameter, requiring extra care when placing
the concrete as this is more likely to jam in the casing tubes when they are lifted. Curtis(3.26)
suggests checking the concrete level by hanging a float on top of the concrete and comparing
its measurement from the top of the tube with the amount of tube extracted. He also suggests
that the position of the reinforcing cage should be checked by a ‘tell-tale’ wire and indicator.
Problems can occur when placing concrete in raking piles. Internal ramming is impossible
as the rammer catches on the reinforcing cage. A high slump concrete is necessary with special
precautions being taken to prevent the reinforcement being lifted with the lining tubes.
3.4.11
The installation of raking piles
BS EN 1536 states that pile bores, whether drilled or driven, should be cased throughout their
length if the rake is flatter than 1 horizontal to 15 vertical unless it can be shown that an
uncased pile bore will be stable. Similarly, stabilizing fluids should not be used if the rake
is flatter than 1 in 15 unless precautions are taken when inserting casing and concreting.
The advantages of raking piles in resisting lateral loads are noted in Chapters 6 and 8.
However, the installation of such piles may result in considerable practical difficulties, and
they should not be employed without first considering the method of installation and the
ground conditions. If the soil strata are such that the piles can be driven to the full penetration
depth without the need to drill out a soil plug or to use jetting to aid driving, then it should
be feasible to adopt raking piles up to a maximum rake of 1 to 2. However, the efficiency of
the hammer is reduced due to the friction of the ram in the guides. It may therefore be
necessary to use a more powerful hammer than that required for driving vertical piles to the
same penetration depth.
The vertical load caused by the pile and hammer on the leaders of the piling frame must
be taken into consideration. Also when driving piles by guides without the use of leaders the
bending stresses caused by the weight of the hammer on the upper end of the pile must be
added to the driving stresses and a check should be made to ensure that the combined
stresses are within allowable limits.
The principal difficulties arise when it is necessary to drill ahead of an open-ended pile
to clear boulders or other obstructions, using the methods described in Section 3.3.5. When
the drill penetrates below the shoe of the pile tube it tends to drop by gravity and it is then
likely to foul the shoe as it is pulled out to resume further driving. Similarly, under-reaming
tools are liable to be jammed as they are withdrawn. The risks of fouling the drilling tool are
less if the angle of rake is small (say 1 in 10 or less) and the drill string is adequately
centralized within the piling tube. However, the drill must not be allowed to penetrate deeply
below the toe of the pile. This results in frequent alternations of drilling and driving with
consequent delays as the hammer is taken off to enter the drill, followed by delays in entering
and coupling up the drill string, and then removing it before replacing the hammer.
Difficulties also arise when installing driven and cast-in-place piles by means of an internal
drop hammer, due to the friction of the hammer on the inside face of the driving tube.
Installers of these piles state that a rake not flatter than 1 in 3.7 is possible.
Power augers can drill for pile boreholes at angles of rake of up to 1 in 3 but when casing
is necessary to support the pile borehole the same difficulties arise with the jamming of the
bucket or auger beneath the toe of the easing. As shown in Figure 3.2 the self-erecting leader
rigs are capable of drilling open holes at rakes up to 1 in 1, but where casing has to be
drilled, rakes flatter than 1 in 3 are difficult to manage.
Piling equipment and methods
135
The American Concrete Institute(6.13) recommends using an over-sanded mix for placing
concrete in raking pile shells or tubes. A concrete mix containing 475 kg/m3 of coarse
aggregate with a corresponding increase in cement and sand to give a slump of 100 mm is
recommended. This mix can be pumped down the raking tube.
3.4.12
Positional tolerances
It is impossible to install a pile, whether by driving, drilling or jacking, so that the head of
the completed pile is always exactly in the intended position or that the axis of the pile is
truly vertical or at the specified rake. Driven piles tend to move out of alignment during
installation due to obstructions in the ground or the tilting of the piling frame leaders.
Driving piles in groups can cause horizontal ground movements which deflect the piles. In
the case of bored piles the auger can wander from the true position or the drilling rig may
tilt due to the wheels or tracks sinking into a poorly prepared platform. However, control-
ling the positions of piles is necessary since misalignment affects the design of pile caps and
ground beams (see Sections 7.8 and 7.9), and deviations from alignment may cause inter-
ference between adjacent piles in a group or dangerous concentrations of load at the toe.
Accordingly, codes of practice specify tolerances in the position of pile heads or deviations
from the vertical or intended rake. If these are exceeded, action is necessary either to
redesign the pile caps as may be required or to install additional piles to keep the working
loads within the allowable values.
Some codes of practice requirements are as follows:
BS 8004: Driven and cast-in-place, and bored and cast-in-place piles should not deviate by
more than 1 in 75 from the vertical, or more than 75 mm from their designed position at the
level of the piling rig. Larger tolerances can be considered for work over water or raking piles.
A deviation of up to 1 in 25 is permitted for bored piles drilled at rakes of up to 1 in 4.
BS EN 1536: Plan location tolerances are given in Clause 7.2 for diameters of vertical and
raking bored piles less than 1000 mm diameter: 100 mm, between 1000 and 1500 mm:
0.1  diameter, and greater than 1500 mm: 150 mm. Deviation in inclination of vertical
piles and piles designed for a rake less than 1 in 15 is limited to 20 mm/m run of pile. For
piles designed with a rake of between 1 in 4 and 1 in 15 the deviation is limited to 40 mm/m.
BS EN 12699: The plan location tolerance (at working level) given in Clause 7.3 for
vertical and raking displacement piles is 100 mm. Deviation for vertical and raking piles is
40 mm/m. The deviations in this code must be taken into account in the design. Both the
new codes allow other tolerances to be specified.
BS 6349: Part 2 Code of Practice for Maritime Structures: A deviation of up to 1 in 100
is permitted for vertical piles driven in sheltered waters or up to 1 in 75 for exposed sites.
The deviation for raking piles should not exceed 1 in 30 from the specified rake for sheltered
waters or 1 in 25 for exposed sites. The centre of piles at the junction with the superstructure
should be within 75 mm for piles driven on land or in sheltered waters. Where piles are
driven through rubble slopes the code permits a positional tolerance of up to 100 mm, and
for access trestles and jetty heads a tolerance of 75 to 150 mm is allowed depending on the
exposure conditions.
Institution of Civil Engineers(2.5): Positional – maximum deviation of centre point of pile
to centre point on the setting out drawing not more than 75 mm, but additional tolerance for
pile cut-off below ground level. Verticality – maximum deviation of finished pile from the
136
Piling equipment and methods
Piling equipment and methods
137
vertical is 1 in 75. Maximum deviation of finished pile from the specified rake is 1 in 25 for
piles raking up to 1:6 and 1 in 15 for piles raking more than 1:6. Relaxation permitted in
exceptional circumstances subject to implications of this action. Other more stringent toler-
ances are specified for diaphragm walls and secant and contiguous piles.
American Concrete Institute Recommendations: The position of the pile head is to be
within 75 to 150 mm for the normal usage of piles beneath a structural slab. The axis may
deviate by up to 10% of the pile length for completely embedded vertical piles or for all
raking piles, provided the pile axis is driven straight. For vertical piles extending above the
ground surface the maximum deviation is 2% of the pile length, except that 4% can be
permitted if the resulting horizontal load can be taken by the pile-cap structure. For bent
piles the allowable deviation is 2% to 4% of the pile length depending on the soil conditions
and the type of bend (e.g. sharp or gentle). Severely bent piles must be evaluated by soil
mechanics’ calculations or checked by loading tests.
The significance of positional tolerance to piling beneath deep basements is noted in
Section 5.9.
3.5
Constructing piles in groups
So far only the installation of single piles has been discussed. The construction of groups of
piles can have cumulative effects on the ground within and surrounding the pile group.
These effects are occasionally beneficial but more frequently have deleterious effects on the
load/settlement characteristics of the piles and can damage surrounding property.
Precautions can be taken against these effects by the installation methods and sequence of
construction adopted. Because the problems are more directly concerned with the bearing
capacity and settlement of the group as a whole, rather than with the installation of the piles,
they are discussed in Sections 5.7 to 5.9.
3.6
References
3.1 GEDDES, W. G. N., STURROCK, K. R., and KINDER, G. New shipbuilding dock at Belfast for Harland and
Wolff Ltd, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 51, January 1972, pp. 17–47.
3.2 FAWCETT, A. The performance of the resonant pile driver, Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference, ISSMFE, Moscow, Vol. 2.1, 1973, pp. 89–96.
3.3 RODGER, A. A. and LITTLEJOHN, G. A. Study of vibratory driving in granular soils, Geotechnique,
Vol. 30, No. 3, 1980, pp. 269–93.
3.4 VIKING, K. The vibratory pile installation technique, Pile Driver, Pile Driving Contractors
Association, USA, Spring 2005, pp. 27–35.
3.5 American Petroleum Institute, Recommended Practice for Planning, Designing and
Constructing Fixed Offshore Platforms, API RP2A, 2000 edn.
3.6 WILLIS, A. J. and CHURCHER, D. W. How much noise do you make? A guide to assessing and man-
aging noise on construction sites, Construction Industry Research and Information Association
(CIRIA), London, Report PR 70, 1999.
3.7 WELTMAN, A. J. (ed.), Noise and vibration from piling operations, Construction Industry Research
and Information Association (CIRIA), London, Report PSA/CIRIA PG7, 1980.
3.8 SHELBOURNE, H. Decibel rating-the important factor, Construction News, Piling and foundations
supplement, 13 December 1973, p. 47.
3.9 Building Research Establishment. Damage to Structures from Ground-borne Vibration, BRE
Digest 403, Watford, 1995.
3.10 WILLIAMS, N. S. Contribution to discussion on pile driving in difficult conditions, Institution of
Civil Engineers, Works Construction Division, 1951.
3.11 GERWICK, B. C. Construction of Offshore Structures, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1986.
3.12 NORTH-LEWIS, J. P. and SCOTT, I. D. Constructional control affecting the behaviour of piles with
particular reference to small diameter bored cast in-situ piles, Proceedings of the Conference on
the Behaviour of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1970, pp. 161–6.
3.13 REESE, L. C., O’NEILL, M. W., and TOUMA, F. T. Bored piles installed by slurry displacement,
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference, ISSMFE, Moscow, Vol. 2.1, 1973, pp. 203–9.
3.14 BOLOGNESI, A. J. L. and MORETTO, O. Stage grouting preloading of large piles in sand, Proceedings
of the 8th International Conference, ISSMFE, Moscow, Vol. 2.1, 1973, pp. 19–25.
3.15 YEATS, J. A. and O’RIORDAN, N. J. The design and construction of large diameter base-grouted piles
in Thanet Sand, London, Proceedings of the International Conference on Piling and Deep
Foundations, London, Vol. 1, Balkema, Rotterdam, 1989, pp. 455–61.
3.16 SHERWOOD, D. E. and MITCHELL, J. M. Base grouted piles in Thanet Sands, London, Proceedings
of the International Conference on Piling and Deep Foundations, London, Vol. 1, – Balkema,
Rotterdam, 1989, pp. 463–72.
3.17 TAPPIN, R. G. R., van DUIVENIJK, J., and HAQUE, M. The design and construction of Jamuna Bridge,
Bangladesh, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 126, 1998, pp. 162–80.
3.18 LITTLECHILD, B. D., PLUMBRIDGE, G. D., and FREE, M. W. Shaft grouted piles in sand and clay in
Bangkok, Deep Foundations Institute 7th International Conference on piling and deep foundations,
DFI, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998, pp. 1.7.1–1.7.8.
3.19 HEALY, P. R. and WELTMAN, A. J. Survey of problems associated with the installation of displacement
piles, Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), London, Report
PG8, 1980.
3.20 SKINNER, H. Working Platforms for Tracked Plant, BR470 Building Research Establishment,
Watford, 2004.
3.21 British Drilling Association, Health and Safety Manual for Land Drilling – Code of Safe Drilling
Practice, BDA 2002.
3.22 FLEMING, W. G. K. and LANE, P. F. Tolerance requirements and constructional problems in piling,
Proceedings of the Conference on the Behaviour of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London,
1970, pp. 175–8.
3.23 THORBURN, S. and THORBURN, J. Q. Review of problems associated with the construction of cast
in-place concrete piles, Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA),
London, Report PG2, 1977.
3.24 FLEMING, W. K. and SLIWINSKI, Z. J. The use and influence of bentonite in bored pile construction,
Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), London, Report PG3, 1977.
3.25 SAMUEL, R. H. The construction of Wuya Bridge, Nigeria, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, Vol. 33, March 1966, pp. 353–80.
3.26 CURTIS, R. L. Constructional control affecting the behaviour of driven in-situ concrete piles,
Proceedings of the Conference on the Behaviour of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London,
1970, pp. 167–74.
138
Piling equipment and methods
Chapter 4
Calculating the resistance of piles 
to compressive loads
4.1
General considerations
4.1.1
The basic approach to the calculation of pile resistance
The numerous types of pile and the diversity in their methods of installation have been
described in Chapters 2 and 3. Each different type and installation method disturbs the
ground surrounding the pile in a different way. The influence of this disturbance on the shaft
friction and end-bearing resistance of piles has been briefly mentioned (see Section 1.3).
This influence can improve or reduce the bearing capacity of the piles, and thus a thorough
understanding of how the piles are constructed is essential to the formulation of a practical
method of calculating loading capacity.
The basic approach used in this chapter to calculate the resistance of piles to compressive
loads is the ‘static’ or soil mechanics approach. Over the years much attention has been
given by research workers to calculation methods based on ‘pure’ soil mechanics theory.
They postulate that the interface friction on a pile shaft can be determined by a simple
relationship between the coefficient of earth pressure ‘at rest’, the effective over-burden
pressure and the drained angle of shearing resistance of the soil, but they recognize that
the coefficient of earth pressure must be modified by a factor which takes into account the
method of pile installation. Similarly, they believe that the end-bearing resistance of a pile
can be calculated by classical soil mechanics theory based on the undisturbed shearing
resistance of the soil surrounding the pile toe. The importance of the settlement of the pile
or pile groups at the working load is recognized and methods have been evolved to calculate
this settlement, based on elastic theory and taking into account the transfer of load in shaft
friction from the pile to the soil.
The concepts of this research work commenced on quite simple lines, the two main
groups, namely driven piles and bored piles, only being differentiated when considering pile
behaviour. However, as the work progressed from the laboratory to the field, particularly in
the study of the behaviour of instrumented full-scale piles, it was observed that there were
very fundamental departures from classical soil mechanics theory, and the all-important
effects of installation procedures on pile behaviour were realized. The installation of piles
results in highly complex conditions developing at the pile–soil interface which are often
quite unrelated to the original undisturbed state of the soil, or even to the fully remoulded
state. The pore water pressures surrounding the pile can vary widely over periods of hours,
days, months or years after installation, such that the simple relationships of shaft friction to
effective overburden pressure are unrealistic. Similarly, when considering deformations of a
pile group under its working load, any calculations of the transfer of load that are based on
elastic theory which do not take account of soil disturbance for several diameters around the
pile shaft and beneath the toe are unrealistic.
Therefore, while the authors base their approach to the calculation of pile carrying capacity
on soil mechanics methods, this approach is simply an empirical one which relates known
pile behaviour to simple soil properties such as relative density and undrained shearing
strength. These can be regarded as properties to which empirical coefficients can be applied
to arrive at unit values for the shaft friction and end-bearing resistances.
Observations made on full-scale instrumented piles have so far only served to reveal the
extreme complexities of the problems, and have shown that there is no simple fundamental
design method. The empirical or semi-empirical methods set out in this chapter have been
proved by experience to be reliable for practical design of light to moderately heavy loadings
on land-based or near-shore marine structures. Special consideration using more complex
design methods are required for heavily loaded marine structures in deep water. The engineer
is often presented with inadequate information on the soil properties. A decision then has to
be made whether to base designs on conservative values with an appropriate safety factor
without any check by load testing, or merely to use the design methods to give a preliminary
guide to pile diameter and length and then to base the final designs on an extensive field
testing programme with loading tests to failure. Such testing is always justified on a large-
scale piling project. Proof-load testing as a means of checking workmanship is a separate
consideration (see Section 11.4).
Where the effective overburden pressure is an important parameter for calculating the
ultimate bearing capacity of piles (as is the case for coarse-grained soils) account must
be taken of the unfavourable effects of a rise in groundwater levels. This may be local or
may be a general rise, due for example to seasonal flooding of a major river, or a long-
term effect such as the predicted large general rise in groundwater levels in Greater
London.
4.1.2
The behaviour of a pile under load
For practical design purposes engineers must base their calculations of carrying capacity on
the application of the load at a relatively short time after installation. The reliability of these
calculations is assessed by a loading test which is again made at a relatively short time after
installation. However, the effects of time on carrying capacity must be appreciated and these
are discussed in Sections 4.2.4 and 4.3.8.
When a pile is subjected to a progressively increasing compressive load at a rapid or
moderately rapid rate of application, the resulting load–settlement curve is as shown in
Figure 4.1. Initially the pile–soil system behaves elastically. There is a straight-line
relationship up to some point A on the curve and if the load is released at any stage up to
this point the pile head will rebound to its original level. When the load is increased
beyond point A there is yielding at, or close to, the pile–soil interface and slippage occurs
until point B is reached, when the maximum shaft friction on the pile shaft will have been
mobilized. If the load is released at this stage the pile head will rebound to point C, the
amount of ‘permanent set’ being the distance OC. The movement required to mobilize the
maximum shaft friction is quite small and is only of the order of 0.3% to 1% of the pile
diameter. The base resistance of the pile requires a greater downward movement for its
full mobilization, and the amount of movement depends on the diameter of the pile. It may
140
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
141
be in the range of 10% to 20% of the base diameter. When the stage of full mobilization
of the base resistance is reached (point D in Figure 4.1) the pile plunges downwards with-
out any further increase of load, or small increases in load produce increasingly large
settlements.
If strain gauges are installed at various points along the pile shaft from which the
compressive load in the pile can be deduced at each level, the diagrams illustrated in
Figure 4.2 are obtained, which show the transfer of load from the pile to the soil at each stage
of loading shown in Figure 4.1. Thus when loaded to point A virtually the whole of the load
is carried by friction on the pile shaft and there is little or no transfer of load to the toe of
the pile (Figure 4.2). When the load reaches point B the pile shaft is carrying its maximum
frictional resistance and the pile toe will be carrying some load. At Point D there is no fur-
ther increase in the load transferred in friction, but the base load will have reached its ulti-
mate value.
4.1.3
Determining allowable loads on piles using 
permissible stress methods
The loading corresponding to point D on the load/settlement curve in Figure 4.1 represents the
ultimate resistance, or ultimate limit state, of the pile and is defined as the stage at which
there is general shear failure of the soil or rock beneath the pile toe. However, this stage is
of academic interest to the structural designer. A piled foundation has failed in its engineering
function when the relative settlement between adjacent single piles or groups of piles causes
intolerable distortion of the structural framework, or damage to claddings and finishes. This
stage may be represented by some point such as E on the load/settlement curve (Figure 4.1).
Thus structural failure will have occurred at a load lower than the ultimate resistance of the
pile. Various criteria of assessing failure loads on piles from the results of loading tests are
listed in Section 11.4.
Load
Unloading
E
B
C
O
A
D
Reloading
Settlement
Figure 4.1 Load/settlement curve for compressive load to failure on pile.
The concept of the separate evaluation of shaft friction and base resistance forms the basis
of all ‘static’ calculations of pile bearing capacity. The basic equation is
Qp  Qb  Qs  Wp
(4.1)
where Qp is the ultimate resistance of the pile, Qb is the ultimate resistance of the base, Qs is
the ultimate resistance of the shaft, and Wp is the weight of the pile. The components Qs and
Qb of the failure load Qp are shown at the final loading stage in Figure 4.2. Usually Wp is
small in relation to Qp and this term is generally ignored. However, it is necessary to provide
for Wp in such situations as piles in marine structures in deep water where a considerable
length of shaft extends above sea bed.
Permissible stress methods are adopted in BS 8004. The actual dead load of a structure and
the most unfavourable combination of imposed loads are assumed to be applied to the
ground. The foundation is assumed to be safe if the permissible stress on the soil or rock is
not exceeded, taking into account the likely variable strength or stiffness properties of the
ground and the effect of a varying groundwater level. In the case of piled foundations,
uncertainty in the reliability of the calculation method is also taken into account. It is
generally accepted that current methods cannot predict failure loads to a greater accuracy
than plus or minus 60% of the value determined from a full-scale loading test taken to
failure. Hence, the safety factors used to obtain the allowable load on a single pile from the
calculated ultimate load are correspondingly high.
In BS 8004 a safety factor between 2 and 3 is generally adopted. Experience of a large
number of loading tests on piles of diameter up to 600 mm taken to failure, both in sands
142
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Load on pile head
Loads carried in
end bearing
Pile toe level
Point D
Point B
Point A
Depth below pile head
Figure 4.2 Load transfer from head of pile to shaft at points A, B and D on load/settlement curve
in Figure 4.1.
and clays, has shown that if safety factor of 2.5 is taken on the ultimate resistance then the
settlement of the pile head at the allowable load is unlikely to exceed 10 mm. For piles of
diameters up to about 1000 mm, failure or ultimate loads as determined by loading tests are
usually assumed to be the loads causing a pile head settlement of 10% of the diameter.
When using permissible stress methods for piles in groups it is accepted that a structure
can suffer excessive distortion caused by group settlement long before an individual pile in
the group has failed in bearing resistance. Hence a separate calculation is made of group
settlement based on a realistic assessment of dead load and the most favourable or
unfavourable combinations of imposed loading, using unfactored values of the compress-
ibility of the ground in the zone influenced by the group loading (see Chapter 5).
Where piles are end bearing on a strong intact rock the concept of a safety factor against
ultimate failure does not apply, since it is likely that the pile itself will fail as a structural
unit before shearing failure of the rock beneath the pile toe occurs. The allowable loads are
then governed by the safe working stress in compression and bending on the pile shaft (or
the Eurocode regulations for the characteristic strength of the pile divided by the appropriate
material factor) and the settlement of the pile due to elastic deformation and creep in the
rock beneath the base of the pile, together with the elastic compression of the pile shaft.
4.1.4
Determining allowable loads in compression using the 
procedure in the Eurocode British Standard EN 1997-1:2004
This account of the procedure adopted in the above Eurocode (referred to in this and
following chapters as Eurocode 7 or EC7)(1.2) is only a brief review of a lengthy document
containing many provisos, exceptions, and cross-references to other Eurocodes. The back-
ground to the scope and purpose of EC7 is outlined in Chapter 1. If the engineer proposes
to undertake the design of a foundation complying in all respects with the code requirements
it is essential for the whole document to be studied together with the other relevant codes
including BS EN 1990(1.3) and 1992(1.4). The commentary by Frank et al.(1.5) is also helpful
to a thorough understanding of the code. The main purpose of this section is to describe the
use of partial factors and the associated ‘design approach’ for determining allowable pile
loads (referred to in EC7). EC7 requires a structure, including the foundations, not to fail to
satisfy its design performance criteria because of exceeding various limit states. The
ultimate limit state can occur under the following conditions:
(a) Loss of equilibrium of the structure and the ground considered as a rigid body in which
the strengths of the structural materials and the ground are insignificant in providing
resistance (State EQU)
(b) Internal failure or excessive deformation of a structure and its foundation (State STR)
(c) Failure or excessive deformation of the ground in which the strengths of the soil or rock
are significant in providing resistance (State GEO)
(d) Loss of equilibrium of a structure due to uplift by water pressure or other vertical
actions (State UPL) and
(e) Hydraulic heave, internal erosion, and piping caused by hydraulic gradients (State HYD).
State EQU could occur when a structure collapses due to a landslide or earthquake. This
state is not considered further in this chapter. Design against occurrence of the other
states listed above involves applying partial factors to the applied loads (actions) and to
the ground resistance to ensure that reaching these states is highly improbable.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
143
Serviceability limit states are concerned with ensuring that the deformations of a structure
due to ground movements below the foundations do not damage the appearance or reduce
the useful life of the structure, or cause damage to finishes, non-structural elements,
machinery or other installations in the structure.
EC7 requires structures and their foundations to have sufficient durability to resist
weakening from attack by substances in the ground or the environment.
The design methods using EC7 can be advantageous compared to permissible stress methods
when designing structures using BS 8110 (Code of practice structural concrete) or BS 5950
(structural steelwork in buildings), or BS 5400 (bridges), which are all limit state codes, in that
difficulty is avoided in achieving compatibility between them and the foundation code BS 8004
which is based on permissible stresses. When the use of BS 8004 for the foundations in con-
junction with limit state codes for the superstructure cannot be avoided, the superstructure
designer should specify clearly whether or not the loads applied to the foundations are factored
or unfactored total loads, or are dead loads combined with factored imposed loading.
In addition to EC7, Eurocodes relevant to pile foundation design are the following:
G
BS EN 1990 Basis of structural design
G
BS EN 1991 Action on structures
G
BS EN 1992 Design of concrete structures
G
BS EN 1993 Design of steel structures
G
BS EN 1994 Design of composite concrete and steel structures
G
BS EN 1995 Design of timber structures
G
BS EN 1996 Design of masonry structures
G
BS EN 1998 Design of structures for earthquake resistance
G
BS EN 1999 Design of aluminium structures
As a preliminary EC7 requires the structure to be considered in three categories of risk
from the foundation aspect. Geotechnical Category 1 covers structures having negligible
risk of failure or damage due to ground movements, or where enough is known about the
ground conditions to adopt a routine method of design, provided that there are no risk problems
associated with excavation below groundwater level.
Category 2 includes conventional structures and their foundations with no exceptional
risk or difficult ground or loading conditions. Structures requiring piling come into this
category provided that there is adequate geotechnical data based on routine methods of
ground investigation.
Category 3 applies to all categories not coming within the scope of 1 and 2. It includes very
large or unusual structures and those involving abnormal risks or exceptionally difficult
ground or loading conditions, also structures in highly seismic areas and areas of site
instability. EC7 (Clause 2.2) lists 15 geological and environmental features which need to be
considered generally in foundation design. All of these are relevant to piled foundations for
which the code prescribes three basic approaches to design. These are the following:
G
Static load tests
G
Empirical or analytical calculations
G
Dynamic load tests.
Design by prescription and by the observational method are also referred to in the general
part of the code. The prescriptive method applies to the tables of allowable bearing pressures
144
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
for spread foundations in various classes of soils and rocks such as Table 1 of BS 8004.
Similar tables are not generally available for piles except those giving allowable base
pressures for piles bearing on rock.
The observational method is not usually relevant to piled foundation design. The method
involves the observation during construction of the behaviour of the whole or part of the
structure and its foundation. Typically, the method involves measuring the total and differential
settlements as the loading increases and making any necessary modifications to the design
if the movements are judged to become excessive. At this stage the piling would have been
long completed and too late to make any changes to the design without demolishing the
superstructure or introducing underpinning piles.
EC7 requires that geotechnical design by calculation should be in accordance with BS EN
1990:2002, Basis of structural design. It is emphasized that the quality of the information
on the ground conditions is more significant than precision in calculation models and the
partial factors employed. Also the interaction between the structure and the ground should
be considered to ensure that the strains in the structure are compatible with the ground
movements resulting from the applied loading.
EC7 defines actions on the foundations. They include earth and groundwater pressures
as well as the dead and imposed loading from structure and ground movements such as soil
swelling and shrinkage, frost action and drag-down. Duration of actions such as repetitive
loading and time effects on soil drainage and compressibility are also required to be
considered.
Ground properties are required to be obtained from field or laboratory tests, either
directly or by correlation, theory or empiricism. The effects of time, stress level and defor-
mation on the properties are to be taken into account.
Geometrical data to be considered include the slope of the ground surface, groundwater
levels and structural dimensions.
Characteristic values of geotechnical parameters are selected from the available
information, usually in the form of a site investigation report. A cautious appraisal of the
data is made within the zone influenced by stresses transmitted to the ground (e.g. the zones
beneath a pile group as shown in Figure 5.21). The selected values may be lower ones which
are less than the most probable ones, or an upper range of values higher than the most probable
ones. The latter selection would apply where high values have an unfavourable effect on
foundation behaviour, for example, when considering drag-down on piles or differential
settlement. Statistical evaluation of geotechnical data is permitted by EC7 provided that it
conforms to local knowledge of comparable materials. A very cautious approach is necessary
when selecting values from published tables of typical properties of soils and rocks.
Design values of actions are required to be determined in accordance with BS EN 1990.
In the case of piled foundations the design value (Fd) can be assessed directly, or derived
from representative values (Frep) by the equation:
Fd  F Frep
(4.2)
where F is the partial factor for an action.
Actions can be either structural, i.e. the loads transmitted from a structure directly to the pile
head or through a raft, or they may be geotechnical. The latter are caused by ground movements,
for example axial compression loads on the embedded surface of a pile caused by negative skin
friction (drag-down); or tension loads caused by swelling of the surrounding soil. Geotechnical
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
145
actions can also occur from transversely applied loads such as those on piles supporting bridge
abutments caused by surcharge from the adjacent approach embankments.
EC7 in Clause 7.3.2.1(3)P states that evaluation of geotechnical actions can be under-
taken in two ways:
(a) by pile–soil interaction analyses when the degree of relative pile–soil movement is
estimated and t–z curves are produced by computer to give the corresponding strains
and axial forces in the pile shaft (Section 4.6). In the case of transversely applied actions
a p–y analysis is performed (Section 6.3.5). Alternatively actions can be estimated from
other forms of analysis, such as finite element analysis.
(b) The upper-bound force exerted on the pile by the ground movement is calculated and
treated as an action.
Method (b) when applied to actions from negative skin friction can give over-conservative
designs if due consideration is not given to variations in frictional forces over the depth of
the pile shaft (Section 4.8).
Having determined the actions, treating structural and geotechnical actions separately, it is
then necessary to show that the design value of resistance of the ground against the pile (Rcd)
at the ultimate limit state is equal to or greater than the design value of the action (Fd). Rcd
for example, the resistance to axial compression can be calculated by the ‘model pile’method
which assumes that a pile of the same penetration depth and cross-sectional dimensions as
proposed for the project is installed at the location of each borehole or in-situ test. The two
components of total pile resistance, that is, the shaft and base resistance, are calculated for
the mean and minimum soil parameters for each borehole or test profile. The two components
are then divided by a correlation factor, , which depends on the number of ground test
profiles on the project site or particular area of the site exhibiting homogeneous ground
properties. Clause 7.6.2.3.5(P) does not make it clear whether the profiles represent mean or
lower bound lines drawn through the plotted points of laboratory test results on samples from
boreholes, or whether they refer only to profiles from in-situ tests such as the cone or
pressuremeter test. The authors have assumed that profiles of laboratory test results can be
used to obtain the correlation factors as shown in Table A10 of Annex A in EC7 (Table 4.6 in
this book). The resulting characteristic pile resistances are given by the equations:
Rck mean  (Rb cal mean  Rs cal mean)/
(4.3a)
and 
Rck min  (Rb cal min  Rs cal min)/
(4.3b)
where Rck mean and Rck min are the mean and minimum characteristic pile resistances respec-
tively, and Rb cal and Rs cal are the calculated base and shaft resistances.
Rck mean is calculated from the arithmetic average of the total resistance Rc cal mean obtained
from each borehole or in-situ test profile on the project site or part of the site, while Rc cal min
is selected from each borehole or test profile showing minimum values. Rs cal is calculated
from the average of the ground properties over the depth of the pile shaft, and Rb cal from the
properties in the region of the pile base.
The correlation factors 
and 
in the above equations refer specifically to calculations
of mean and minimum ground resistance based on the results of tests on borehole samples
4
3
4
3

146
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
or parameters derived from in-situ tests. They are shown in Table 4.6. As described below
when Rck is obtained from static pile loading tests the factors are 
and 
(Table 4.7) and
when Rck is derived from dynamic impact tests the factors 
and 
are used.
The design action Fd in equation 4.2 and the design values of base and shaft resistance
are obtained by dividing the characteristic values of Rbk and Rsk obtained from equations 4.3a
and 4.3b by the partial factors b and s respectively. These factors are
for actions (A series): G permanent and Q variable from Table 4.1;
for ground properties (M series): M from Table 4.2;
for ground resistances (R series): R from Table 4.3 to 4.5; and
correlation factors from Table 4.6.
The above partial factors are selected by adopting one or all of three design approaches
each with a different combination or set of the A, M, and R series. Thus
Design approach 1 (DA1), Combination 1: A1  M1  R1
Design approach 1 (DA1), Combination 2: A2  (M1 or M2)  R4
Design approach 2 (DA2), A1  M1  R2
Design approach 3 (DA3), A1 (or A2)  M1  R3.
The plus sign in the above list denotes ‘combined with’. As design approach DA1 will be
adopted for pile design by the British National Annex when published. DA2 and DA3 are
not considered in this text.
Taking the case of a pile loaded axially in compression and considering the limit states
STR or GEO, for DA1 Tables 4.2 and 4.3 show that the partial factors for ground properties
and ground resistances are unity. Therefore to ensure that Fd is equal to or not greater than
Rcd the partial factors are applied to the actions. Accordingly, it is essential that the field
operations and laboratory testing techniques should be undertaken in a thorough manner
with the appropriate standard of quality.
Approach DA1, Combination 2 provides for alternative material factors M1 or M2. The
former is used for structural actions while the latter is applied to geotechnical actions caused
by ground movements. Similarly, when approach DA3 is used the action factor A1 refers to
6
5
2
1
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
147
Table 4.1 Partial factors on actions (F)
Action
Symbol
Set
A1
A2
Permanent
Unfavourable
G
1.35
1.0
Favourable
1.0
1.0
Variable
Unfavourable
G
1.5
1.3
Favourable
0
0
Notes
The partial factors shown in Tables 4.1 to 4.8 are those
provided in Annex A of EC7.The mandatory factors to be
applied under the British National Annex are due to be
published in 2008, and should be consulted prior to under-
taking design to EC7 rules.
Different factors will apply to bridges in Table 4.1
Table 4.2 Partial factors for soil parameters (M)
Soil parameter
Symbol
Set
M1
M2
Angle of shearing resistancea
1.0
1.25
Effective cohesion
1.0
1.25
Undrained shear strength
cu
1.0
1.4
Unconfined strength
qu
1.0
1.4
Weight density

1.0
1.0
Note
a This factor is applied to tan
.

c

Table 4.3 Partial resistance factors (R) for driven piles
Resistance
Symbol
Set
R1
R2
R3
R4
Base
b
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
Shaft (compression)
s
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
Total/combined (compression) t
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
Shaft in tension
s;t
1.25
1.15
1.1
1.6
Table 4.4 Partial resistance factors (R) for bored piles
Resistance
Symbol
Set
R1
R2
R3
R4
Base
b
1.25
1.1
1.0
1.6
Shaft (compression)
s
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
Total/combined (compression)
t
1.15
1.1
1.0
1.6
Shaft in tension
s;t
1.25
1.15
1.1
1.6
Table 4.5 Partial resistance factors (R) for continuous flight auger piles
Resistance
Symbol
Set
R1
R2
R3
R4
Base
b
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.45
Shaft (compression)
s
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.3
Total/combined (compression)
t
1.1
1.1
1.0
1.4
Shaft in tension
s;t
1.25
1.15
1.1
1.6
structural actions and A2 to geotechnical actions. The R3 factors in the DA3 approach are
all unity requiring the ground resistances to be calculated directly from the characteristic
ground properties in a single calculation to verify that Rcd is equal to or greater than Fd.
It will be noted from Tables 4.3 to 4.5 that higher factors are used for uplift loading. The
application of these factors is discussed in Chapter 6.
Whichever of the design approaches or combinations of partial factors are used the
factors for structural actions and geotechnical actions must be selected separately. EC7 gives
no guidance on the factors to be used to obtain the design value of Fd where this is caused
by geotechnical actions. Frank et al.(1.5) recommend that the material and resistance factors
as shown in Tables 4.2 to 4.5 should be applied to the characteristic values of the geotechnical
actions to obtain the design values. Because they are equal to unity or greater than unity they
should be applied as multipliers to ensure that Fd (geotechnical) is equal to or less than the
factored ground resistance.
An alternative to the model pile procedure is permitted. Characteristic values of the soil
parameters over the penetration depth of the pile, as determined by field or laboratory
testing, are used to obtain the components Rbk and Rsk characteristic of the whole site or
homogeneous area of the site. Correlation factors are not applied to these components. It is
likely that their sum, i.e. the characteristic total pile resistance, will be higher than that
calculated using the model pile procedure. Clause 7.6.2.3(8) of EC7 states, ‘If this alternative
procedure is applied the values of the partial factors b and s recommended in Annex A
may need to be corrected by a model factor larger than 1.0. The value of the model factor
may be set by the National Annex.’ The purpose of the model factor is to make the results
of the alternative method compatible with the model pile method. The partial factor values
shown in Tables 4.1 to 4.17 in this and other chapters of this book are as set out in Annex A
of EC7 but correction factors to modify b and s are not shown in Annex A and the British
National Annex has not been published at the time of preparing this edition.
One further step may need to be taken. If the superstructure or substructure supported by
the piles is stiff enough to redistribute loads from the weaker to the stronger piles, Clause
7.6.2.3(7) allows the correlation factors 
and 
to be divided by 1.1 provided that 
is
never less than 1.0.
Experimental models are not used in the day-to-day design of piled foundations. Scale
models (including centrifugal models) have their uses as a general research tool, provided
that they reproduce the pile installation method, and the findings are verified by full-scale
tests and by experience.
3
4
3
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
149
Table 4.6 Correlation factors ( ) to derive characteristic values from
ground test results
n
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
1.40
1.35
1.33
1.31
1.29
1.27
1.25
1.40
1.27
1.23
1.20
1.15
1.12
1.06
Notes
n
denotes the number of test profiles.
denotes on the mean values of the calculated resistances from ground test
results.
denotes on the minimum values of ground test results.
4
3
4
3


Pile loading tests using procedures described in Section 11.4.2 can be used directly to
obtain design resistance values or to verify design resistances derived from empirical or
analytical methods. If there is any doubt about the validity of such methods loading tests are
required to be made on trial piles. The Geotechnical Risk Category, as previously described,
should be considered when deciding on the programme for pile loading tests. At this stage
the trial piles can also be used to check that the proposed installation method can achieve
the design penetration depth without difficulty (particularly in the case of driven piles) and
can produce a soundly constructed foundation. Loading tests are made on working piles at
the project construction stage to confirm the experiences of pre-contract trials and as a
routine check on the contractor’s workmanship.
Whenever possible static pile loading tests should be taken to failure or to the stage where
a failure can be reliably extrapolated from the load/settlement diagram. In cases where the
failure load or ultimate limit state resistance Rcm cannot be interpreted from a continuously
curving load/settlement diagram, Clause 7.6.1.1(3) of EC7 permits Rcm to be defined as the
load applied to the pile head which causes a settlement of 10% of the pile diameter.
Clause 7.5.2.1 recommends that tension tests should always be taken to failure because of
doubts about the validity of extrapolation in uplift loading.
The correlation factors shown in Table 4.7 are applied to ultimate resistances (Rcm)
obtained from loading tests on trial or working piles to obtain characteristic resistances Rck.
The partial factors in Tables 4.3 to 4.5 are then applied to arrive at the design resistances Rcd.
When instrumented piles are used to measure the separate components of base and shaft
resistances (Rbk and Rsk) the appropriate partial factors are used as shown in the tables. If the
structure above the piles is stiff enough to redistribute loads from weaker to stronger piles
the correlation factors may be reduced by the factor of 1.1 as noted above for calculations
using analytical methods, provided that 
is never less than 1.0.
Clause 7.5.3. of EC7 states that dynamic loading tests may be used to estimate resistances
to axial compression loads provided that there has been an adequate ground investigation
and that the method has been calibrated against static loading tests on the same type of pile
and of similar length and cross-section, and in comparable soil conditions. The equipment
used for dynamic testing and the method of interpretation are described in Section 7.3.
At the stage of trial piling the correlation factors shown in Table 4.8 are applied to the test
results to obtain characteristic and design resistances in the manner described above for static
load tests. Table A.11 in Annex A of EC7 should be consulted for the various qualifications in
the application of the correlation factors which depend on the instrumentation used in the tests.
1
150
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Table 4.7 Correlation factors ( ) to derive characteristic
values from static pile load tests
n
1
2
3
4
5
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
1.40
1.20
1.05
1.00
1.00
Notes
n
denotes the number of tested piles.
denotes on the mean values of measured resistances in static
tests.
denotes on the minimum values of measured resistances in static
load tests.
2
1
2
1


Geometrical data are concerned with the cross-sectional dimensions of piles. In the case
of precast concrete and manufactured steel sections, the dimensions are required to conform
to manufacturing tolerances as set out in BS EN 1990. These tolerances are insignificant in
relation to the uncertainties involved with soil properties and design methods and can be
ignored. Bored piles in which the concrete is placed in unlined boreholes or driven and cast-
in-place piles where the drive tube is extracted during or after placing the concrete may
undergo reductions in shaft diameter caused by ‘waisting’ or ‘necking’ as described in
Section 2.4.2.
BS EN 1992-1-1 specifies that the diameters to be used in design calculations should be
in accordance with the tolerances shown in Table 4.9.
Partial factors of unity are used when checking a foundation design for compliance with
serviceability limit-state criteria. The procedure for pile groups is discussed in Chapter 5.
The following sections of Chapter 4 will describe the use of partial factors in obtaining
values for the separate components of base and shaft resistance of driven and bored piles in
clays, sands, and rocks.
4.2
Calculations for piles in fine-grained soils
4.2.1
Driven displacement piles
When a pile is driven into a fine-grained soil (e.g. clays and clayey silts) the soil is displaced
laterally and in an upward direction, initially to an extent equal to the volume of the pile
entering the soil. The clay close to the pile surface is extensively remoulded and high pore-
water pressures are developed. In a soft clay the high pore pressures may take weeks or
months to dissipate. During this time the shaft friction and end-bearing resistance, in so far
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
151
Table 4.8 Correlation factors ( ) to derive characteristic
values from dynamic impact tests
n
2
5
10
15
20
1.60
1.50
1.45
1.42
1.40
1.50
1.35
1.30
1.25
1.25
Notes
n
denotes the number of tested piles.
denotes on the mean values of the measured resistances from
dynamic tests.
denotes on the minimum values of the measured resistances from
dynamic tests.
See Table A.11 of EN1997-1: 2004 for qualifications to validity of
above correlation factors.
6
5
6
5


Table 4.9 Design tolerances for diameters of uncased bored
piles
Nominal diameter (dnom)
Design diameter (d)
400 mm
d  dnom  20 mm
400
dnom
1000 m
d  0.95dnom
dnom  1000 mm
d  dnom  50 mm


as they are related to the effective overburden pressure (the total overburden pressure minus
the pore water pressure), are only slowly developed. The soft clay displaced by the pile shaft
slumps back into full contact with the pile. The water expelled from the soil is driven back
into the surrounding clay, resulting in a drier and somewhat stiffer material in contact with
the shaft. As the pore-water pressures dissipate and the re-consolidation takes place the
heaved ground surface subsides to near its original level.
The effects in a stiff clay are somewhat different. Lateral and upward displacement again
occurs, but extensive cracking of the soil takes place in a radial direction around the pile.
The clay surrounding the upper part of the pile breaks away from the shaft and may never
regain contact with it. If the clay has a fissured structure the radial cracks around the pile
propagate along the fissures to a considerable depth. Beneath the pile toe, the clay is exten-
sively remoulded and the fissured structure destroyed. The high pore pressures developed in
the zone close to the pile surface are rapidly dissipated into the surrounding crack system
and negative pore pressures are set up due to the expansion of the soil. The latter may result
in an initially high ultimate resistance which may be reduced to some extent as the negative
pore pressures are dissipated and relaxation occurs in the soil which has been compressed
beneath and surrounding the lower part of the pile.
In permissible stress terminology the end-bearing resistance of the displacement pile (the
term Qb in equation 4.1) is calculated from the equation:
(4.4)
where Nc is the bearing capacity factor, cub is the characteristic undisturbed undrained
shear strength representative of the fissured strength at the pile toe, and Ab is the cross-
sectional area of pile toe. The bearing capacity factor Nc is approximately equal to 9
provided that the pile has been driven at least to a depth of 5 diameters into the bearing
stratum. It is not strictly correct to take the undisturbed strength for cub since remoulding
has taken place beneath the toe. However, the greater part of the failure surface in end
bearing shown in Figure 4.3 is in soil which has been only partly disturbed by the pene-
tration of the pile. In a stiff fissured clay the gain in strength caused by remoulding is
offset by the loss due to large displacement strains along a fissure plane. In the case of a
soft and sensitive clay the full undisturbed cohesion should be taken only when the working
load is applied to the pile after the clay has had time to regain its original shearing strength
(i.e. after full dissipation of pore pressures); the rate of gain in the carrying capacity of piles
in soft clays is shown in Figure 4.4. It may be noted that a period of a year is required for the
full development of carrying capacity in the Scandinavian ‘quick’ clays. In any case the
end-bearing resistance of a small-diameter pile in clay is only a small proportion of the total
resistance and errors due to the incorrect assumption of cub on the failure surface are not of
great significance.
In terms of ‘pure’ soil mechanics theory the ultimate shaft friction is related to the
horizontal effective stress acting on the shaft and the effective remoulded angle of friction
between the pile and the clay. Thus
(4.5)
where s is the unit shaft friction at any point, 
is the horizontal effective stress, and 	r is
the effective remoulded angle of friction.
h
s  
h tan 	r
Qb  NccubAb
152
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
153
Failure surface in 
shaft friction
Failure surface 
in end bearing
Figure 4.3 Failure surfaces for compressive loading on piles.
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1
5
 10
50
30
25
20
15
10
Bearing capacity (tons)
Bearing capacity (kN)
5
100
Time after driving (days)
200 × 215 mm concrete
(Gothenburg)
300 × 125 mm I-Beam
(Gothenburg)
350 × 150 mm tapered timber (Drammen)
150 mm (6 in) steel tube (San Francisco)
500
1000
Figure 4.4 Gain in bearing capacity with increasing time after driving of piles into soft clays.
A further simplifying assumption is made that 
is proportional to the vertical effective
overburden pressure 
. Thus
(4.6)
The value of K is constantly changing throughout the period of installation of the pile and
its subsequent loading history. In the case of a driven pile in a stiff clay K is initially very
high, as a result of the energy transmitted by the hammer blows required to displace the clay
around the pile. However, at this time 
is very low or even negative due to the high
pore-water pressures induced by the pile driving. In the case of a bored pile, K is low as the
vo
s  K
vo tan 	r
vo
h
soil swells at the time of drilling the hole, but it increases as concrete is placed in the shaft.
Because of these constantly changing values of K, and the varying pore pressures (and hence
values of 
), ‘pure’ soil mechanics methods cannot be applied to practical pile design for
conventional structures without introducing empirical factors and simplified calculations to
allow for these uncertainties.
A method has been developed at Imperial College, London, for determining the ultimate
bearing capacity of piles driven into clays and sands. The method was developed primarily
for piles carrying heavy compression and uplift loads in offshore platforms for petroleum
exploration and production. The procedure for piles in clays is based on the use of rather
complex and time-consuming laboratory tests, with the aim of eliminating many of the
uncertainties inherent in the effective stress approach as noted above. The method for piles
in clays and sands is described in Section 4.3.7.
In the case of piles which penetrate a relatively short distance into the bearing stratum of
firm to stiff clay, that is piles carrying light to moderate loading, a sufficiently reliable
method of calculating the ultimate shaft friction, Qs, on the pile shaft is to use the equation:
(4.7)
where  is an adhesion factor, 
is the characteristic or average undisturbed undrained shear
strength of the soil surrounding the pile shaft, and As is the surface area of the pile shaft
contributing to the support of the pile in shaft friction (usually measured from the ground
surface to the toe).
The adhesion factor depends partly on the shear strength of the soil and partly on the
nature of the soil above the bearing stratum of clay into which the piles are driven. Early
studies(4.1) showed a general trend towards a reduction in the adhesion factor from unity or
higher than unity for very soft clays, to values as low as 0.2 for clays having a very stiff con-
sistency. There was a wide scatter in the values over the full range of soil consistency and
these seemed to be unrelated to the material forming the pile.
Much further light on the behaviour of piles driven into stiff clays was obtained in the
research project undertaken for the Construction Industry Research and Information
Association (CIRIA) in 1969.(4.2) Steel tubular piles were driven into stiff to very stiff
London clay and were subjected to loading tests at 1 month, 3 months and 1 year after driving.
Some of the piles were then disinterred for a close examination of the soil surrounding the
interface. This examination showed that the gap, which had formed around the pile as the
soil was displaced by its entry, extended to a depth of 8 diameters and it had not closed up
a year after driving. Between depths of 8 diameters and 14 to 16 diameters the clay was
partly adhering to the pile surface, and below 16 diameters the clay was adhering tightly to
the pile in the form of a dry skin 1 to 5 mm in thickness which had been carried down by
the pile. Thus in the lower part of the pile the failure was not between the pile and the clay,
but between the skin and surrounding clay which had been heavily sheared and distorted.
Strain gauges mounted on the pile to record how the load was transferred from the pile to
the soil showed the distribution of load in Figure 4.5. It may be noted that there was no trans-
fer of load in the upper part of the pile, due to the presence of the gap. Most of the load was
transferred to the lower part where the adhesion was as much as 20% greater than the
undrained strength of the clay. For structures on land, the gap in the upper part of the
pile shaft is of no great significance for calculating pile capacity because the greater part of
the shaft friction is provided at lower levels. In any case much of the clay in the region of
cu
Qs  cuAs
vo
154
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
the gap is removed when excavating for the pile cap. The gap may be significant for
relatively short piles with shallow capping beams for house foundations where these are
required as a precaution against the effects of soil swelling and shrinkage caused by vegetation
(Section 7.9). However, house foundation piles are usually bored and cast-in-place types
where a gap is not formed during installation.
Recent research by Bond and Jardine(4.3) on extensively instrumented piles jacked into stiff
London Clay confirmed the findings on the nature of the soil disturbance very close to the pile.
Negative pore pressures were induced in the clay close to the pile wall and positive pressures
further away from the pile. Equalization of pore pressures after installation was very rapid
occurring in a period of about 48 hours. There was no change in shaft friction capacity after the
equalization period as observed by periodic first-time loading tests over a 31⁄2-month period.
Earlier research, mainly in the field of pile design for offshore structures, has shown that
the mobilization of shaft friction is influenced principally by two factors. These are
the over-consolidation ratio of the clay and the slenderness (or aspect) ratio of the pile. The
over-consolidation ratio is defined as the ratio of the maximum previous vertical effective
overburden pressure, 
, to the existing vertical effective overburn pressure, 
. For
the purposes of pile design, Randolph and Wroth(4.4) have shown that it is convenient to
represent the over-consolidation ratio by the simpler ratio of the undrained shear strength to the
existing effective overburden pressure, cu/
. Randolph and Wroth showed that the cu/
ratio could be correlated with the adhesion factor, . A relationship between these two has
been established by Semple and Rigden(4.5) from a review of a very large number of pile
loading tests, the majority of them being on open-end piles either plugged with soil or
concrete. This is shown in Figure 4.6a for the case of a rigid pile, and where the shaft friction
vo
vo
vo
vc
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
155
Load on pile head
199 kN
Gap
Weakly
adhering
clay
Strongly
adhering
clay
Clay probably
moving down
with pile
168 mm O.D.
steel tubular
pile
Possible
tension crock
Load
on pile
shaft
1
2
3
Depth below ground level in m
4
5
5.6
Figure 4.5 Load transfer from pile to stiff clay at Stanmore(4.2).
is calculated from the peak value of cu. To allow for the flexibility and slenderness ratio of
the pile it is necessary to reduce the values of p by a length factor, F, as shown in
Figure 4.6b. Thus total shaft friction:
(4.8)
The slenderness ratio, L/B, influences the mobilization of shaft friction in two ways. First,
a slender pile can ‘whip’ or flutter during driving causing a gap around the pile at a shallow
depth. The second influence is the slip at the interface when the shear stress at transfer from
the pile to the soil exceeds the peak value of shear strength and passes into the lower resid-
ual strength. This is illustrated by the shear/strain curve of the simple shear box test on a
clay. The peak shear strength is reached at a relatively small strain followed by the much
lower residual strength at long strain. It follows that when an axial load is applied to the head
of a long flexible pile the relative movement between the pile and the clay at a shallow depth
can be large enough to reach the stage of low post-peak strength at the interface. Near the
pile toe the relative movement between the compressible pile and the compressible clay may
not have reached the stage of mobilizing the peak shear strength. At some intermediate level
the post-peak condition may have been reached but not the lowest residual condition. It is
therefore evident that calculation of the skin friction resistance from the results of the peak
undrained shear strength, as obtained from unconfined or triaxial compression tests in the
laboratory, may overestimate the available friction resistance of long piles. The length
factors shown in Figure 4.6b are stated by Semple and Rigden to allow both for the flutter
effects and the residual or part-residual shear strength conditions at the interface. The effect
of these conditions on the settlement of single piles is discussed in Section 4.6.
Where an overburden of soft clay is overlying a stiff clay adhesion, factors appropriate to
each type should be selected and the shaft resistance calculated for the portion of the shaft
embedded in each stratum. The length factor in Figure 4.6b is taken on the overall embedded
length.
In marine structures where piles may be subjected to uplift and lateral forces caused by
wave action or the impact of berthing ships, it is frequently necessary to drive the piles to
much greater depths than those necessary to obtain the required resistance to axial
compression loading only. To avoid premature refusal at depths which are insufficient to
obtain the required uplift or lateral resistance, tubular piles are frequently driven with open
ends. At the early stages of driving soil enters the pile when the pile is said to be ‘coring’.
As driving continues shaft friction will build up between the interior soil and the pile wall.
This soil is acted on by inertial forces resulting from the blows of the hammer. At some stage
the inertial forces on the core plus the internal shaft friction will exceed the bearing capacity
of the soil at the pile toe calculated on the cross-sectional area of the open end. The plug is
then carried down by the pile as shown in Figure 4.7a. However, on further driving and when
subjected to the working load, the pile with its soil plug does not behave in the same way as
one driven to its full penetration with the tip closed by a steel plate or concrete plug. This is
because the soil around and beneath the open end is not displaced and consolidated to the
same extent as that beneath a solid-end pile.
Comparative tests on open-end and closed-end piles were made by Rigden et al.(4.6) The
two piles were 457 mm steel tubes driven to a penetration of 9 m into stiff glacial till in
Yorkshire. A clay plug was formed in the open-end pile and carried down to occupy 40% of
the final penetration depth. However, the failure loads of the clay-plugged and steel plate
Qs  FpcuAs
156
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
closed piles were 1160 and 1400 kN respectively. Evaluation of the ultimate shaft friction
and base resistances showed that the external shaft friction on the open-end piles was 20%
less than that on the closed-end piles.
Accordingly, it is recommended that where field measurements show that a clay plug
is carried down, the total ultimate bearing capacity should be calculated as the sum of the
external shaft friction (obtained from equation 4.8 and Figure 4.6) multiplied by a factor of
0.8, and the ultimate base resistance, Qb, obtained from equation 4.4 multiplied by a factor
of 0.5 (see Section 4.3.9). Where an internal stiffening ring is provided at the toe of a steel
pile the base resistance should be calculated only on the net cross-sectional area of the steel.
Attempts to clean out the core of soil from within the pile and replace it by a plug of
concrete or cement–sand grout are often ineffective due to the difficulty of removing the
strongly adherent clay skin to provide an effective bond to the pile surface. Also on large
diameter piles the radial shrinkage of the concrete or grout plug can weaken the bond with
the pile. As already noted the majority of the pile tests used to derive the relationships in
Figure 4.6 were made on open-end piles plugged with soil or concrete. Hence, the shaft
friction derived from them already incorporates the effect of the open end.
Plug formation between the flanges and web of an H-section pile is problematical. The
possible plug formation at the toe of an H-pile is shown in Figure 4.7b. The mode of
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
157
1.6
(1.0,0.35)
(0.5,0.8)
Undrained shear strength/effective
overburden pressure, Cu/s9vo
Embedded length/width ratio of pile, L/B
0.8
Peak adhesion factor a p
Length factor F
0.4
0.2
1.6
0.8
0.4
20
40
80
(1.0,50)
(0.7,120)
160
320
0.2
0.4
0.8
1.6
3.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 Adhesion factors for piles driven to deep penetration into clays (after Semple and
Rigden4.5) (a) Peak adhesion factor versus shear strength/effective overburden pressure
(b) Length factor.
formation of a dragged-down soft clay or sand skin has not been studied. A gap has been
observed around all flange and web surfaces of H-piles driven into stiff glacial till. An H-pile
is not a good type to select if it is desired to develop shaft friction and end-bearing resist-
ance in a stiff clay. The authors recommend calculating the shaft friction on the outer flange
surfaces only, but plugging can be allowed for by calculating the end-bearing resistance on
the gross cross-sectional area of the pile. Because of the conservative assumptions of shaft
friction and the relatively low proportion of the load carried in end bearing the calculated
resistance need not be reduced by the factor of 0.5 as recommended for tubular piles.
Applying the recommendations of EC7, for calculating the ultimate resistance of piles
driven into clay, the permissible stress equation 4.1 becomes
Rcd  Rbd  Rsd
(4.9)
where Rcd, Rbd, and Rsb are the design values of the total, base and shaft resistances respectively.
The first step is to calculate the latter two components using the arithmetic average of the
undrained shear strength cu for each borehole or in-situ test profile. Thus:
Rc cal mean  9  cub mean  Ab  F  p 
us mean  As 
(4.10)
and 
Rc cal min  9  cub min  Ab  F  p 
us min  As
(4.11)
Rc cal mean is calculated from equation 4.10 for each borehole or test profile using ub mean as
the average value from tests in the region of the pile base, and cus mean as the average for each
c
c
c
158
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Clay plug
carried down
with pile
Lp
Sheared clay
lumps partly
carried down
Flanges
End bearing on
gross area
Shaft friction on
gross perimeter
only on this length
Shaft friction acts
only on
outer flange surfaces
Web
Open-ended
pile
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7 Formation of soil plug at toe of small displacement piles (a) Open-ended tube (b) H-section.
borehole or test profile over the penetration depth of the pile. Rc cal min is calculated from
equation 4.11 using the values of cu at the base and over the penetration depth of the pile
from the borehole or test pile showing the lowest results after reviewing all test data.
The characteristic total pile resistance is then obtained from the equation:
Rck  (Rb cal  Rs cal)/
(4.12)
In equation 4.12 values of Rck are obtained using the correlation factor 
for mean values
of Rck and 
for minimum values (see Table 4.6) to give
Rck  Rbk  Rsk
(4.13)
where Rck, Rbk and Rsk are characteristic values and Rck is the lower of the factored compo-
nents of the minimum or mean strength profiles.
Rbk and Rsk are divided by the partial factors b and s respectively after using DA1 design
approach as described in Section 4.1.4 to give the design values:
Rcd  Rbk/b  Rsk/s  Rbd  Rsd
(4.14)
When the alternative procedure is used Rcd is given by
Rcd  (9  cubk  Ab)/b  (F  p 
usk)/s
(4.15)
where cubk and usk are characteristic values of cu for the base and shaft respectively.
The foregoing procedures are illustrated by Example 4.1 at the end of this chapter.
4.2.2
Driven and cast-in-place displacement piles
The end-bearing resistance of driven and cast-in-place piles terminated in clay can be
calculated from equation 4.4. Where the piles have an enlarged base formed by hammering
out a plug of gravel or dry concrete, the area Ab should be calculated from the estimated
diameter of the base. It is difficult, if not impossible, for the engineer to make this estimate
in advance of the site operations since the contractor installing these proprietary piles makes
his own decision on whether to adopt a fairly shallow penetration and hammer out a large
base in a moderately stiff clay, or whether to drive deeper to gain shaft friction, but at the
expense of making a smaller base in the deeper and stiffer clay. In a hard clay it may be
impracticable to obtain any worthwhile enlargement over the nominal shaft diameter. In any
case, the base may have to be taken to a certain minimum depth to ensure that settlements
of the pile group are not exceeded (see Section 5.2.2). The decision as to this minimum
length must be taken or approved by the engineer.
The conditions for predicting shaft friction on the shaft are different from those with driven
pre-formed piles in some important aspects. The effect on the soil of driving the piling tube with
its end closed by a plug is exactly the same as with a steel tubular pile; the clay is remoulded,
sheared, and distorted, giving the same conditions at the pile–soil interface as with the driven
pre-formed pile. The clay has no chance to swell before the concrete is placed and the residual
radial horizontal stress in the soil closes up any incipient gap caused by shrinkage of the con-
crete. Also the gap which may form around the upper part of the driving tube (or down the full
c
c
4
3

Resistance of piles to compressive loads
159
length of the driving tube if an enlarged detachable shoe is used to close its base) becomes filled
with concrete. The tube, while being driven, drags down a skin of soft clay or sandy soil for a
few diameters into the stiff clay and it is quite likely that this skin will remain interposed
between the concrete and the soil, i.e. the skin is not entirely pulled out by adhering to the tube.
However, in one important aspect there is a difference between the driven, and the driven and
cast-in-place pile in that water migrates from the unset concrete into the clay and softens it for
a limited radial distance. This aspect is discussed in greater detail in Section 4.2.3. Thus the
adhesion factor for a driven and cast-in-place pile in a stiff clay may be slightly less than that
for a driven pile in corresponding soil conditions. It will probably be greater over the length in
a soft clay, however, since the concrete slumps outwards as the tube is withdrawn, producing an
increase in effective shaft diameter.
The results of a number of loading tests on driven and driven and cast-in-place piles in
glacial till have been reviewed by Weltman and Healy(4.7). There appeared to be little differ-
ence in the –cu relationship for either type of pile. They produced the design curves shown
in Figure 4.8 for the two types of driven pile including a curve for piles driven a short pen-
etration into stiff glacial till overlain by soft clay. Their review also included a study of the
shaft friction on bored piles in glacial till.
Trenter(4.8) recommended using the Weltman and Healy relationships and stated that it is
essential to obtain 100 mm samples of the till suitable for strength tests.
When using the EC7 recommendations to determine the ultimate limit state resistance of
driven and cast-in-place piles, the procedure described in Section 4.2.1 should be followed.
Compliance with the shaft dimension tolerances in Table 4.9 should be observed.
4.2.3
Bored and cast-in-place non-displacement piles
The installation of bored piles using the equipment and methods described in Sections 3.3.1
to 3.3.6 and 3.4.6 causes changes in the properties of the soil on the walls of the pile bore-
hole which have a significant effect on the frictional resistance of the piles. The effect of
drilling is to cause a relief of lateral pressure on the walls of the hole. This results in swelling
of the clay and there is a migration of pore water towards the exposed clay face. If the bore-
hole intersects water-filled fissures or pockets of silt the water will trickle down the hole and
160
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
1.2
60
80
100
120
Undrained shear strength Cu, kN/m2
Driven and driven and cast-in-place piles
Bored piles
140
160
180
200
220
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Adhesion factor a
0
Reduced values for driven 
piles where L < 10B and till
is overlain by soft clay
Figure 4.8 Adhesion factors for piles in glacial till (after Weltman and Healy4.7).
form a slurry with the clay as the drilling tools are lowered down or raised from the hole.
Water can also soften the clay if it trickles down from imperfectly sealed-off water-bearing
strata above the clay, or if hose pipes are carelessly used at ground level to remove clay
adhering to the drilling tools.
The effect of drilling is always to cause softening of the clay. If bentonite is used to sup-
port the sides of the borehole, softening of the clay due to relief of lateral pressure on the
walls of the hole will still take place, but flow of water from any fissures will not occur.
There is also a risk of entrapment of pockets of bentonite in places where overbreak has been
caused by the rotary drilling operation. This would be particularly liable to occur in a stiff
fissured clay.
After placing concrete in the pile borehole, water migrates from the unset concrete into
the clay, causing further softening of the soil. The rise in moisture content due to the com-
bined effects of drilling and placing concrete was observed by Meyerhof and Murdock(4.9),
who measured an increase of 4% in the water content of London Clay close to the interface
with the concrete. The increase extended for a distance of 76 mm from the interface.
This softening affects only the shaft. The soil within the zone of rupture beneath and
surrounding the pile base (Figure 4.3) remains unaffected for all practical purposes and the
end-bearing resistance Qb can be calculated from equation 4.4, the value of the bearing
capacity factor Nc again being 9. However, Whitaker and Cooke(4.10) showed that the
fissured structure of London Clay had some significance on the end-bearing resistance of
large bored piles, and they suggested that if a bearing capacity factor of 9 is adopted the
characteristic shearing strength should be taken along the lower range of the graph of shearing
strength against depth. If bentonite is used the effects of any entrapment of slurry beneath
the pile base as described by Reese et al.(3.13) should be allowed for by an appropriate reduction
in end-bearing resistance.
The effect of the softening on the shaft friction of bored piles in London Clay was
studied by Skempton(4.11), who showed that the adhesion factor in equation 4.7 ranged
from 0.3 to 0.6 for a number of loading test results. He recommended a value of 0.45 for
normal conditions where drilling and placing concrete followed a reasonably rapid
sequence. However, for short piles, where a large proportion of the shaft may be in heav-
ily fissured clay, Skempton recommended the lower value of 0.3. Skempton observed
that the actual unit shaft friction mobilized in London Clay did not exceed 100 kN/m2,
and this value should be taken as an upper limit when the unit resistance is calculated
from 0.3 or 0.45 times the average undisturbed undrained shear strength. Alternatively,
the curve for bored piles in Figure 4.8 can be used to obtain the adhesion factor for very
stiff to hard clays.
The authors recommend that the same value of 0.3 should be used for small-diameter
bored piles where there may be a long delay between drilling and placing the concrete, for
example, where piles are drilled in the morning and the borehole is left unlined awaiting the
arrival of the ready-mixed concrete truck at the end of the day. The factor of 0.3 should also
be used for large bored piles with enlarged bases which may involve a long delay between
first drilling and finally concreting the shaft, giving a long period for the swelling and soft-
ening of the clay on the sides of the shaft. It is believed that differences in the method of
drilling, such as between the scoring or gouging of a plate auger and the smoothing of a
bucket auger, can also cause differences in friction. However, the effects of soil swelling and
water from the concrete are likely to be of much greater significance in controlling the
adhesion factor.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
161
Fleming and Sliwinski(4.12) reported no difference in the adhesion factor between bored
piles drilled into clays in bentonite-filled holes and dry holes. In spite of this evidence it
must be pointed out that if the use of a bentonite slurry to support an unlined hole in clay
does not reduce the shaft friction this must mean that the rising column of concrete placed
by tremie pipe beneath the slurry has the effect of sweeping the slurry completely off
the wall of the borehole. It is difficult to conceive that this happens in all cases; therefore
the adhesion factor  recommended for London Clay, or for other clays in Figure 4.8, should
be reduced by 0.8 to allow for the use of bentonite unless a higher value can be demonstrated
conclusively by loading tests.
In clays other than London Clay, where there is no information from loading tests or
publications, the adhesion factors shown in the curve for bored piles in glacial till
(Figure 4.8) can be used as a guide to pile design. The calculated pile capacity should be
confirmed by field loading tests.
The procedure for checking the ULS resistance of bored piles in clay when using the EC7
rules is the same as described in Section 4.2.1 for driven piles. The b and s partial factors
in equation 4.14 are used for conventional bored piles and continuous flight auger (CFA) piles
as shown in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.
The greater part of the resistance of bored piles in clay is provided by shaft friction for
which the component in equation 4.10 becomes 
. It will be noted that the value of s
is unity in the above tables. Hence, the engineer should give careful attention to the quality
of the undisturbed sample and the laboratory testing techniques.
The higher value of 1.25 for b in bored piles in equations 4.14 and 4.15 compared with
unity for driven piles reflects the influence of the fissured structure of many stiff clays, and
also takes into account possible inadequacies when cleaning out the base of the pile bore-
hole before placing the concrete. The latter operation also involves the risk in soft clays of
‘waisting’ or necking when placing concrete in uncased boreholes or when extracting tem-
porary casing. Allowances for possible reductions in pile diameter due to these causes are
shown in Table 4.9.
When enlarged bases are provided on bored piles in a fissured clay there may be a loss of
adhesion over part of the pile shaft in cases where appreciable settlements of the pile base
are allowed to occur. The effect of such movements is to open a gap between the conical
surface of the base and the overlying clay. The latter then slumps downwards to close the
gap and this causes a ‘drag-down’ on the pile shaft. Arching prevents slumping of the full
thickness of clay from the ground surface to the pile base. It is regarded as over-cautious to
add the possible drag-down force to the working load on the pile, but nevertheless it may be
prudent to disregard the supporting action on the pile of shaft friction over a height of two
shaft diameters above the pile base, as shown in Figure 4.9.
Disregarding shaft friction over a height of two shaft diameters and taking an adhesion
factor of 0.3 for the friction on the remaining length may make a pile with an enlarged base
an unattractive proposition in many cases when compared with one with a straight shaft.
However, the enlarged-base pile is economical if the presence of a very stiff or hard stratum
permits the whole of the working load to be carried in end bearing. These piles can also be
advantageous where the concept of yielding or ‘ductile’ piles is adopted for the purpose of
achieving load distribution between piles as discussed in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.10. Enlarged
bases may also be a necessity to avoid drilling down to or through a water-bearing layer in
an otherwise impervious clay.
cuskAs
162
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Piles for marine structures are sometimes installed by driving a steel tube to a limited
penetration below sea bed, followed by drilling-out the soil plug then continuing the drilled
hole without further support by the pile tube. A bentonite slurry is sometimes used to support
the borehole. On reaching the design penetration depth a smaller diameter steel tube insert
pile is lowered to the bottom of the borehole and a cement–sand grout is pumped-in to fill
the annulus around the insert pile. The grout is injected either through a small-diameter pipe
or is pumped directly down the insert pile.
Kraft and Lyons(4.13) have shown that the adhesion factor used to calculate the shaft friction
on the grout/clay interface is of the same order as that used for the design of conventional
bored and cast-in-place concrete piles. Where bentonite is used as the drilling fluid a reduc-
tion factor should be adopted as discussed above. A considerable increase in the adhesion
factor can be obtained if grout is injected under pressure at the pile–soil interface after a
waiting period of 24 hours or more. Jones and Turner(4.14) report a two- to threefold increase in
adhesion factor when post-grouting was undertaken around the shafts of 150 mm diameter
micropiles in London clay. However, the feasibility of achieving such increases should be
checked by loading tests before using them for design purposes particularly if there are
doubts about the ability of the grouting process to achieve full coverage of the shaft area.
The post-grouting technique is used as a first step around the shafts of bored piles where
base grouting is used as described in Section 3.3.9.
4.2.4
The effects of time on pile resistance in clays
Because the methods of installing piles of all types have such an important effect on the
shaft friction it must be expected that with time after installation there will be further
changes in the state of the clay around the pile, leading to an increase or reduction in the
friction. The considerable increase in resistance of piles driven into soft sensitive clays due
to the effects of re-consolidation have already been noted in 4.2.1.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
163
Clay moves down
to close up
incipient gap
Shaft friction not
allowed over
this length
Effective
length
B
2B
Figure 4.9 Effective shaft length for calculating friction on shaft of under-reamed pile.
Bjerrum(4.15) has reported on the effects of time on the shaft friction of piles driven into
soft clays. He observed that if a pile is subjected to a sustained load over a long period the
shearing stress in the clay next to the pile is carried partly in effective friction and partly in
effective cohesion. This results in a downward creep of the pile until such time as the
frictional resistance of the clay is mobilized to a degree sufficient to carry the full shearing
stress. If insufficient frictional resistance is available the pile will continue to creep down-
wards. However, the effect of long-period loading is to increase the effective shaft resistance
as a result of the consolidation of the clay. It must therefore be expected that if a pile has an
adequate safety factor as shown by a conventional short-term loading test, the effect of the
permanent (i.e. long-term) working load will be to increase the safety factor with time.
However, Bjerrum further noted that if the load was applied at a very slow rate there was a
considerable reduction in the resistance that could be mobilized. He reported a reduction of
50% in the adhesion provided by a soft clay in Mexico City when the loading rate was
reduced from 10 to 0.001 mm per minute, and a similar reduction in soft clay in Gothenburg
resulting from a reduction in loading rate from 1 to 0.001 mm per minute. These effects must
be taken into account in assessing the required safety factor if a pile is required to mobilize
a substantial proportion of the working load in shaft friction in a soft clay.
No conclusive observations have been published on the effects of sustained loading on
piles driven in stiff clays, but there may be a reduction in resistance with time. Surface water
can enter the gap and radial cracks around the upper part of the pile caused by the entry of
displacement piles, and this results in a general softening of the soil in the fissure system
surrounding the pile. The migration of water from the setting and hardening concrete into
the clay surrounding a bored pile is again a slow process but there is some evidence of a
reverse movement from the soil into the hardened concrete(4.16). Some collected data on
reductions in resistance with time for loading tests made at a rapid rate of application on
piles in stiff clays are as follows:
Type of pile
Type of clay
Change in resistance
Reference
Driven precast
London
Decrease of 10% to 20% at 9 months
Meyerhof and
concrete
over first test at 1 month
Murdock(4.9)
Driven precast
Aarhus
Decrease of 10% to 20% at 3 months
Ballisager(4.17)
concrete
(Septarian)
over first test at 1 month
Driven steel tube
London
Decrease of 4% to 25% at 1 year over
Tomlinson(4.2)
first test at 1 month
It is important to note that the same pile was tested twice to give the reduction shown
above. Loading tests on stiff clays often yield load/settlement curves of the shape shown
in Figure 11.13b (Section 11.4.2). Thus the second test made after a time interval may
merely reflect the lower ‘long-strain’ shaft friction which has not recovered to the original
peak value at the time of the second test. From the above data it is concluded that the fairly
small changes in pile resistance for periods of up to one year after equalization of pore
pressure changes caused by installation are of little significance compared with other
uncertain effects. An increase should be allowed only in the case of soft clays sensitive to
remoulding.
164
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
4.3
Piles in coarse-grained soils
4.3.1
General
The classic formulae for calculating the resistance of piles in coarse soils follow the same
form as equation 4.1. Expressed in the parameters of a coarse-grained soil (cu = 0), the total
pile resistance is given by the expression:
(4.16)
where 
is the effective overburden pressure at pile base level, Nq is the bearing capacity
factor, Ab is the area of the base of the pile, Ks is a coefficient of horizontal soil stress which
depends on the relative density and state of consolidation of the soil, the volume displacement
of the pile, the material of the pile and its shape, 	 is the characteristic or average value of
the angle of friction between pile and soil, and As is the area of shaft in contact with the soil.
The factors Nq and Ks are empirical and based on correlations with static loading tests, 	 is
obtained from empirical correlations with field tests.
The factor Nq depends on the ratio of the depth of penetration of the pile to its diameter
and on the angle of shearing resistance 
of the soil. The latter is normally obtained from
the results on tests made in-situ (see Section 11.1.4). The relationship between the standard
penetration resistance N and , as established by Peck et al.(4.18), and between the limiting
static cone resistance, qc and 
as established by Durgonoglu and Mitchell(4.19), are shown
in Figures 4.10, and 4.11 respectively.
From tests made on instrumented full-scale piles, Vesic(4.20) showed that the increase of
base resistance with increasing depth was not linear as might be implied from equation 4.16,
but that rate of increase actually decreased with increasing depth. For practical design
purposes it has been assumed that the increase is linear for pile penetrations of between
10 and 20 diameters, and that below these depths the unit base resistance has been assumed
to be at a constant value. This simple design approach was adequate for ordinary foundation
work where the penetration depths of closed-end piles were not usually much greater than
10 to 20 diameters. At these depths practical refusal was usually met when driving piles into
medium dense to dense coarse soils.
However, the use of piled foundations for offshore petroleum production platforms has
necessitated driving hollow tubular piles with open ends to very great depths below the sea
bed to obtain resistance in shaft friction to uplift loading. The assumption of a constant unit
base resistance below a penetration depth of 10 to 20 diameters has been shown to be over-
conservative (see Section 4.3.7).
The value of Nq is obtained from the relationship between the drained angle of shearing
resistance (
) of the soil at the pile base and the penetration depth/breadth of the pile.
The relationship developed by Berezantsev et al.(4.21) is shown in Figure 4.13. Vesic(4.20)
stated that these Nq values gave results which most nearly conform to the practical criteria
of pile failure. The alternative is to use the Brinch Hansen Nq factors shown in Figure 4.13.
They should be multiplied by a shape factor of 1.3 to allow for the square or circular
cross-section of the pile base. The Brinch Hansen factors may be over-conservative for
some D/B ratios, as, for example, a D/B ratio of 20 and 
values greater than 35	. It is
important to note that the values of 
obtained from SPT N-values should not be






vo
Qp  Nq
voAb  1
2Ks
vo tan 	As
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
165
Very loose
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Standard penetration resistance N, blows/300 mm
Angle of shearing resistance f, degrees
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
Loose
Medium dense
Dense
Very dense
Figure 4.10 Relationship between standard penetration test N-values and angle of shearing resistance
(after Peck et al.(4.18)).
Cone resistance, qc (MN/m2)
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
200
300
400
500
32°
34°
36°
38°
40°
42°
44°
=46° 
Vertical effective stress svo (KN/m2)

Figure 4.11 Relationship between angle of shearing resistance and cone resistance for an
uncemented, normally consolidated quartz sand (after Durgonoglu and Mitchell(4.19)).
corrected for overburden pressure when relating them to the Berezantsev or Brinch
Hansen Nq factors.
The base resistance of open-end piles driven into sands is low compared with closed-end
piles, except when a plug of sand formed at the toe is carried down during driving. The
mechanics and effects of plug formation are discussed in Section 4.3.3.
Kulhawy(4.22) calculated the ultimate base resistance for very loose and very dense sands
in dry and saturated conditions (i.e. in the absence of groundwater and piles wholly below
groundwater level) for a range of depths down to a penetration of 30 m. Unit weights of 18.1
and 19.7 kN/m3 were used for the dry loose and dense sands respectively. These values
shown in Figure 4.12 may be used for preliminary design purposes in uniform sand deposits.
For densities between very loose and very dense the base resistance values can be obtained
by linear interpolation.
Reduction in the rate of increase in base resistance with increase in penetration depths
is also shown by Berezantsev et al.(4.21) Their values of Nq related to 
and depth/width
ratios are shown in Figure 4.13. Ultimate base resistance values using these factors
have been calculated for a closed-end pile of 1220 mm diameter driven into loose sand
having a uniform unit submerged weight of 7.85 kN/m3 in Figure 4.14. The angle of
shearing resistance of the sand has been assumed to decrease from 30	 at the soil surface
to 28	 at 30 m depth. It will be seen that the Berezantsev Nq values gave lower base resistance
than those of Kulhawy. In Figure 4.13 the Berezantsev factors are compared with those
of Brinch Hansen(5.4). The latter have been adopted by the American Petroleum
Institute(3.5).
A similar comparison was made for the 1220 mm pile driven into a dense sand having a
uniform unit submerged density of 10.8 kN/m3. The angle of shearing resistance was
assumed to decrease from 40	 at the soil surface to 37	 at 30 m. Figure 4.14 shows that
the Kulhawy base resistance values in this case were lower than those of Berezantsev.

Resistance of piles to compressive loads
167
Depth below ground surface (m)
0
10
20
Saturated sand
Dry sand
Very dense
Very
loose
30
40
0
10
20
30
Ultimate base resistance (MN/m2)
Figure 4.12 Approximate ultimate base resistance for foundations in sand (after Kulhawy(4.22)).
The penetration depths in Figure 4.14 have been limited to 20 m for dense sands. This is
because the pile capacity as determined by the base resistance alone exceeds the value to
which the pile can be driven without causing excessive compression stress in the pile shaft.
For example, taking a heavy section tubular pile with a wall thickness of 25 mm in high-
yield steel and limiting the compression stress to twice the value given by the allowable
working stress of 0.3 times the yield stress, the ultimate pile load is 9.7 MN. This is exceeded
at 12 and 20 m penetration using the Berezantsev and Kulhawy factors respectively. The
high base resistances which can be obtained in dense sands often make it impossible to drive
piles for marine structures to a sufficient depth to obtain the required resistances to uplift
and lateral loading. This necessitates using open-end piles, possibly with a diaphragm across
the pile at a calculated height above the toe as described in Section 2.2.4.
The second term in equation 4.16 is used for calculating the friction on the pile shaft. The
value of Ks is critical to the evaluation of the shaft friction and is the most difficult to deter-
mine reliably because it is dependent on the stress history of the soil and the changes which
take place during installation of the pile. In the case of driven piles displacement of the soil
increases the horizontal soil stress from the original Ko value. Drilling for bored piles can
loosen a dense sand, and thereby reduce the horizontal stress.
When piles are driven into coarse-grained soils (gravels, sands and sandy silts) massive
changes take place around the pile shaft and beneath its base. Loose soils are readily
displaced in a radial direction away from the shaft. If the loose soils are water-bearing, vibrations
from the pile hammer cause the soils to become ‘quick’ and the pile slips down easily. The
168
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
200
150
Bearing capacity factor (Nq)
100
50
0
25
30
Angle of shearing resistance (f)
35
70
Depth/least width ratio
20
D/B=5
D/B=20
D/B= 5
40
45
Berezantsev
Brinch Hansen
Figure 4.13 Bearing capacity factors of Berezantsev et al.(4.21) and Brinch Hansen(5.4).
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
169
Ultimate base resistance of closed-end pile (MN)
Kulhawy/Vesic Nq* Ng* values
Loose sand
2× allowable load on
1220 m OD×25 mm wall
thickness pile in high
yield steel
Dense sand
Depth of penetration (m)
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
10
15
20
25
30
s
e
ula
v
q
N
v
e
stn
az
e
r
e
B
s
e
ula
v
q
N
v
e
st
n
a
z
e
r
e
B
s
e
ula
v
*
g
N
*
q
N
cis
e
V
/y
w
a
hlu
K
Figure 4.14 Base resistance versus penetration depth for 1220 mm diameter closed-end pile driven
into sand (a) loose sand (b) dense sand.
behaviour is similar with bored piles, when the loosened sand (which may initially be in a
dense state) slumps into the borehole. When piles are driven into medium-dense to dense
sands, radial displacement is restricted by the passive resistance of the surrounding soil
resulting in the development of a high interface friction between the pile and the sand.
Continued hard driving to overcome the build-up of frictional resistance may cause
degradation of angular soil particles with consequent reduction in their angle of shearing
resistance. In friable sands, such as the detritus of coral reefs, crushing of the particles
results in almost zero resistance to the penetration of open-end piles.
Driving a closed-end pile into sand displaces the soil surrounding the base radially. The
expansion of the soil mass reduces its in-situ pore-pressure, even to a negative state, again
increasing the shaft friction and greatly increasing the resistance to penetration of the pile.
Tests on instrumented driven piles have shown that the interface friction increases exponen-
tially with increasing depth as shown in Figure 4.15.
170
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Relative density
Ko
Loose
0.5
Medium-dense
0.45
Dense
0.35
Equation 4.6 applies to the shaft resistance of piles in coarse-grained soils. The factor K is
governed by the following influences:
(1) The stress history of the soil deposit
(2) The ratio of the penetration depth to the diameter of the pile shaft
(3) The rigidity and shape of the pile and
(4) The nature of the material forming the pile shaft.
The stress history of the soil deposit is characterized by its coefficient of earth pressure at
rest, Ko, in an undisturbed state. This is measured by field tests such as the standard pene-
tration test (SPT), or cone penetration test (CPT) and by the pressuremeter (Section 11.1).
In normally consolidated soils Ko is constant with depth and depends on the relative density
of the deposit. Some typical values for a normally consolidated sand are
Interface shear stress
Pile toe
Depth below ground surface
Figure 4.15 Distribution of interface friction on shaft of pile driven into sand.
If the soil deposits are over-consolidated, that is, if they have been subjected to an over-
burden pressure at some time in their history, Ko can be much higher than the values shown
above, say of the order of 1 to 2 or more. It is possible to determine whether or not the soil
deposit is over-consolidated by reference to its geological history or by testing in the field
using standard penetration tests or static cone tests. Normally consolidated soils show low
penetration values at the surface increasing roughly linearly with depth. Over-consolidated
soils show high values at shallow depths, sometimes decreasing at the lower levels.
When calculating 
in equation 4.6, the factor K in sands and other coarse-grained soils
is denoted by Ks which is related to Ko, to the type of pile and to the installation method.
Some typical values are shown in Table 4.10.
The angle of interface friction 	r in equation 4.6 is obtained by applying a factor to
the average effective angle of shearing resistance (
) of the soil as determined from its
relationship with SPT or CPT values as shown in Figure 4.10 and 4.11. The factor to
obtain 	r from the design 
depends on the surface material of the pile. Factors established
by Kulhawy(4.22) are shown in Table 4.11. They apply both to driven and bored piles. In the
latter case 
depends on the extent to which the soil has been loosened by the drilling
process (Section 4.3.6). The CFA type of bored pile (Section 2.4.2) is advantageous in
this respect.
Use of the Ks/Ko relationship in Table 4.10 to determine the shaft resistance of a pile
driven into sand when using equation 4.16 does not reflect the exponential distribution of
intergranular friction shown in Figure 4.15. A semi-empirical method based on cone resist-
ance values has been developed at Imperial College, London. It is particularly suitable for
piles driven to a deep penetration and is described in Section 4.3.6.
EC7 requires that the base resistance of tubular piles driven with open ends having an
internal diameter greater than 500 mm should be the lesser of the shearing resistance
between the soil plug and the pile interior, and the base resistance of the cross-sectional area
of the pile at the toe.
4.3.2
Driven piles in coarse-grained soils
Driving piles into loose sands densifies the soil around the pile shaft and beneath the base.
Increase in shaft friction can be allowed by using the higher values of Ks related to Ko from
Table 4.10. However, it is not usual to allow any increase in the 
values and hence the
bearing capacity factor Nq caused by soil compaction beneath the pile toe. The reduction in
the rate of increase in end-bearing resistance with increasing depth has been noted above. A
further reduction is given when piles are driven into soils consisting of weak friable particles
such as calcareous soils consisting of carbonate particles derived from disintegrated corals
and shells. The soil tends to degrade under the impact of hammer blows to a silt-sized
material with a marked reduction in the angle of shearing resistance.
Because of these factors, published records for driven piles which have been observed
from instrumented tests have not shown values of the ultimate base resistance much higher
than 11 MN/m2. The authors use this figure for closed-end piles as a practical peak
value for ordinary design purposes but recognize that higher resistances up to a peak of
22 MN/m2 may be possible when driving a pile into a dense soil consisting of hard angular
particles. Such high values should not be adopted for design purposes unless proved by
loading tests. Figure 4.14 shows that the base resistance of a closed-end pile driven into a
dense sand can reach the maximum compressive stress to which the pile can be subjected
during driving at a relatively short penetration. Therefore, if the peak base resistance of
11 MN/m2 is used for design there is no advantage in attempting to drive piles deeply into
medium-dense to dense soils with the risk of pile breakage in order to gain a small increase
in shaft friction.




s
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
171
H-section piles are not economical for carrying high compression loading when driven
into sands. Plugging of the sand does not occur in the area between the web and flanges. The
base resistance is low because of the small cross-sectional area. Accordingly the pile must
be driven deeply to obtain worthwhile shaft friction. The latter is calculated on the total sur-
face of the web and flanges in contact with the soil. At Nigg in Scotland soil displacements
of only a few centimetres were observed on each side of the flanges of H-piles driven about
15 m into silty sand, indicating that no plugging had occurred over the full depth of the pile
shaft. The base resistance of these piles can be increased by welding short stubs or wings
(see Figure 2.19a) at the toe. Some shaft friction is lost on the portion of the shaft above
these base enlargements.
The exponential distribution of interface friction shown in Figure 4.15 has been shown by
the Imperial College research to be a function of the length to diameter ratio, or in the terms
of the researchers to the ratio of the height above the toe to the pile radius (h/R). It follows
that it is more advantageous to use a large-diameter pile with a relatively short embedment
depth, rather than a small diameter with a deep penetration, but in some circumstances,
however, it may be necessary to drive deeply to obtain the required resistance to uplift or
lateral loading.
The maximum working stress on proprietary types of precast concrete jointed piles is in
the range of 10 to 17 MN/m2. Therefore, if the peak design ultimate resistance of 11 MN/m2
is adopted the piles will have to develop substantial shaft friction to enable the maximum working
load to be utilized. This is feasible in loose to medium-dense sands but impracticable in dense
sands or medium-dense to dense sandy gravels. In the latter case peak base resistance values
higher than 11 MN/m2 may be feasible, particularly in flint gravels.
When using EC7 rules to determine the ULS resistance of piles driven into coarse-
grained soils design approach DA1 in equation 4.16 becomes
(4.17)
Rcd 
Nq
vok  Ab
b
  0.5Ks
vok tan 	r As
s
172
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Table 4.11
Values of the angle of pile to soil friction for various
interface conditions
Pile/soil interface condition
Angle of pile/soil friction, 	
Smooth (coated) steel/sand
0.5 –0.7
Rough (corrugated) steel/sand
0.7 –0.9
Precast concrete/sand
0.8 –1.0
Cast-in-place concrete/sand
1.0
Timber/sand
0.8 –0.9








Table 4.10
Values of the coefficient of horizontal soil stress, Ks
Installation method
Ks/Ko
Driven piles, large displacement
1–2
Driven piles, small displacement
0.75–1.25
Bored and cast-in-place piles
0.70–1
Jetted piles
0.50–0.7

The partial factor
in Table 4.2 is applied to obtain 
, and Nq is derived from 
using
the relationship with SPT or CPT tests. The mean and minimum values of the standard pen-
etration or cone resistance should be plotted against depth rather than basing the calculations
on individual test results. The design 
values obtained from the test profiles should be
divided by the calibration factor of 1.05. The correlation factor depends on the number of
test profiles (Table 4.6).
Nq factors obtained from the Brinch Hansen relationship with 
(Figure 4.13) should be
multiplied by the shape factor of 1.3 as previously noted. The partial factors b and s for
driven piles are shown in Table 4.3.
All set combinations using the DA1 approach should be analysed to obtain the design pile
penetration depth until the engineer is sufficiently familiar with the EC7 procedures to be
able to appreciate the combination critical to the particular problem. The M sets are not used
because the 
(and tan 	r) are derived from in-situ tests.
4.3.3
Piles with open ends driven into coarse-grained soils
It was noted in Section 4.3.1 that it is frequently necessary to drive piles supporting off-shore
petroleum production platforms to a very great depth below the sea bed in order to obtain
the required resistance to uplift loading by shaft friction. Driving tubular piles with open
ends is usually necessary to achieve the required penetration depth. Driving is relatively
easy, even through dense soils, because with each blow of the hammer the overall pile diameter
increases slightly thereby pushing the soil away from the shaft. When the hammer is
operating with a rapid succession of blows the soil does not return to full contact with the
pile. A partial gap is found around each side of the pile wall allowing the pile to slip
down. Flexure of the pile in the stick-up length above sea bed also causes low resistance to
penetration.
At some stage during driving a plug of soil tends to form at the pile toe after which the
plug is carried down with the pile. At this stage the base resistance increases sharply from
that provided by the net cross-sectional area of the pile shoe to some proportion (not 100%)
of the gross cross-sectional area.
The stage when a soil plug forms is uncertain; it may form and then yield as denser soil
layers are penetrated. It was noted in Section 2.2.4 that 1067 mm steel tube piles showed
little indication of a plug moving down with the pile when they were driven to a depth of
22.6 m through loose becoming medium dense to dense silty sands and gravels in Cromarty
Firth. No plugging, even at great penetration depths, may occur in uncemented or weakly
cemented calcareous soils. Dutt et al.(4.23) described experiences when driving 1.55 m diameter
steel piles with open ends into carbonate soils derived from coral detritus. The piles fell
freely to a depth of 21 m below sea bed when tapped by a hammer with an 18-tonne ram.
At 73 m the driving resistance was only 15 blows/0.3 m.
It should not be assumed that a solidly plugged pile will mobilize the same base resistance
as one with a closed end. In order to mobilize the full resistance developed in friction on the
inside face the relative pile–soil movement at the top of the plug must be of the order of 1⁄2%
to 1% of the pile diameter. Thus with a large-diameter pile and a long plug a considerable set-
tlement at the toe will be needed to mobilize a total pile resistance equivalent to that of a
closed-end pile. Another uncertain factor is the ability of the soil plug to achieve sufficient
resistance to yielding by arching of the plug across the pile interior. Research has shown that





vok

Resistance of piles to compressive loads
173
the arching capacity is related principally to the pile diameter. Clearly it is not related to the
soil density because the soil forming the plug is compacted by the pile driving. The estimated
ultimate bearing resistances of sand-plugged piles obtained from published and unpublished
sources have been plotted against the pile diameters by Hight et al.(4.24) Approximate upper
and lower limits of the plotted points are shown in Figure 4.16. In most cases the piles were
driven into dense or very dense soils and the test evidence pointed clearly to failure within
the plug and not to yielding of the soil beneath the pile toe.
4.3.4
Driven and cast-in-place piles in coarse-grained soils
Both the base resistance and shaft friction of driven and cast in-situ piles can be calculated
in the same way as described for driven piles in the preceding section. The installation of
driven and cast in-situ types does not loosen the soil beneath the base in any way, and if there
is some loosening of the soil around the shaft as the driving tube is pulled out the original
state of density is restored, if not exceeded, as the concrete is rammed or vibrated into place
while pulling out the tube. Loosening around the shaft must be allowed for if no positive
means are provided for this operation. The provision of an enlarged base adds considerably
to the end-bearing resistance of these piles in loose to medium-dense sands and gravels. The
gain is not so marked where the base is formed in dense soils, since the enlargement will not
greatly exceed the shaft diameter and, in any case, full utilization of the end-bearing resist-
ance may not be possible because of the need to keep the compressive stress on the pile shaft
within allowable limits (see Table 2.4).
174
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
500
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Pile diameter (mm)
1000
1500
End-bearing capacity (MN/m2)/Embedded length (m)
Figure 4.16 Reduction in end-bearing capacity of open-end piles driven into sand due to
increase in diameter (after Hight et al.(4.24)).
4.3.5
Bored and cast-in-place piles in coarse-grained soils
If drilling for the piles is undertaken by baler (see Section 3.3.7) or by grabbing under water
there is considerable loosening of the soil beneath the pile toe as the soil is drawn or slumps
towards these tools. This causes a marked reduction in end-bearing resistance and shaft
friction, since both these components must then be calculated on the basis of a low relative
density 
. Only if the piles are drilled by power auger or reverse-circulation
methods in conjunction with a bentonite slurry or by drilling under water using a base
grouting technique as described in Section 3.3.9 can the end-bearing resistance be calcu-
lated on the angle of shearing resistance of the undisturbed soil. However, the effects of
entrapping slurry beneath the pile toe(3.13) must be considered. Loading tests should be made
to prove that the bentonite technique will give a satisfactory end-bearing resistance. If there
are indications that the entrapment of slurry beneath the toe cannot be avoided, the appro-
priate reduction in resistance should be made. Fleming and Sliwinski(4.12) suggest that the
shaft friction on bored piles, as calculated from a coefficient of friction and the effective
lateral pressure, should be reduced by 10% to 30% if a bentonite slurry is used for drilling
in a sand.
The effects of loosening of the soil by conventional drilling techniques on the interface
shaft friction and base resistances of a bored pile in a dense sand is well illustrated by
the comparative loading tests shown in Figure 4.17. Bored piles having a nominal shaft
diameter of 483 mm and a driven precast concrete shell pile with a shaft diameter of
508 mm were installed through peat and loose fine sand into dense sand. The bored piles
with toe levels at 4.6 and 9.1 m failed at 220 and 350 kN respectively, while the single
precast concrete pile which was only 4 m long carried a 750 kN test load with negligible
settlement.
When determining the ULS resistance of bored piles in coarse soils by EC7 rules, the
direct use of in-situ tests is unpracticable because these tests measure the soil properties in
a relatively undisturbed state compared with the gross disturbance which can occur when
drilling the pile boreholes. Only when drilling is performed under a slurry can the undis-
turbed soil properties be used in the calculation, subject to applying a factor to take account
of the process.
The most reliable method to obtain compliance with EC7 is to obtain the ULS resistance
from static load tests. Dynamic tests are impractible because of the likely variations in the
cross-sectional area of the shaft and different elastic properties between the concrete at the
pile head and in the body of the shaft.
Design by calculation using the DA1 approach is similar to that described in Section 4.3.2
with Nq and tan 	r in equation 4.17 being obtained from 
values based on SPT or CPT
relationships and judgement used to estimate the reduction in 
caused by the pile drilling.
Values of Ks in equation 4.17 are obtained from Table 4.10 with the assumption that Ko
represents the loosening of the sand.
4.3.6
The use of in-situ tests to predict the ultimate resistance 
of piles in coarse-grained soils
It has been noted that the major component of the ultimate resistance of piles in dense coarse
soils is the base resistance. However, Figures 4.13 and 4.14 show that the values of Nq are


(  28	 to 30	)
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
175
very sensitive to the values of the angle of shearing resistance of the soils. These values are
obtained from in-situ tests made in boreholes, and if the boring method has loosened the
soil, which can happen if incorrect techniques are used (see Section 11.1.4), then the base
resistance of any form of driven pile is grossly underestimated. It is very unlikely that the
boring method will compact the soil, and thus any over-estimation of the shearing resistance
is unlikely.
A reliable method of predicting the shaft friction and base resistance of driven and driven
and cast-in-place piles is to make static cone penetration tests at the site investigation stage
(see Section 11.1.4). This equipment produces curves of cone penetration resistance with
depth (Figure 4.18). Extensive experience with pile predictions based on the cone
penetrometer in the Netherlands has produced a set of design rules which have been
summarized by Meigh(4.25).
176
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Load on pile (kN)
Settlement of pile head (mm)
0
10
20
30
480 mm
bored pile
4.6 m long
480 mm bored pile
9.1 m long
Sandy clay fill
Soft clayey
peat with
pockets of
silty fine sand
Dense medium
sand and
gravel
(N=47)
Very dense silty
fine sand and
gravel (N=86)
Very dense silty
fine sand 
with thin layers
of silty clay 
(N=70)
Stiff laminated
silty clay with
partings of 
silty fine sand
10.06
Borehole
record
10.36
5.49
2.74
0.91
6.40
510 mm dia precast
concrete pile
driven to 4.0 m
40
50
60
70
80
90
200
400
600
800
Figure 4.17 Comparison of compressive resistance of driven piles and bored and cast in-situ piles in
dense to very dense coarse soils.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
177
Table 4.12 Relationships between pile shaft friction and cone resistance
(after Meigh(4.25))
Pile type
Ultimate unit 
shaft friction
Timber
0.012 qc
Precast concrete
0.012 qc
Precast concrete enlarged basea
0.018 qc
Steel displacement
0.012 qc
Open-ended steel tubeb
0.008 qc
Open-ended steel tube driven into fine to medium sand
0.0033 
Notes
a Applicable only to piles driven in dense groups otherwise use 0.003 where shaft
size is less than enlarged base.
b Also applicable to H-section piles.
Although engineers in the Netherlands and others elsewhere base shaft friction values on
the measured local sleeve friction (fs), the authors prefer to use established empirical correlations
between unit friction and cone resistance (qc). This is because the cone resistance values are
more sensitive to variations in soil density than the sleeve friction and identification of the soil
type from the ratio of qc to fs is not always clear-cut. Empirical relationships of pile friction
to cone resistance are shown in Table 4.12.
A limiting value of 0.12 MN/m2 is used for the ultimate shaft friction. The values shown
in Table 4.12 are applicable to piles under static compression loading and a safety factor of
2.5 is used for qc values obtained from the electrical cone and 3.0 for the mechanical cone
(see Chapter 11). A somewhat higher safety factor would be used for piles subjected to
cyclic compression loading to allow for degradation of the assumed siliceous sand (see
Section 6.2.2 for piles carrying uplift loading).
Cone-resistance values should not be used to determine the shaft friction of bored piles.
This is because of the loosening of the soil caused by drilling as described in the preceding
section.
The end-bearing resistance of piles is calculated from the relationship:
(4.18)
where 
is the average cone resistance within the zone influenced by stresses imposed by
the toe of the pile. This average value can be obtained by plotting the variation of qc against
depth for all tests made within a given area. An average curve is then drawn through the
plots either visually or using a statistical method. The allowable base pressure is then
determined from the value of the average curve at pile toe level divided by the appropriate
safety factor (Figure 4.18). The value of the safety factor will depend on the scatter of
results. It is normally 2.5 but it is a good practice to draw a lower bound line through the
lower cone-resistance values, ignoring sharp peak depressions provided that these are not
clay bands in a sand deposit. The allowable base pressure selected from the average curve
should have a small safety factor when calculated from the lower bound qc at the toe level
(Figure 4.18a).
qc
qub  qc
The method generally used in the Netherlands is to take the average cone resistance 
over a depth of up to four pile diameters below the pile toe, and the average 
eight pile
diameters above the toe as described by Meigh(4.25).
The ultimate base resistance is then
(4.19)
The shape of the cone-resistance diagram is studied before selecting the range of depth
below the pile to obtain 
. Where the qc increases continuously to a depth of 4D below
the toe, the average value of 
is obtained only over a depth of 0.7D. If there is a sudden
decrease in resistance between 0.7D and 4D the lowest value in this range should be selected
for 
(Figure 4.18b). To obtain 
the diagram is followed in an upward direction
and the envelope is drawn only over those values which are decreasing or remain constant
at the value at the pile toe. Minor peak depressions are again ignored provided that they
do not represent clay bands; values of qc higher than 30 MN/m2 are disregarded over the 
4D – 8D range.
qc2
qc1
qc1
qc  1
qub  qc1qc2
2
qc2
qc1
178
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Cone resistance (qc) (MN/M2)
Cone resistance (qc) (MN/M2)
Soft silty clay
Loose
becoming
medium
dense
sand
Lower
bound curve
Average curve
Path for
determining qc–1
Method used in the Netherlands
for obtaining base resistance
Depth below ground level (m)
5
10
0
5
10
15
20
15
5
10
Pile
D
8D
4D
15
0
(a)
(b)
5
10
15
20
Determining qc from average
and lower bound qc /depth
curves
Path for
determining qc–2
Figure 4.18 Use of static cone penetration tests (CPT) to obtain design values of average cone
resistance (
) in coarse soils.
qc
Safety factors generally used in the Netherlands in conjunction with the ‘4D – 8D’
method to obtain the allowable pile load are given by te Kamp(4.26) as:
Timber
1.7
Precast concrete, straight shaft
2.0
Precast concrete, enlarged shaft
2.5
An upper limit is placed on the value of the ultimate base resistance obtained by either of
the methods shown in Figure 4.18. Upper limiting values depend on the particle-size
distribution and over-consolidation ratio and are shown in Figure 4.19.
The relationship qb = qc in equation 4.18 is valid for piles up to about 500 mm in diameter
or breadth provided, when designing by permissible stress methods, that a pile head
displacement of one-tenth of the diameter is taken as the criterion of failure and that a safety
factor of 2.5 is adopted on the calculated total resistance. The reduction of the qb/qc ratio
with increase in diameter is discussed in Section 4.3.7.
Cone-resistance values cannot be used to obtain the end-bearing resistance of bored and
cast-in-place piles because of the loosening of the soil caused by drilling as described in the
preceding chapter.
A further factor must be considered when calculating pile shaft friction and end-bearing
resistance from CPT data. This is the effect of changes in overburden pressure on the qc (and
also local friction) values at any given level. Changes in overburden pressure can result from
excavation, scour of a river or sea bed, or the loading of the ground surface by placing fill.
The direct relationship between qc and overburden pressure is evident from Figure 4.11.
Taking the case of a normally consolidated sand when the vertical effective stress is reduced
by excavation, the ratio of the horizontal to the vertical stress is also reduced, but not in the
same proportion depending on the degree of unloading. The effects are most marked at shal-
low depths.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
179
Limiting value of ultimate
end-bearing resistance (MN/m2)
20
10
0 0
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
Fine-coarse sands
OCR=1
Very gravelly coarse sand
and sand with OCR in
range of 2 to 4
Calculated value of ultimate
end-bearing resistance
(qub) (MN/m2)
Fine gravel and sand with OCR
in range of 6 to 10
Limit 15MN/m2 for all coarse-grained soils
Figure 4.19 Limiting values of pile end-bearing resistance for solid end piles (after te Kamp(4.26)).
Small reductions in overburden pressure cause only elastic movements in the assembly of
soil particles. Larger reductions cause plastic yielding of the assembly and a proportionate
reduction of horizontal pressures. Broug(4.28) has shown that the threshold value for the
change from elastic to elastoplastic behaviour of the soil assembly occurs when the degree
of unloading becomes less than 0.4.
The effect of unloading on cone resistance values was shown by de Gijt and
Brassinga(4.27). Figure 4.20 shows qc/depth plots before and after dredging to a depth of 30 m
in the normally consolidated alluvial sands of the River Maas in connection with an extension
to the Euroterminal in the Netherlands. Large reductions in overburden pressure within
the zone 10 m below the new harbour bed caused the reduction in cone resistance. The
difference between the observed new cone resistance and the mean line predicted by Broug
did not exceed 5%.
The effects are most marked where the soil deposits contain weak particles such as mica-
ceous or carbonate sands. Broug(4.28) described field tests and laboratory experiments on
sands containing 2% to 5% of micaceous particles. These studies were made in connection
with the design of piled foundations for the Jamuna River bridge in Bangladesh where scour
depths of 30 to 35 m occur at times of major floods(3.17).
The static cone penetration test, which measures the resistance of the undisturbed soil, is
used as a measure of the resistance to penetration of a pile into a soil which has been
compacted by the pile driving. Heijnen(4.29) measured the cone resistance of a loose to
medium-dense silty fine sand before and after installing driven and cast in-situ piles. The
increase in resistance at various distances from the 1 m diameter enlarged base caused by
the pile driving was as follows:
180
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Distance from pile axis (m)
Increase in static cone resistance (%)
1
50–100 
2
About 33 
3.5
Negligible
In spite of the considerable increase in resistance close to the pile base, the ultimate
resistance of the latter was in fact accurately predicted by the cone resistance value of
the undisturbed soil by using equation 4.18. This indicates that the effect of compaction
both in driven and driven and cast in-situ piles is already allowed for when using this
equation.
Field trials to correlate the static cone resistance with pile loading tests are necessary in
any locality where there is no previous experience to establish the relationship between the
two. In the absence of such tests the base resistance should be taken as one-half of the static
cone resistance with the application of a factor of safety of 2.5 to obtain the allowable unit
pressure on the base of the pile. Experience has shown that if a safety factor of 2.5 is applied
to the ultimate base resistance as calculated from the cone resistance the settlement at the
working load is unlikely to exceed 10 mm for piles of base widths up to about 500 mm. For
larger base widths it is desirable to check that pile head settlements resulting from the design
end-bearing pressure are within tolerable limits. Pile head settlements can be calculated
using the methods described in Section 4.6.
4.3.7
Tubular steel piles driven to deep penetration 
into clays and sands
The research work undertaken at Imperial College, London, on the axial capacity of steel
tube piles has been referred to briefly in the preceding sections. This work was undertaken
on behalf of the UK Marine Technology Directorate. The design procedure adopted from the
research became known as the MTD method. It is understood that MTD no longer operates
but the work at Imperial College has been extended with analysis of further test data and has
been published in book form by Jardine et al.(4.30) The design procedures which have
evolved have become known as the ICP method. 
The principal users of large tubular steel piles are the offshore petroleum industry and
recently these piles have found increasing use as monopile foundations for offshore wind
power generators. Before publication of details of the MTD method guidance for engineers
designing offshore piling was available in the recommendations of the American Petroleum
Institute(4.31). Their recommendations for the shaft friction of piles in clay generally followed
the cu relationship of Semple and Rigden(4.5). Equation 4.16 was used for piles in sands
with Brinch Hansen factors of Nq for calculating base capacity. Chow(4.32) found that the API
recommendations for piles in sand were over-conservative for short piles with L/B ratios up
to 30, and for dense sands with relative densities of 60% or more.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
181
30
20
10
0
+5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30
–35
–40
qc after
dredging
qc after
0
0.5
1.0
Calculated (Broug)
measured
qc before
qc before dredging
Depth of dredging to 30 m
Cone resistance qc (MN/m2)
Depth to NAP datum (m)
Figure 4.20 Cone resistance versus depth before and after dredging sand (after Gijt and
Brassinga(4.27)).
The ICP method for piles driven into clays is based on effective stresses and takes into
account the effects on the interface shaft resistance of the radial displacement of the clay and
the gross displacement of the clay beneath the base. To determine shaft resistance the ICP
method calculates the local shear stress at failure on the interface after equalization of pore
pressure changes brought about by the pile driving. The calculations are made for a succes-
sion of layers over the embedded length of the shaft. They are then integrated to give the
total shaft resistance from the equation:
(4.20)
The peak local interface shear stress 
is obtained from the equation:
= (Kf /Ko) 
tan 	f
(4.21)
where
Kf = coefficient of radial effective stress for shaft at failure = 
/
Ko = coefficient of earth pressure at rest = 
/
= equalized radial effective stress = Kc
	f = operational interface angle of frictional failure
Kc is obtained from the equation:
Kc = [2.2  0.016YSR – 0.870 Ivy]YSR0.42(h/R)0.20
(4.22)
where
Ivy = relative void index at yield = log10St
Ivo = relative void index
YSR = yield stress ratio or apparent over-consolidation ratio
St = clay sensitivity
h = height of soil layer above pile toe
R = pile radius 
and Kf /Kc = 0.8
An alternative to equation 4.22 which is marginally less conservative is
K = [2 – 0.625 
Ivo]YSR0.42(h/R)0.20
(4.23)
YSR, 
vy and 
vo are obtained either from oedometer tests in the laboratory on good
quality undisturbed samples or from a relationship with consolidated anisotropic undrained
triaxial compression tests or by estimation from CPT or field vane tests. The clay sensitivity
is determined by dividing the peak intact unconsolidated undrained shear strength by its
remoulded undrained shear strength.
The operational interface angle of friction at failure 	f lies between the peak effective shear
stress angle and its ultimate or long strain value. The actual value used in equation 4.21 depends
on the soil type, prior shearing history and the clay to steel interface properties. It is influenced
by local slip at the interface when the blow of the hammer drives the pile downwards and at
rebound when the hammer is raised at the end of the stroke. A further influence is progressive
failure when the interface shear stress near the ground surface is at the ultimate state, but near
the toe the relative pile–soil movement may be insufficient to reach the peak stress value.




vo
rc
vo
rf
vo
rf
rc
f
f
Qs  Df  dZ
182
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
The conditions at the interface can be simulated by determining 	 in a ring shear apparatus
where the remoulded clay is sheared against an annular ring fabricated from the same material
and having the same roughness as the surface of the pile. Details of the apparatus and
the testing technique are given in the IC publication which should be consulted for further
information on the development and applications of the ICP method.
For calculating the shaft capacity of open-end piles in clay an equivalent radius R* is
substituted for R in the h/R term where
R* = (R2
outer – R2
inner)0.5
(4.24)
and h/R* is not less than 8.
Dealing with the base resistance of closed-end piles in clay, the ICP method does not accept
the widely used practice of calculating the ultimate resistance from Qb = Nc cu Ab where the
bearing capacity factor Nc is assumed to be equal to 9. The data base of instrumented pile tests
used in the IC research showed a wide variation in Nc which was found to be higher than 9 in
all the tests analysed. However, the results did demonstrate a close correlation with the results
of static cone penetration tests and led to a recommendation to adopt the relationships:
qb = 0.8qc for undrained loading
and
(4.25)
qb = 1.3qc for drained loading
(4.26)
The cone resistance qc is obtained from CPT’s by averaging the readings over a distance
of 1.5 pile diameters above and below the toe.
For open-end piles, plugging of the pile toe with clay is defined as the stage when the plug
is carried down by the pile during driving. This is deemed to occur when [Dinner/DCPT 
0.45qc]/Pa is less than 36. The cone diameter DCPT is 0.036 m and the atmospheric pressure
Pa is 100 kN/m2.
Fully plugged piles as defined above develop half the base resistance calculated by
equations 4.25 and 4.26 for undrained and drained loading respectively, after a pile head
displacement of D/10.
The base resistance of an unplugged open-end pile is calculated on the annular area of
steel only, when qb is taken as the average qc at founding depth it is stated that Qb may be
increased by a factor of 1.6 for drained loading.
It is evident from the foregoing account of the application of the ICP method to piles in
clay that the reliability of the method depends in the first instance on obtaining good quality
undisturbed samples taken by piston samplers and using thin-wall tubes. Second, the labo-
ratory operations involving oedometer and ring shear testing require special apparatus
handled by skilled technicians. These facilities are not widely available to UK commercial
site investigation contractors. Nevertheless, the accuracy of the predictions by the ICP
method appears to justify its use for offshore construction where savings in estimated pile
lengths are more than offset by the corresponding reduced construction costs.
The ratio of calculated to measured pile resistance derived from the IC data base of 43
piles ranging in diameter from 100 to 570 mm and in length from 3.5 to 57 m showed a sta-
tistical mean of 1.03, a standard deviation coefficient of 0.21 and a coefficient of variation
of 0.20, compared with the corresponding figures of 0.99, 0.32 and 0.33 using the API
(1993) recommendations.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
183
Jardine et al.(4.30) recommend safety factors of 1.3 to 1.6 for the shaft resistance in
compression for offshore foundations where settlements of the structures are not critical and
the design is based on permissible stress methods.
In contrast, the ICP method of design for tubular piles in sands is a simple one based on
the static cone penetration test. No other field work or special laboratory testing is required.
The method is wholly empirical and is justified by the assumption that the penetration of the
sleeved cone simulates the displacement of the soil by a closed-end or fully plugged pile.
The expression for the shaft resistance is calculated by the following sequence of equations:
Unit shaft resistance = f = 
tan 	f
(4.27)
Radial effective stress at point of shaft failure = 
= 

(4.28)
Equalized radial effective stress = 
= 0.029qc (
/Pa)0.13(h/R)–0.38
(4.29)
Dilatant increase in local radial effective stress = 
= 2G	f /R
(4.30)
where
	f = 	cr = interface angle of friction at failure
R = pile radius
G = operational shear modulus
In equation 4.27 	f can be obtained either by constant volume shear box tests in the
laboratory or by relating it to the pile roughness and particle size of the sand (Figure 4.21).
The equalized radial stress in equation 4.29 implies that the elevated pore pressures around
the shaft caused by pile driving have dissipated. The term Pa is the atmospheric pressure
which is taken as 100 kN/m2. Because of the difficulty in calculating or measuring the high
radial stresses near the pile toe h/R is limited to 8.
rd

vo
rc
rd
rc
rf
rf
184
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
20
0.1
Values are for rough
steel interface
(CLA 6–10 m)
1
Mean particle size, D50 (mm)
1.0
22
Interface friction angle cv (°)
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
Figure 4.21 Relationship between interface friction angle and mean particle size of a silica sand (based
on Jardine et al.(4.30)).
The shear modulus G in equation 4.30 can be measured in the field using a pressuremeter
(Section 11.1.4) or a seismic cone penetrometer, or obtained by correlation with CPT data
using the relationship established by Chow(4.32):
(4.31)
and 
(4.32)
The term 	f in equation 4.30 is equal to twice the average roughness Rcla of the pile
surface which is the average height of the peaks and troughs above and below the centre line.
For lightly rusted steel 
r is 0.02 mm. 
rf is inversely proportional to the pile radius and
tends to zero for large-diameter piles.
In equation 4.31:
A = 0.0203
B = 0.00125
C = 1.216 106
Piles driven with open ends develop a lower shaft resistance than closed-end piles because
of their smaller volume displacement when a solid plug is not carried down during driving.
The open unplugged end is allowed for by adopting an equivalent pile radius R* (see
equation 4.24). Equation 4.29 becomes
= 0.029qc(
/Pa)0.13(h/R*)–0.38
(4.33)
To use the ICP method the embedded shaft length is divided into a number of short
sections of thickness h depending on the layering of the soil and the variation with depth of
the CPT readings. A mean line is drawn through the plotted qc values over the depths of the
identified soil layers. A line somewhat higher than the mean is drawn when the ICP method
is used to estimate pile driveability when the shaft resistance must not be underestimated.
From a data base of pile tests in calcareous sands, Jardine et al.(4.30) stated that the ICP
method was viable in these materials and recommended that the density should be taken as
7.5 kN/m3 for calculating 
and the interface angle 	f as 25	. The third term in equation
4.28 is omitted (
= 
) and equation 4.29 for open-end piles is modified to become
= 72(
/Pa)0.84(h/R*)–0.35. For closed-end piles R is substituted for R*.
The ICP method was used to compare the calculated distribution of interface shear stress
at failure with stresses measured over the shaft depth of a well-instrumented 762 mm OD pile
driven with an open end to a depth of 44 m into medium-fine silty micaceous sand in
Bangladesh. The test was made as part of the trial piling for the foundations of the Jamuna
River bridge at Sirajgang(4.33, 4.34) as described in Section 9.6.2. The observed and calculated
distributions of stress are compared in Figure 4.22. It will be noted that the ICP method
considerably over-estimated the measured stresses. This was commented on by Jardine
et al.(4.30) with no conclusions as to the reasons for the over-estimate. However, he pointed
out that the Jamuna piles developed very marked increases in bearing capacity with time as
noted in Section 4.3.8. A study of the shaft friction measurements made on two 762 mm trial
vo
rc
rc
rf
vo
vo
rc

  qcPa
vo
G  qc(A  B  C2)
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
185
piles showed that the distribution of interface shear stress could be represented by the
relationship f = 0.009(h/d)–0.5qf in compression and 0.003(h/d)–0.5qc in tension.
The ICP method uses CPT data to calculate the base resistance. For closed-end piles the
equation is:
qb = qc [1 – 0.5 log(D/DCPT)]
(4.34)
where qc is the cone resistance averaged over 1.5 pile diameters above and below the toe, D
is the pile diameter, and DCPT is the cone diameter. The equation is valid provided that the
variations in qc are not extreme and the depth intervals between peaks and troughs of the qc
values are not greater than D/2. If these conditions are not met a qc value below the mean
should be adopted. A lower limit for qb of 0.3qc is suggested for piles having diameters
greater than 0.9 m.
A rigid basal plug within an open-end pile is assumed to develop if the inner diameter in
metres is less than 0.02 (Dr  30) where the relative density Dr is expressed as a percentage.
Also Dinner/DCPT should be less than 0.83qc/Pa and the absolute atmospheric pressure Pa is
taken as 100 kN/m2.
If the above criteria are satisfied the fully plugged pile is stated to develop a base resistance
of 50% of that of a closed-end pile after the head has settled by one-tenth of the diameter.
A lower limit of qb is that it should not be less than that of the unplugged pile and should
not be less than 0.15qc for piles having diameters greater than 0.9 m.
The base resistance of unplugged piles is taken as 0.5qc multiplied by the net cross-
sectional area of the pile at the toe, where qc is the cone resistance at toe level. No
contribution is allowed from the inner wall shaft friction. For a solid end pile qb at the toe is
determined from equation 4.34.
186
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
25
0
10
20
30
Depth below ground level (m)
40
50
50
Interface shear stress (kN/m2)
75
100
ICP method
Pile toe 44.2 m
Measured on test pile
Test pile: 
125
150
762 mm OD × 38 mm WT
Driven with open end into
medium-fine silty micaceous sand
Figure 4.22 Comparison of measured and calculated interface shear stress on the shaft of a steel tube
pile driven into sand.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
187
Method
Mean Qc/Qm
Standard deviation(s)
Coefficient of variation
ICP, all piles
0.99
0.28
0.28
ICP, all open-end piles
1.05
0.30
0.28
API RP2A(1993), all piles
0.87
0.58
0.60
Note
Qc/Qm denotes calculated/measured.
Imperial College have assessed the reliability of their method for piles in sands by
comparing the predictions of shaft capacity with those of the American Petroleum Institute
method(3.5) as shown below:
White and Bolton(4.35) re-analysed the IC data base for closed-end piles on the basis that
instead of the criterion of failure being the load causing a settlement of one-tenth of the diam-
eter they assumed that plunging settlement occurred, i.e. beyond the point D in Figure 4.1. They
also made allowance for only partial embedment of some piles into the bearing stratum, and the
presence in some piles of a weaker layer below base level. They found a mean of qb = 0.9q with
no trend towards a reduction of qb with increase in pile diameter. They suggested that a reduc-
tion factor to obtain the ultimate bearing capacity of a closed-end pile in sand should be linked
to partial embedment and partial mobilization rather than to absolute diameter. This suggestion
would appear to be part of the methodology of research based on analysis of test pile failures
rather than criteria to be adopted at the design stage of piled foundations. White and Bolton
noted the dearth of high-quality pile load test data in the public domain.
It was generally assumed in past years that no allowance should be made for significant
changes in the bearing capacity of piles driven into coarse soils with time after installation.
Neither increases nor decreases in capacity were considered although the ‘set-up’ or tempo-
rary increase in driving resistance about 24 hours after driving was well known. The long-
term effects had not been given serious study. However, the research work at Imperial
College described in the previous section did include some long-term tension tests on piles
at Dunkirk(4.30). Six 465 mm OD  19 m long and one 465 mm OD  10 m long steel tube
piles were tested in tension at ages between 10 days and about 6 months. A progressive
increase in resistance of about 150% was recorded. All the tests were ‘first-time’, that is,
none of the piles were tested a second time.
The 762 mm OD  44 m long test pile at the Jamuna Bridge site was referred to in the
previous section(4.34). There was an increase in tension capacity of about 270% on retest after
the initial test made a few days after driving into medium-dense silty micaceous sand.
Precast concrete piles on the same site showed a progressive increase of about 200% in
compression at various ages up to 80 days after driving. The ultimate resistances were
estimated from dynamic tests and graphical analysis of loading tests not taken to failure.
Jardine et al.(4.30) attributed the increased tension capacity at Dunkirk mainly to relaxation
through creep of circumferential arching around the pile shaft leading to increase in radial
effective stress.
The procedure for determining the resistance of piles driven into sand using CPT values is
wholly empirical and was originally based on uninstrumented loading tests and experience. The
tests were mainly made on piles of small to medium diameter. EC7 rules do not recommend
any particular method of relating qc to base or shaft resistance but state that the method adopted
should have been established from pile loading tests and from comparable experience involving
the same type of soil and similar structures with particular reference to local information
(Clauses 7.6.2.3 and 1.5.2.2). The overall safety factor for DA1 approach is mainly influenced
by the correlation factors derived from the number of in-situ tests made on the site.
Jardine et al.(4.30) do not offer any recommendations for applying EC7 procedures to their
design methods.
4.3.8
Time effects for piles in coarse-grained soils
The engineer should be aware of a possible reduction in capacity where piles are driven into
fine sands and silts. Peck et al.(4.18) stated that ‘If the fine sand or silt is dense, it may be
highly resistant to penetration of piles because of the tendency for dilatancy and the
development of negative pore pressures during the shearing displacements associated with
insertion of the piles. Analysis of the driving records by means of the wave equation may
indicate high dynamic capacity but instead of freeze, large relaxations may occur.’
An example of this phenomenon was provided by the experiences of driving large diameter
tubular steel piles into dense sandy clayey silts for the foundations of the new Galata Bridge
in Istanbul(4.36). The relaxation in capacity of the 2 m OD piles in terms of blows per 250 mm
penetration is shown in Figure 4.23. The magnitude of the reduction in driving resistance was
not related to the period of time between cessation and resumption of driving. It is likely that
most of the reduction occurred within a period of 24 hours after completing a stage of
driving. The widely varying time periods shown in Figure 4.23 were due to the operational
movements of the piling barge from one pile location or group to another.
Correlation of blow count figures with tests made with the dynamic pile analyser
(Section 7.3) showed a markedly smaller reduction in dynamic soil resistance than indicated
by the reduction in blow count after the delay period.
These experiences emphasize the need to make re-driving tests after a minimum period of
24 hours has elapsed after completing the initial drive. Loading tests should not be made on
piles in sands until at least seven days after driving. Where piles are driven into laminated fine
sands, silts and clays, special preliminary trial piling should be undertaken to investigate time
effects on driving resistance. These trials should include tests with the pile driving analyser.
Increases in shaft capacity similar to those described above are not expected with
bored piles.
4.4
Piles in soils intermediate between sands and clays
Where piles are installed in sandy clays or clayey sands which are sufficiently permeable to
allow dissipation of excess pore pressure caused by application of load to the pile, the base
and shaft resistance can be calculated for the case of drained loading using equation 4.16.
The angle of shearing resistance used for obtaining the bearing capacity factor Nq should be
the effective angle 
obtained from unconsolidated drained triaxial compression tests. In a
uniform soil deposit, equation 4.16 gives a linear relationship for the increase of base resistance
with depth. Therefore, the base resistance should not exceed the peak value of 11 MN/m2
unless pile loading tests show that higher ultimate values can be obtained. The effective
overburden pressure, 
, in equation 4.16 is the total overburden pressure minus the pore
water pressure at the pile toe level. It is important to distinguish between uniform 
soils and layered c and 
soils, as sometimes the layering is not detected in a poorly executed
soil investigation.

c  
vo

188
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
4.5
Piles in layered fine- and coarse-grained soils
It will be appreciated from Sections 4.2 and 4.3 that piles in fine-grained soils have a
relatively high shaft friction and a low end-bearing resistance, and in coarse soils the reverse
is the case. Therefore, when piles are installed in layered soils the location of the pile toe is
of great importance. The first essential is to obtain a reliable picture of the depth and lateral
extent of the soil layers. This can be done by making in-situ tests with static or dynamic cone
test equipment (see Section 11.1.4), correlated by an adequate number of boreholes. If it is
desired to utilize the potentially high end-bearing resistance provided by a dense sand or
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
189
2.0 OD
tubular steel
pile with
closed end
Blows/250 mm penetration
Piles driven by Delmang D100
diesel hammer
Dense sandy
gravel and
cobbles
Delay time
in hours
45.6
Stiff sandy
silty clay
Dense sandy
clayey silt
Depth below sea level (m)
36
13
21
12
278
34.8
33.6
–75
–74
–76
–77
–78
800
600
400
200
77.9
12
16
84
18
0
Figure 4.23 Driving resistance over final 4.5 m of penetration for 2.0 m tubular steel pile showing reduc-
tion in driving resistance after various delay periods, New Galata Bridge, Istanbul.
gravel layer, the variation in thickness of the layer should be determined and its continuity
across the site should be reliably established. The bearing stratum should not be in the form
of isolated lenses or pockets of varying thickness and lateral extent.
Where driven or driven and cast-in-place piles are to be installed, problems can arise when
piles are driven to an arbitrary ‘set’ to a level close to the base of the bearing stratum, with
the consequent risk of a breakthrough to the weaker clay layer when the piles are subjected
to their working load (Figure 4.24a). In this respect the driven and cast-in-place pile with an
enlarged base is advantageous, as the bulb can be hammered out close to the top of the bear-
ing stratum (Figure 4.24b). The end-bearing resistance can be calculated conservatively on
the assumption that the pile always terminates within or just above the clay layer, that is, by
basing the resistance on that provided by the latter layer. This is the only possible solution
for sites where the soils are thinly bedded, and there is no marked change in driving resist-
ance through the various layers. However, this solution can be uneconomical for sites where
a dense sand layer has been adequately explored to establish its thickness and continuity.
A method of calculating the base resistance of a pile located in a thick stiff or dense layer
underlain by a weak stratum has been established by Meyerhof(4.37). In Figure 4.25 the unit
base resistance of the pile is given by the equation:
(4.35)
qb  qo  qlqo
10B  H  ql
190
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Firm clay
Dense sand
Firm clay
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.24 Pile driven to end bearing into relatively thin dense soil layer (a) Driven pile
(b) Driven and cast-in-place pile.
Weak soil
~10B
Dense sand
Weak soil
Pile toe
D
H
ql
qp
qo
Figure 4.25 End-bearing resistance of piles in layered soils.
where
qo  ultimate base resistance in the lower weak layer 
ql  ultimate base resistance in the upper stiff or dense stratum 
H  distance from the pile toe to the base of the upper layer and
B  width of the pile at the toe 
The following procedures were adopted for the piled foundations of British Coal’s bulk-
handling plant at Immingham, where a layer of fairly dense sandy gravel was shown to exist
at a depth of about 14.6 m below ground level. The thickness of the gravel varied between
0.75 and 1.5 m and it lay between thick deposits of firm to stiff boulder clay. The end-
bearing resistance in the gravel of the 508 mm diameter driven and cast in-situ piles
was more than 3000 kN as derived from loading tests to obtain separate evaluations of shaft
friction and base resistance. It was calculated that if the toe of the pile reached a level at
which it was nearly breaking through to the underlying clay, the end-bearing resistance
would then fall to 1000 kN and the safety factor of the pile would be reduced to 1.2 at the
working load of 800 kN. This safety factor was inadequate, and it was then necessary to
drive the pile some 3.6 m deeper to mobilize additional shaft friction so as to raise the safety
factor to a satisfactory value. A record was made to compare the driving resistance of piles
driven completely through the gravel to a deeper penetration and those terminating on
the gravel layer (Figure 4.26). An evaluation of this record led to the establishment of the
following rules:
(1) When the driving resistance in the gravel increased rapidly from 20 mm per blow to
5 mm per blow for a complete 300 mm of driving it was judged that the pile was properly
seated in the gravel stratum
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
191
Driving resistance in blows/300 mm
0
5
Pile terminating in gravel layer
Depth below ground level (m)
Pile driven through gravel
134
Firm clay
Soft clay
Peat
Firm to stiff
boulder clay
Dense gravel
with sand
Firm boulder
clay
Very stiff
boulder clay
10
15
20
25
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 4.26 Resistance to driven and cast-in-place piles provided by a thin layer of dense sand and
gravel at Immingham.
(2) The pile was then required to be driven a further 75 mm without any reduction in the
driving resistance
(3) If the resistance was not maintained at 5 mm per blow, it was judged that the gravel layer
was thin at that point, and the pile was liable to break through to the clay. Therefore, the
pile had to be driven further to a total penetration of 20 m, which was about 3 to 4 m
below the base of the gravel, to obtain the required additional frictional resistance.
The effects of driving piles in groups onto a resistant layer underlain by a weaker
compressible layer must be considered in relation to the settlement of the group. This aspect
is discussed in Chapter 5.
4.6
The settlement of the single pile at the working 
load for piles in soil
It is necessary to divide the calculated ultimate resistance of the pile (or the ultimate resistance
derived from load testing) by a safety factor to obtain the design working load on the pile.
A safety factor is required for the following reasons:
(1) To provide for natural variations in the strength and compressibility of the soil
(2) To provide for uncertainties in the calculation method used
(3) To ensure that the working stresses on the material forming the pile shaft are within the
safe limits
(4) To ensure that the total settlement(s) of the single isolated pile or the group of piles are
within tolerable limits
(5) To ensure that the differential settlements between adjacent piles or within groups of
piles are within tolerable limits.
The need for a safety factor or partial factors to cover the uncertainties in the calculation
methods will have been evident from the earlier part of this chapter, and in this respect they
are ‘factors of ignorance’ rather than absolute values. With regard to reason 4 above, the
load/settlement curves obtained from a very large number of loading tests in a variety of soil
types, both on displacement and non-displacement piles, have shown that for piles of small to
medium (up to 600 mm) diameter, the settlement under the working load will not exceed 10
mm if the safety factor is not lower than 2.5. This is reassuring and avoids the necessity of
attempting to calculate settlements on individual piles that are based on the compressibility of
the soils. A settlement at the working load not exceeding 10 mm is satisfactory for most
building and civil engineering structures provided that the group settlement is not excessive.
However, for piles larger than 600 mm in diameter the problem of the settlement of the
individual pile under the working load becomes increasingly severe with the increase in
diameter, requiring a separate evaluation of the shaft friction and base load. The question of
the correct safety factor then becomes entirely the consideration of the permissible settle-
ment or in EC7 terms compliance with serviceability limit-state. The load/settlement rela-
tionships for the two components of shaft friction and base resistance and for the total
resistance of a large-diameter pile in a stiff clay are shown in Figure 4.27. The maximum
shaft resistance is mobilized at a settlement of only 10 mm but the base resistance requires
a settlement of nearly 150 mm for it to become fully mobilized. At this stage the pile has
192
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
reached the point of ultimate resistance at a failure load of 4.2 MN. A safety factor of 2 on
this condition gives a working load of 2.1 MN, under which the settlement of the pile will
be nearly 5 mm. This is well within the settlement which can be tolerated by ordinary build-
ing structures. The full shaft resistance will have been mobilized at the working load, but
only 22% of the ultimate base resistance will have been brought into play. For economy in
pile design the settlement at the working load should approach the limit which is acceptable
to the structural designer, and this usually involves mobilizing the full shaft resistance.
By using partial safety factors on the ultimate shaft and base resistances, Burland
et al.(4.38) have presented a simple stability criterion for bored piles in clay which states that
if an overall load factor of 2 is stipulated, together with a minimum factor of safety in end
bearing of 3, then the maximum safe load on the pile is the lesser of the two expressions 
( Qp) and (Qs  Qb), where Qp is the ultimate resistance of the whole pile, Qs is the ultimate
resistance of the shaft, and Qb is the ultimate resistance of the base.
Burland et al. state that the first expression is nearly always dominant for straight-sided
piles and for long piles with comparatively small under-reams, whereas the second expres-
sion often controls piles with large under-reamed bases. Satisfaction of the above criteria
does not necessarily mean that the settlement at working load will be tolerable. Experience
based on loading tests on piles in similar soil conditions may give a guide to the order of
1
3
1
2
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
193
Load (MN)
0
25
50
75
100
Settlement (mm)
125
150
1
2
3
4
5
Working load
2.1MN
Total pile
load
Base
resistance
Shaft
resistance
Figure 4.27 Load/settlement relationships for large-diameter bored piles in stiff clay.
settlement that may be expected. If there is no such experience available, then it may be
necessary to undertake loading tests on full-scale piles. This is very costly for large piles and
a more economical procedure is to estimate values from the results of loading tests made on
circular plates at the bottom of the pile boreholes, or in trial shafts.
However, loading tests on piles are more helpful when designing ‘ductile piles’
(Section 5.2.1). Instrumentation can be provided to determine the relative proportions of
load carried in friction on the shaft and transmitted to the base and hence to determine the
degree of settlement needed to mobilize peak friction (e.g. at a pile head settlement of about
10 mm in Figure 4.27), and to determine whether or not the lower ‘long strain’ value of shaft
friction is operating when load distribution between piles in a group takes place.
Burland et al.(4.38) plotted the settlement of test plates divided by the plate diameter (i/B)
against the plate bearing pressure divided by the ultimate bearing capacity for the soil
beneath the plate (i.e. q/qf ) and obtained a curve of the type shown in Figure 4.28. If the
safety factor on the end-bearing load is greater than 3, the expression for this curve is
i/B
(4.36)
When plate bearing tests are made to failure, the curve can be plotted and, provided that the
base safety factor is greater than 3, the settlement of the pile base i can be obtained for any
desired value of B.
The procedure used to estimate the settlement of a circular pile is as follows:
(1) Obtain qf from the failure load given by the plate bearing test
(2) Check qf against the value obtained by multiplying the shearing strength by the appro-
priate bearing capacity factor Nc, i.e. qf should equal Nc  cub
(3) Knowing qf, calculate the end-bearing resistance Qb of the pile from Qb  Ab  qf
 K  qqf
194
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
0.2
1.0
q/qf
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
0
ri/B (%)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 4.28 Elastic settlements of bored piles in London clay at Moorfields (after Burland et al.(4.38)).
(4) Obtain the safe end-bearing load on the pile from 
where F is a safety factor
greater than 3
(5) Obtain q from q = Wb/ B2 and hence determine q/qf
(6) From a curve of the type shown in Figure 4.28, read off i/B for the value of q/qf and
hence obtain i (the settlement of the pile base).
Merely increasing the size of the base by providing an under-ream will not reduce the
base settlement, and if the settlement is excessive it should be reduced by one or more of the
following measures:
(1) Reduce the working load on the pile
(2) Reduce the load on the base by increasing the shaft resistance, i.e. by increasing the
shaft diameter
(3) Increase the length of the shaft to mobilize greater shaft friction, and to take the base
down to deeper and less-compressible soil.
For piles in London Clay, K in equation 4.36 has usually been found to lie between 0.01
and 0.02. If no plate bearing tests are made, the adoption of the higher value provides a
conservative estimate of settlement. Having estimated the settlement of the individual pile
using the above procedure it is still necessary to consider the settlement of the pile group as
a whole (see Chapter 5).
The greater the length of the pile the greater is the pile head settlement. From their analyses
of a large number of load/settlement curves, Weltman and Healy(4.7) established a simple
relationship for the settlement of straight shaft bored and cast-in-place piles in glacial till.
The relationship given below assumed a pile diameter not greater than 600 mm, a working
stress on the pile shaft of about 3 MN/m2, a length to diameter ratio of 10 or more, and stiff
to hard glacial till with undrained shear strengths in excess of 100 kN/m2. The pile head
settlement is given by
in millimetres
(4.37)
where lm is the length of embedment in glacial till in metres.
Precast concrete piles and some types of cast-in-place piles are designed to carry working
loads with shaft stresses much higher than 3 MN/m2. In such cases the settlement should be
calculated from equation 4.37 assuming a stress of 3 MN/m2. The settlement should then be
increased pro rata to the designed working stress.
The above methods of Burland et al., and Weltman and Healy, were developed specifically
for piling in London Clay and glacial till respectively and were based on the results of field
loading tests made at a standard rate of loading as specified by the Institution of Civil
Engineers (Section 11.4) using the maintained loading procedure. More generally the pile
settlements can be calculated if the load carried by shaft friction and the load transferred to
the base at the working load can be reliably estimated. The pile head settlement is then given
by the sum of the elastic shortening of the shaft and the compression of the soil beneath the
base as follows:
(4.38)
  (Ws2Wb)L
2AsEp
 
4 . Wb
Ab
 . 
B(1 v2)Ip
Eb
  lm
4
 
1
4
Wb  QbF,
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
195
where 
Ws and Wb  loads on the pile shaft and base respectively 
L  shaft length 
As and Ab  cross-sectional area of the shaft and base respectively 
Ep  elastic modulus of the pile material 
B  pile width 
v  Poisson’s ratio of the soil 
Ip  influence factor related to the ratio of L/R
Eb  deformation modulus of the soil beneath the pile base
For a Poisson’s ratio of 0 to 0.25 and L/B  5, Ip is taken as 0.5 when the last term approx-
imates to 0.5 Wb/(BEb). Values of Eb are obtained from plate loading tests at pile base level
or from empirical relationships with the results of laboratory or in-situ soil tests given in
Sections 5.2 and 5.3. The value of Eb for bored piles in coarse soils should correspond to the
loose state unless the original in-situ density can be maintained by drilling under bentonite
or restored by base grouting.
The first term in equation 4.38 implies that load transfer from pile to soil increases linearly
over the depth of the shaft. It is clear from Figure 4.22 that the increase is not linear for a
deeply penetrating pile. However, with the present-day availability of computers it is possible
to simulate the load transfer for wide variations in soil stratification and in cross-sectional
dimensions of a pile. One of the principal programmes represents an elastic continuum model.
A pile carrying an axial compression load is modelled as a system of rigid elements connected
by springs and the soil resistance by external non-linear springs (Figure 4.29). The load at the
pile head is resisted by frictional forces on each element. The resulting displacement of each
of these is obtained from Mindlin’s equation for the displacement due to a point load in a
semi-infinite mass. The load/deformation behaviour is represented in the form of a t–z curve
(Figure 4.29). A similar q–z curve is produced for the settlement of the pile base.
The concept of modelling a pile as a system of rigid elements and springs for the
purpose of determining the stresses in a pile body caused by driving is described in
Section 7.3.
It was noted at the beginning of this section that the adoption of nominal safety factors in
conjunction with conventional methods of calculating pile-bearing capacity can obviate the
necessity of calculating working load settlements of small-diameter piles. However, there is
not the same mass of experience relating settlements to design loads obtained by EC7 methods
based on partial safety factors. Hence, it is necessary to check that the design pile capacity
does not endanger the serviceability limit-state of the supported structure. Equation 4.38 can
be used for this check. A material factor of unity should be adopted for the design value of Ed.
EC7 (Clause 7.6.4.1) states that where piles are bearing on medium-dense to dense soils
the safety requirements for ultimate limit state design are normally sufficient to prevent a
serviceability limit state in the supported structure.
4.7
Piles bearing on rock
4.7.1
Driven piles
For maximum economy in the cross-sectional area of a pile it is desirable to drive the pile
to virtual refusal on a strong rock stratum, thereby developing its maximum carrying capacity.
196
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Piles driven in this manner are regarded as wholly end bearing: friction on the shaft is not
considered to contribute to the support of the pile. The depth of penetration required to reach
virtual refusal depends on the thickness of any weak or heavily broken material overlying
sound rock. If a pile can be driven to near refusal on to a strong intact rock the safe working
load on the pile is governed by the permissible working stress on the material of the pile at
the point of minimum cross-section; i.e. the pile is regarded as a short column supported
against buckling by the surrounding soil. Where piles are driven through water or through
very soft clays and silts of fluid consistency, then buckling as a long strut must be considered
(see Section 7.5).
When steel piles are adopted, working loads based on the permissible working stress on
the steel may result in concentrations of very high loading on the rock beneath the toe of the
pile. The ability of the rock to sustain this loading without yielding depends partly on the
compressive strength of the rock and partly on the frequency and inclination of fissures and
joints in the rock mass, and whether these discontinuities are tightly closed or are open or
filled with weathered material. Very high toe loads can be sustained if the rock is strong,
with closed joints either in a horizontal plane or inclined at only a shallow angle to the
horizontal. If the horizontal or near-horizontal joints are wide there will be some yielding of
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
197
Pile/soil model
for finite element
method
Vertical displacement, z
Vertical force, t
t–z curve
Figure 4.29 t–z curve for deformation of a pile under vertical axial loading.
the rock mass below the pile toe but the amount of movement will not necessarily be large
since the zone of rock influenced by a pile of slender cross-section does not extend very
deeply below toe level. However, the temptation to continue the hard driving of slender-
section piles to ensure full refusal conditions must be avoided. This is because brittle rocks
may be split by the toe of the pile, thus considerably reducing the base resistance. The splitting
may continue as the pile is driven down, thus requiring very deep penetration to regain the
original resistance.
Where bedding planes are steeply inclined with open transverse joints there is little
resistance to the downward sliding of a block of rock beneath the toe and the movement will
continue until the open joints have become closed, or until the rock mass becomes crushed
and locked together. This movement and crushing will take place as the pile is driven down,
as indicated by a progressive tightening-up in driving resistance. Thus there should be no
appreciable additional settlement when the working load is applied. However, there may be
some deterioration in the end-bearing value if the piles are driven in closely spaced groups
at varying toe levels. For this reason it is desirable to undertake re-driving tests whenever
piles are driven to an end bearing into a heavily jointed or steeply dipping rock formation.
If the re-driving tests indicate a deterioration in resistance, then loading tests must be made
to ensure that the settlement under the working load is not excessive. Soil heave may also
lift piles off their end bearing on a hard rock, particularly if there has been little
penetration to anchor the pile into the rock stratum. Observations of the movement of the
heads of piles driven in groups, together with re-driving tests indicate the occurrence of
pile lifting due to soil heave. Methods of eliminating or minimizing the heave are described
in Section 5.7.
Steel tubes driven with open ends, or H-section piles are helpful in achieving the
penetration of layers of weak or broken rock to reach virtual refusal on a hard unweath-
ered stratum. However, the penetration of such piles causes shattering and disruption of
the weak layers to the extent that the shaft friction may be seriously reduced or virtu-
ally eliminated. This causes a high concentration of load on the relatively small area of
rock beneath the steel cross-section. While the concentration of load may be satisfactory
for a strong intact rock it may be excessive for a strong but closely jointed rock mass. The
concentration of load can be reduced by welding stiffening rings or plates to the pile toe
or, in the case of weak and heavily broken rocks, by adopting winged piles (Figure 2.19).
The H-section pile is particularly economical for structures on land where the shaft is
wholly buried in the soil and thus not susceptible to significant loss of cross-sectional
area due to corrosion. To achieve the maximum potential bearing capacity it is desirable
to drive the H-pile in conjunction with a pile driving analyser (Section 7.3) to determine
its ultimate resistance and hence the design working load, verified if necessary by pile
loading tests.
The methods given below for calculating the ultimate bearing capacity assume that this is
the sum of the shaft and base resistance. Both of these components are based on correlations
between pile loading tests and the results of field tests in rock formations or laboratory tests
on core specimens.
Where the joints are spaced widely, that is at 600 mm or more apart, or where the joints
are tightly closed and remain closed after pile driving, the ultimate base resistance may be
calculated from the equation:
(4.39)
qb  2Nquc
198
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
where the bearing capacity factor:
The variations in 
caused by joints in the rock mass are demonstrated by the comparisons
in Table 4.13 of observations of the ultimate base resistance of driven and bored piles
terminated in weak mudstones, siltstones and sandstones with the corresponding N values
calculated from equation 4.40. For these rocks the 
values as recommended by Wyllie(4.39)
are in the range of 27	 to 34	 giving 
values from 2.7 to 3.4.
It will be noted that the calculated 
values in Table 4.13 are considerably lower than
the range of 2.7 to 3.4 established for rocks with widely spaced and tight joints. The reduc-
tion is most probably due to the jointing characteristics of the rock formation in which the
tests were made. A measure of the joint spacing is the rock quality designation (RQD)
determined as described in Section 11.1.4. Kulhawy and Goodman(4.40,4.41) showed that
the ultimate base resistance (qub) can be related to the RQD of the rock mass as shown
in Table 4.14.
Where laboratory tests can be made on undisturbed samples of weak rocks to obtain the
parameters c and , Kulhawy and Goodman(4.40, 4.41) state that the ultimate bearing capacity of
the jointed rock beneath the pile toe can be obtained from the equation:
(4.40)
qub  cNcDNq  
BN
2  

N
N

N
N 
 tan 2 45	 
2
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
199
Table 4.13 Observed ultimate base resistance values of piles terminated in weak mudstones,
siltstones, and sandstones
Description of rock
Pile type
Plate or pile 
Observed bearing 
Calculated 
diameter (mm)
pressure at failure 
(MN/m2)
Mudstone/siltstone 
Bored
900
5.6
0.25
moderately weak
Mudstone, highly to 
Plate test
457
9.2
1.25
moderately weathered
weak
Cretaceous mudstone 
Bored
670
6.8
3.0
weak, weathered,
clayey
Weak carbonate  
Driven
762
5.11
1.5
siltstone/sandstone
(coral detrital 
limestone)
Calcareous sandstone 
Driven tube
200
3.0
1.2
weak
Sandstone, weak to 
Driven
275
19a
1.75
moderately weak
Note
a From dynamic pile test.
N
where
c  undrained shearing resistance
B  base width
D  base depth below the rock surface
  effective density of the rock mass
Nc, Nq, and N  bearing capacity factors related to 
as shown in Figure 4.30.
The above equation represents wedge failure conditions beneath a strip foundation and
should not be confused with Terzaghi’s equation for spread foundations. Because equation 4.40
is for strip loading the value of cNc should be multiplied by a factor of 1.25 for a square pile
or 1.2 for a circular pile base. Also the term BN/2 should be corrected by the factors
0.8 or 0.7 for square or circular bases respectively. The term BN/2 is small compared with
cNc and is often neglected.
Where it is difficult to obtain satisfactory samples for laboratory testing to determine
c or 
the relationship of these parameters to the uniaxial compression strength


200
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Table 4.14 Ultimate base resistance of piles
related to the uniaxial compression
strength of the intact rock and the
RQD of the rock mass
RQD (%)
qub
c
0–70
0.33quc
0.1quc
30
70–100
0.33–0.8quc
0.1quc
30–60
 (	)
1000
100
Bearing capacity factor
10
Nc
Ng
Nq
1
0
10
20
Friction angle, f
30
40
50
60
70
Figure 4.30 Wedge bearing capacity factors for foundations on rock (reprinted from Pells and
Turner(4.42)).
and RQD of the rock as shown in Table 4.14 can be used. The quc values are determined
from tests on core specimens of the intact rock to obtain its point load strength
(Section 11.1.4).
It is important to note that to mobilize the maximum base resistance from equation 4.40
the settlement of the pile toe is likely to be of the order of 20% of its diameter, requiring an
ample safety factor, at least 2.5, to ensure that settlements at the working load are within
allowable limits (Section 4.7.4).
Driving a closed-end pile into low to medium density chalk causes blocks of the rock to
be pushed aside. Crushed and remoulded chalk flows from beneath the toe, and the cellular
structure of the rock is broken down releasing water trapped in the cells to form a slurry.
This flows into fissures and causes an increase in pore pressure which considerably
weakens the shaft resistance, although it is possible that drainage from the fissures will
eventually relieve the excess pore pressure thereby increasing the shaft resistance.
Very little penetration is likely to be achieved when attempting to drive large closed-end
piles into a high-density chalk formation with closed joints, but penetration is possible with
open-end or H-section plies.
Because of the effects of driving piles into chalk, as described above, equations 4.39 and
4.40 cannot be used to calculate base resistance. From the results of a number of plate and
pile loading tests, CIRIA Report 574(4.43) recommends that the base resistance should be
related to the standard penetration test N-values (Section 11.1.4). The report gives the
relationship for driven piles as
Base resistance  qub  300 N kN/m2
(4.41)
where N is the SPT resistance in blows/300 mm. A lower bound is of the order of
200 N kN/m2.
No correction should be made to the N-values for overburden pressure when using
equation 4.41. Use of this equation is subject to the stress at the base of the pile not
exceeding 600 to 800 kN/m2 for low to medium density chalk, and 1000 to 1800 kN/m2
for medium to high-density chalk. Also the allowable load on the pile should be the lesser
of either:
(4.42)
or, 
(4.43)
Dynamic testing (Section 7.3) of trial or working piles is frequently used to determine
permissible working loads in end bearing on chalk. CIRIA Report 574 states that instrumented
dynamic tests using the CAPWAPC program can give a good estimate of end-bearing resistance
provided that the hammer blow displaces the toe at least 6 mm during the test. Definitions of
the density grades of chalk and their characteristics for use with equations 4.42 and 4.43 are
given in Appendix 3.
Pa  QsQb
2
Pa  Qs
1.0  Qb
3.5 (Pa  Qs
1.5  Qb
3.5 if the settlement is to be less than 10 mm)
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
201
Granite rocks are widely distributed in the territories of Hong Kong, where the fresh
rock is blanketed by varying thicknesses of weathered rock in the form of a porous
mass of quartz particles in a clayey matrix of decomposed feldspar and biotite(4.44).
The Geotechnical Office (GEO) of the Hong Kong Government(4.45) recommends that
the end-bearing resistance of piles should be expressed in terms of a safe rather than an
ultimate value. They recommend that piles should be driven to refusal in a fresh to
moderately decomposed or partially weathered granite having a rock content greater than
50%. For these conditions the allowable load on the pile is governed by the permissible
stresses on the material forming the pile. This recommendation assumes that the rock joints
are widely spaced and closed. In the case of open or clay-filled joints, the yielding of the
pile at the toe should be calculated using the drained elastic modulus of the rock. In Hong
Kong the modulus is related to the standard penetration test N-value. The GEO publication
gives an Ev value of 3.5 to 5.5N (MN/m2). It is pointed out that N may be increased by
compaction during pile-driving.
The shaft friction developed on piles driven into weak weathered rocks cannot
always be calculated from the results of laboratory tests on rock cores. It depends on
such factors as the formation of an enlarged hole around the pile, the slurrying and
degradation of rocks, the reduction in friction due to shattering of the rock by driving
adjacent piles, and the presence of groundwater. Some observed values are shown in
Table 4.16. In the case of brittle coarse-grained rocks such as sandstones, igneous
rocks and some limestones, it can be assumed that pile driving shatters the rock around
the pile shaft to the texture of a loose to medium-dense sand. The ultimate shaft friction
can then be calculated from the second term in equation 4.16 using the appropriate
values of Ks and 	. Where rocks such as mudstones and siltstones weather to a clayey
consistency making it possible to obtain undisturbed samples from boreholes, the weath-
ered rock can be treated as a clay and the shaft friction calculated from the methods
described in Section 4.2.1.
The effects of degradation of weakly cemented carbonate soils caused by pile driving
have been discussed in Section 4.3.3. Similar effects occur in carbonate rocks such as
detrital coral limestones, resulting in very deep penetration of piles without any significant
increase in driving resistance. An example of the low driving resistance provided by weak
coral limestone to the penetration of closed-end tubular steel piles at a coastal site in Saudi
Arabia is shown in Figure 4.31.
Beake and Sutcliffe(4.46) observed ultimate unit shaft resistances of 170 and 300 kN/m2
from tension tests on 1067 and 914 mm OD tubular steel piles driven with open ends
into weak carbonate siltstones and sandstones in the Arabian Gulf. The mean compression
strengths of the rocks were 3.2 and 4.7 mN/m2. The two test piles were 4.2 and 4.55 m
into the rocks. The above shaft resistances were 0.04 to 0.10 of the mean unconfined
compression strength of the rock.
Although a relationship was established between the base resistance and SPT N-values
of piles driven into chalk as noted above, no meaningful relationship could be found
with shaft resistance. The CIRIA recommendations(4.43) in Table 4.15 are the best
possible estimates derived from pile loading tests. The CIRIA report recommends that
whenever possible a preliminary trial pile should be tested to verify the design. It
should be noted that dissipation of excess pore pressure caused by pile driving can
increase the shaft resistance of piles in chalk. Therefore, as long a delay as possible
202
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
300
Piles driven into very weak
to weak coral detrital limestone
(N-value increasing from 20 blows
to 60 blows per 300 mm over
depth from 4 to 35m below
ground level). 762 mm OD
tubular steel piles driven
with closed ends by diesel
hammer (rated energy 13500 m/kg
per blow)
200
Driving resistance (blows/0.5m)
100
0
5
10
15
Depth below ground level (m)
20
25
30
35
Figure 4.31 Low resistance to driving of tubular steel piles provided by weak coral limestone.
Table 4.15 CIRIA recommendations for the shaft resistance of displacement piles driven into chalk
Chalk classification
Type of pile
Ultimate unit shaft 
resistance (kN/m2)
Low to medium density, open joints
Small displacement
20
Small displacement, H-sections
10
Large displacement, preformed
30
High density, closed joints
Small displacement, open end 
120
tubular
Large displacement, preformed 
(100) verify by load 
in pre-drilled holes
testing
should be allowed between driving and load testing. The authors recommend a minimum
period of 28 days.
Some other observed values of the shaft resistance of piles in weak rocks are shown
in Table 4.16.
4.7.2
Driven and cast-in-place piles
Driven and cast-in-place piles terminated on strong rock can be regarded as end bearing. Their
working load is governed by the permissible working stress on the pile shaft at the point of
minimum cross-section, or by code of practice requirements. Where these piles are driven into
weak or weathered rocks they should be regarded as partly friction and partly end-bearing piles.
CIRIA Report 574(4.43) recommends that the base resistance of driven and cast-in-place
piles in chalk should be taken as 250 N kN/m2 where N is the SPT N-value. A lower bound
should be 200 N kN/m2 with the recommendation to make a preliminary test pile whenever
possible. For calculating the unit shaft resistance the effective overburden pressure 
should be multiplied by a factor of 0.8 where is 
less than 100 kN/m2. If 
is greater
than 100 kN/m2 the design should be confirmed by a loading test.
4.7.3
Bored and cast-in-place piles
Where these piles are installed by drilling through soft overburden onto a strong rock the
piles can be regarded as end-bearing elements and their working load is determined by the
safe working stress on the pile shaft at the point of minimum cross-section, or by code of
practice requirements. Bored piles drilled down for some depth into weak or weathered
rocks and terminated within these rocks act partly as friction and partly as end-bearing piles.
Wyllie(4.39) gives a detailed account of the factors governing the development of shaft
friction over the depth of the rock socket. The factors which govern the bearing capacity and
vo
vo
vo
204
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Table 4.16 Observed ultimate shaft friction values for piles driven into weak and
weathered rocks
Pile type
Rock description
Ultimate
Reference
shaft friction
(kN/m2)
H-section
Moderately strong slightly weathered
28a
4.47
slaty mudstone
H-section
Moderately strong slightly weathered
158b
4.47
slaty mudstone
Steel tube
Very weak coral detrital limestone
45
Unpubl.
(carbonate sandstone/siltstone)
Steel tube
Faintly to moderately weathered
127
Unpubl.
moderately strong to strong mudstone
Steel tube
Weak calcareous sandstone
45
Unpubl.
Precast
Very weak closely fissured argillaceous
130
4.48
concrete
siltstone (Mercia Mudstone)
Notes
a Penetration 1.25 m.
b Penetration 2.2 m.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
205
Percentage of applied load Q carried in side-wall shear
0
20
Q
Q
Q
B
Q
L = B
L = 2B
L = 3B
L = 4B
Rock, Ed
Concrete Ec
40
60
80
100
20
Percentage of
full socket
length
v = 0.25
Ed/Ec=5
Ed/Ec =0.5
40
60
80
100
Figure 4.32 Distribution of side-wall shear stress in relation to socket length and modulus ratio (after
Osterberg and Gill(4.49)).
settlement of the pile are summarized as the following:
(1) The length to diameter ratio of the socket
(2) The strength and elastic modulus of the rock around and beneath the socket
(3) The condition of the side walls, that is, roughness and the presence of drill cuttings or
bentonite slurry
(4) Condition of the base of the drilled hole with respect to removal of drill cuttings and
other loose debris
(5) Layering of the rock with seams of differing strength and moduli
(6) Settlement of the pile in relation to the elastic limit of the side-wall strength and
(7) Creep of the material at the rock/concrete interface resulting in increasing settlement
with time.
The effect of the length/diameter ratio of the socket is shown in Figure 4.32 for the
condition of the rock having a higher elastic modulus than the concrete. It will be seen that
if it is desired to utilize base resistance as well as socket friction the socket length should be
less than four pile diameters. The high interface stress over the upper part of the socket will
be noted.
The condition of the side walls is an important factor. In a weak rock such as chalk, clayey
shale, or clayey weathered marl, the action of the drilling tools is to cause softening and
slurrying of the walls of the borehole and, in the most adverse case, the shaft friction
corresponds to that typical of a smooth-bore hole in a soft clay. In stronger and fragmented
rocks the slurrying does not take place to the same extent, and there is a tendency towards the
enlargement of the drill hole, resulting in better keying of the concrete to the rock. If the pile
borehole is drilled through soft clay this soil may be carried down by the drilling tools to fill the
cavities and smear the sides of the rock socket. This behaviour can be avoided to some extent by
inserting a casing and sealing it into the rock-head before continuing the drilling to form the
rock socket, but the interior of the casing is likely to be heavily smeared with clay which will
be carried down by the drilling tools into the rock socket. Wyllie(4.39) suggests that if bentonite
is used as a drilling fluid the rock socket shaft friction should be reduced to 25% of that of a
clean socket unless tests can be made to verify the actual friction which is developed.
It is evident that the keying of the shaft concrete to the rock and hence the strength of the
concrete to rock bond is dependent on the strength of the rock. Correlations between the
unconfined compression strength of the rock and rock socket bond stress have been estab-
lished by Horvarth(4.50), Rosenberg and Journeaux(4.51), and Williams and Pells(4.52). The
ultimate bond stress, fs, is related to the average unconfined compression strength, 
, by
the equation:
(4.44)
where
 reduction factor relating to 
as shown in Figure 4.33
  correction factor related to the discontinuity spacing in the rock mass as shown in
Figure 4.34.
The curve of Williams and Pells in Figure 4.33 is higher than the other two, but the  factor
is unity in all cases for the Horvarth and the Rosenberg and Journeaux curves. It should also
be noted that the  factors for all three curves do not allow for smearing of the rock socket
caused by dragdown of clay overburden or degradation of the rock.
The  factor is related to the mass factor, j, which is the ratio of the elastic modulus of
the rock mass to that of the intact rock as shown in Figure 4.35. If the mass factor is not
known from loading tests or seismic velocity measurements, it can be obtained approxi-
mately from the relationships with the rock quality designation (RQD) or the discontinuity
spacing quoted by Hobbs(4.53) as follows:
quc

fs  quc
quc
206
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
RQD (%)
Fracture frequency per metre
Mass factor j
0–25
15
0.2
25–50
15–8
0.2
50–75
8–5
0.2–0.5
75–90
5–1
0.5–0.8
90–100
1
0.8–1
As a result of later research Horvath et al.(4.54) derived the following equation for
calculating the socket shaft friction of large diameter piles in mudstones and shales:
Unit shaft friction  fs 
(4.45)
b
ucw
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
207
Rock socket shaft friction
Unconfined compression strength-quc (MN/m2)
  = fs= abquc
Williams & Pells
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 0
0
10
100
Horvath
Rock socket reduction factor a
Rosenberg & Journeaux
Figure 4.33 Reduction factors for rock socket shaft friction.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
0.2
0.4
Mass factor j
Rock socket correction factor b
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 4.34 Reduction factors for discontinuities in rock mass (after Williams and Pells(4.52)).
where 
ucw is the unconfined compression strength of the weaker material (concrete or
rock), and fs and 
are expressed in MN/m2. The factor b is given as 0.2 to 0.3.
The shaft friction can be increased in weak or friable rocks by grooving the socket.
Horvath et al.(4.54) described experiments in mudstones using a toothed attachment to a
rotary auger. They showed that fs was related to the depth of the groove by the equation:
(4.46)
fs
ucw
 0.8(RF)0.45
ucw
where 
is the rock strength defined as above and RF is a roughness factor given as
(4.47)
where 
 average height of asperities
rs  nominal socket radius
Lt  the total travel distance along the grooved profile
Ls  the nominal socket depth
is further defined as the radial distance from a socket profile to the surface of an imaginary
cylinder which would fit into the grooved socket. A factor of safety of 2 is recommended to
be applied to fs calculated from equations 4.46 and 4.47. There may be practical difficulties
in measuring the depth of the groove achieved by the rotary tool, particularly where direct
visual or underwater television methods of inspection are used in muddy water.
CIRIA Report 570(4.55) recommends that the shaft friction of bored piles in very weak
mudstones can be calculated in the same way as piles in stiff clay using either effective stress
methods (equation 4.6) or undrained shear strengths (equation 4.7). However, the report
points out the difficulty in obtaining satisfactory samples in weak weathered mudstones
with the result that the cu values are likely to be low and hence the calculated shaft friction
will be over-conservative. When effective stress methods are used 
should be taken as zero
to allow for softening and a remoulded value of 
of 36	 should be assumed. Laboratory
tests gave Ko values of 1.5 to 1.6. Report 570 relates  in equation 4.7 and  (K in equation
4.6) to the weathering grades of mudstone shown in Table 4.17.
The allowable bearing pressure on the base of bored piles in weak rocks depends to a
great extent on drilling techniques. The use of percussive drilling tools can result in the

c
 r
 r
RF  r
rs    Lt
Ls
ucw
208
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Upper limit
Fracture frequency per metre
Strong rocks
Lower limit
Mass factor j
Figure 4.35 Mass factor value (after Hobbs(4.53)).
formation of a very soft sludge at the bottom of the drillhole which, apart from weakening
the base resistance, makes it difficult to identify the true character of the rock at the design
founding level. The sludge should be baled out, accompanied if necessary by flushing with
air and water. Standard or cone penetration tests can be used to assess the rock quality at
base level but the procedure is time consuming. It is better to judge the founding level by
examination and testing of cores taken from boreholes at the site investigation stage
(Section 11.1.3), with later correlation by examining drill cuttings from the pile boreholes.
Assessment of pile base levels from rock cores is particularly necessary in thinly bedded
strata where weak rocks are interbedded with stronger layers. In such cases the allowable
bearing pressure should be governed by the strength of the weak layers, irrespective of the
strength of the material on which the pile is terminated.
The introduction of powerful mechanical augers of the type described in Section 3.3 has
eliminated most of the rock identification problems associated with percussion drilling.
Where pile boreholes are socketted into strong rock the allowable base pressure is gov-
erned by the permissible compression strength of the concrete forming the pile shaft
(Section 2.4.2). In weak rocks which are decomposed to a soil-like consistency (complete
weathering), the ultimate base resistance of the material can be determined, in the case of
sandstones, by making standard or cone penetration tests in the weathered layers at the site
investigation stage, with calculations from the test results as described for bored piles in
coarse-grained soils in Section 4.3.6.
It should be possible to obtain undisturbed samples of completely weathered mudstones,
siltstones and shales, from which shear strength tests can be made and base resistance
calculated as described in Section 4.2.3. In the case of moderately weathered mudstones,
siltstones and shales, uniaxial compression tests are made on rock cores, or in the case of
poor core recovery, point load tests (Section 11.1.4) are made to obtain the compression
strength. The base resistance is then calculated using the relationship with quc and RQD as
shown in Table 4.14. Alternatively, the parameters c and 
can be obtained from this table
and used in conjunction with equation 4.40.
In the absence of compression strength data, published relationships between the weath-
ering grade, undrained shear strength and elastic properties of the above rocks can be used
to determine the base resistance from equation 4.40. CIRIA Report 181(4.57) gives these
properties as shown in Table 4.18.
High values of base resistance resulting from the calculations described above should
be adopted with caution because of the risk of excessive base settlement. This can be of the
order of 20% of the pile width at the toe which is required to mobilize the ultimate base

Resistance of piles to compressive loads
209
Table 4.17  and  values of weak mudstones
related to weathering grades
Grade


IV–III
0.45
—
IV–II
0.45
0.5
II
0.3
1.71
IV–III
0.3
0.86
III
0.31–0.44
0.86–1.06
IV–II
0.45
—
IV–II
0.375
—
resistance. If the safety factor to obtain the allowable load is too low, the resulting shaft
settlement could break down the bond between the rock and concrete thus weakening the
total pile resistance in cases where the design requires the load to be shared between the
shaft and the base. A reduction in shaft resistance of 30% to 40% of the peak value has been
observed where shear displacements of the rock socket of little more than 15 mm have
occurred. It may also be difficult to remove soft or loose debris from the whole base area at
the time of final clean-out before placing the concrete.
Because of the porous cellular nature of chalk and the consequent break down and soft-
ening of the material under the action of drilling tools (similar to that described in Section
4.7.1), conventional methods of calculating the base resistance and rock socket shaft friction
cannot be used for bored piles in chalk. CIRIA Report 574 states that these two components
of bearing capacity are best determined from relationships with the standard penetration test
N-values uncorrected for overburden pressure. These give a rough indication of the weathering
grade to supplement the classification based on examination of rock cores and exposures in
the field. The recommendations of Report 574 are
Ultimate base resistance of bored piles: 200 N (kN/m2)
Ultimate base resistance of continuous flight auger (CFA) piles: 200 N (kN/m2)
Ultimate shaft resistance of bored piles in low to medium-density chalk: 0.8 vo
The above relationships for base resistance are subject to the pile bore being certified as
clean. Also where the average effective overburden pressure, 
, is less than 400 kN/m2
(based on final ground levels and omitting the contribution from made ground and fill) the
calculated shaft friction must be confirmed by load testing. For high-density Grade A chalk
the pile should be treated as a rock socket and the shaft friction taken as 0.1 times the uni-
axial compression strength. The report makes a distinction between made ground and fill.
The former is regarded as an accumulation of debris resulting from the ‘activities of man’,
whereas fill is purposefully placed.
A somewhat modified recommendation is made for continuous flight auger piles. A later
CIRIA Report PR86(4.58) states:
Average ultimate shaft resistance 
(4.48)

vo
vo

210
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Table 4.18 Relationships between weathering grades, undrained shear
strength, and elastic properties of weak rocks (see also
Seedhouse and Sancters(4.56)).
Weathering grade
Undrained shear  
Shear modulus 
Youngs modulus 
strength (cu, kN/m2) (G, MN/m2)
(E, MN/m2)
V–VI
250
80
115
IV
850
100
230
III
1330
350
820
III
1270
265
615
III
1230
210
490
III
1150
175
405
III
1090
150
350
The factor  should be based on SPT N-values. For low values of N (less than or equal
to 10) or a cone resistance qc between 2 and 4 MN/m2, and in the absence of pile test
results,  should be taken as 0.45 throughout. Where N is greater than 10, or qc greater
than 4 MN/m2, and in the absence of flints,  is taken as 0.8 throughout. The allowable
pile load Pa should be determined by using the partial factors in equation 4.42.
Throughout reports 574 and PR86 it is emphasized that load testing is desirable at some
stage as a means of confirming load capacity, and achieving economy in design. It is pointed
out that a single test made to 3 times the working load is a much better aid to judgement than
two tests to 1.5 times the working load.
For granites and volcanic rocks, the practice in Hong Kong is to relate the allowable base
bearing pressure for bored piles to the weathering grade of the decomposed material. The
recommendations of the Government Geotechnical Office(4.45) as quoted by Ng et al.(4.59)
are shown in Table 4.19.
The Hong Kong Government recommends that completely weathered granite should be
treated as a soil. Also the rock socket shaft friction in weak to moderately weak and strong
to moderately strong granites should be determined from correlation with the uniaxial com-
pression strength of sedimentary rocks using the method of Horvath et al.(4.50) Ng et al.(4.59)
point out that observations made in loading tests in granites suggest that the value for b in
equation 4.45 of 0.2 is appropriate.
4.7.4
The settlement of the single pile at the working 
load for piles in rocks
The effects of load transfer from shaft to base of piles on the pile head settlements have
been discussed by Wyllie(4.39). Because of the relatively short penetration into rocks which
is needed to mobilize the required total pile resistance, the simpler methods of determining
pile head settlement described in Section 4.6 are suitable in most cases. For piles having
base diameters up to 600 mm the settlement at the working load should not exceed 10 mm
if a safety factor of 2.5 has been applied to the ultimate bearing capacity.
The settlement of large diameter piles can be calculated from equation 4.38. The modulus
of deformation of the rock below the pile toe can be obtained from plate bearing or
pressuremeter tests or from empirical relationships developed between the modulus, the
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
211
Table 4.19 Presumed safe vertical bearing stress for foundations on horizontal ground in
Hong Kong
Category
Weathering 
Total core 
Uniaxial compression
Equivalent point
Presumed
grade
recovery
strength (MN/m2)
load index strength
bearing stress
(%)
(MN/m2)
(MN/m2)
1(a)
II
95 of grade
50
2
7.5
1(b)
II-III
85 of grade
25
1
5
1(c)
III-IV
50 of grade
—
—
3
Notes
Category 1(a): Fresh to slightly decomposed, strong.
Category 1(b): Slightly to moderately decomposed, moderately strong.
Category 1(c): Moderately decomposed, moderately strong to moderately weak.



weathering grade and the unconfined compression strength of the rock given in Table 4.18
and Section 5.5.
These relationships are not applicable to high porosity chalk or weathered silty mudstone
(Mercia Mudstone). The relationships given in Section 5.5 assume fairly low stress levels.
Therefore calculated values based on the unconfined compression strength of the rock
should take into account the high-bearing pressures beneath the base of piles.
In CIRIA Report 574(4.43) the deformation modulus of chalk is related to the weathering
grade and standard penetration test N-values. For Grade A chalk where the N-value is greater
than 25, the deformation modulus is 100 to 300 MN/m2. For Grades B, C and D with N-values
less than 25 the modulus is 25 to 100 MN/m2.
Pells and Turner(4.60) have derived influence factors for calculating the settlement of a
bored pile where the load is carried by rock socket shaft friction only using the equation:
Settlement = 
(4.49)
where
Q  total load carried by the pile head
Ip  influence factor
B  diameter of the socket
Ed  deformation modulus of the rock mass surrounding the shaft.
The influence factors of Pells and Turner are shown in Figure 4.36. Where the rock
sockets are recessed below the ground surface or where a layer of soil or very weak rock
overlies competent rock, a reduction factor is applied to equation 4.49. Values of the reduction
factor are shown in Figure 4.37.
4.7.5
Eurocode recommendations for piles in rock
EC7 makes no specific recommendations for the design of piles carrying axial compression
loads in rock. The design methods described in the preceding Sections 4.7.1 to 4.7.3 are
based either on relationships with unconfined compression strengths or by correlation with
SPT N-values. 
Where the calculations are based on relationships with SPT N-values, the correlation
factors based on the number of test profiles are applied as in equation 4.19 together with a
calibration factor of 1.05. Where design total pile resistances are obtained from static or
dynamic pile tests the correlation factors are obtained from Tables 4.7 and 4.8 respectively.
EC7(Clause 7.6.4.2) states that ‘when the pile toe is placed in a medium-dense or firm
layer overlying rock or very hard soil, the partial safety factors for the ultimate limit state
conditions are normally sufficient to satisfy serviceability limit-state conditions’.
4.8
Piles in fill – negative skin friction
4.8.1
Estimating negative skin friction
Piles are frequently required for supporting structures that are sited in areas of deep fill. The
piles are taken through the fill to a suitable bearing stratum in the underlying natural soil
 
QIp
BEd
212
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
2.0
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
Influence factor, lp
0.20
0.16
0.12
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
200
L/B
100
50
20
10
1.0
Q
0.4
R= 2
Ed
Qlp
BEd
Ed
B
=
R =
Ec
Ec
L
Gap
r
Figure 4.36 Elastic settlement influence factors for rock-socket shaft friction on piles (after Pells and
Turner(4.60), courtesy of Research Journals, National Research Council, Canada).
1.0
D/B = 1
L/B
L/B
R = 100
2
4
8
D/B = 1
R = 10
2
4
8
0.9
0.8
Reduction
factor
for 
recessed
socket F
0.7
0.6
0.5
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Q
Ed
FQlp
BEd
Ed
B
r =
R =
Ec
Ec
L
D
Gap
Figure 4.37 Reduction factors for calculation of settlement of recessed sockets (after Pells and
Turner(4.60), courtesy of Research Journals, National Research Council, Canada).
or rock. No support for compressive loads from shaft friction can be assumed over the length
of the pile shaft through the fill. This is because of the downward movement of the fill as it
compresses under its own weight or under the weight of further soil or surcharge placed over
the fill area. The downward movement results in drag-down forces, generally known as
negative skin friction, on the pile shaft. Where fill is placed over a compressible natural soil
the latter consolidates and moves downwards relative to the pile. Thus the negative skin
friction occurs over the length of the shaft within the natural soil as well as within the fill.
Calculation of the magnitude of the negative skin friction is a complex problem which
depends on the following factors:
(1) The relative movement between the fill and the pile shaft
(2) The relative movement between any underlying compressible soil and the pile shaft
(3) The elastic compression of the pile under the working load and
(4) The rate of consolidation of the compressible layers.
The simplest case is fill that is placed over a relatively incompressible rock with piles
driven to refusal in the rock. The toe of the pile does not yield under the combined working
load and drag-down forces. Thus the negative skin friction on the upper part of the pile
shaft is equal to the fully mobilized value. Near the base of the fill its downward movement
may be insufficiently large to mobilize the full skin friction, and immediately above rock-
head the fill will not settle at all relative to the pile shaft. Thus negative skin friction cannot
occur at this point. The distribution of negative skin friction on the shaft of the unloaded
pile is shown in Figure 4.38a. If a heavy working load is now applied to the pile shaft, the
shaft compresses elastically and the head of the pile moves downwards relative to the fill.
The upper part of the fill now acts in support of the pile although this contribution is
neglected in calculating the pile resistance. The distribution of negative skin friction on the
shaft of the loaded pile is shown in Figure 4.38b. Where the fill has been placed at a
relatively short period of time before installing the piles, continuing consolidation of the
material will again cause it to slip downwards relative to the pile shaft, thus re-activating
the drag-down force.
The simplified profile of negative skin friction for a loaded pile on an incompressible
stratum is shown in Figure 4.38c. This diagram can be used to calculate the magnitude of
the drag-down forces. The peak values for coarse soils and fill material are calculated by the
method described in Section 4.3.
In the case where negative skin friction is developed in clays, the rate of loading must be
considered. It was noted in Section 4.2.4 that the capacity of a clay to support a pile in skin
friction is substantially reduced if the load is applied to the pile at a very slow rate. The same
consideration applies to negative skin friction, but in this case it works advantageously in
reducing the magnitude of the drag-down force. In most cases of negative skin friction in
clays the relative movement between the soil which causes drag-down and the pile takes
place at a very slow rate. The movement is due to the consolidation of the clay under its own
weight or under imposed loading, and this process is very slow compared with the rate of
application of the working load to the pile.
Meyerhof (4.37) advises that the negative skin friction on piles driven into soft to firm clays
should be calculated in terms of effective stress from the equation:
(4.50)
s neg  
vo
214
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
215
(a)
(b)
Residual
negative
skin friction 
operating
Peak negative
skin friction
Movement between
pile and soil
insufficient to
mobilize peak
value
Compression of pile
due to load W causes
pile to move downwards
relative to fill, thus
reducing negative skin
friction
Negative skin friction
eliminated by elastic
compression of pile
Profile for soils
or fills which do
not show reduction
in negative skin
friction for
‘long strain’
condition
Fill or
compressible
soil settling
under own
weight
Zero settlement
of fill above rockhead
Surface
Residual
W
W
H
0.IH
0.IH
0.8H
Rockhead
Original ground
No load on
pile head
Peak negative
skin friction
Residual
value of
negative
friction
operating
Profile of unit
negative skin
friction
(c)
Peak
Figure 4.38 Distribution of negative skin friction on piles terminated on relatively incompressible
stratum (a) No load on pile head (b) Compressive load on pile head (c) Design curve for
loaded pile.
Values of the negative skin friction factor allowing for reduction of the effective angle of
friction with increasing depth to the residual value 	r are shown in Figure 4.39.
Taking the case of a pile bearing on a compressible stratum, where yielding of the pile toe
occurs under the drag-down forces and the subsequently applied working load, the down-
ward movement of the pile relative to the lower part of the fill may then be quite large, and
such that negative skin friction is not developed over quite an appreciable proportion of the
length of the shaft within the fill. Over the upper part of the shaft the fill moves downwards
relative to the pile shaft to an extent such that the negative skin friction operates, whereas in
the middle portion of the pile shaft the small relative movement between the fill and the pile
may be insufficient to mobilize the peak skin friction as a drag-down force. The distribution
for the unloaded pile is shown in Figure 4.40a.
When the working load is applied to the head of the pile, elastic shortening of the pile
occurs, but since the load is limited by the bearing characteristics of the soil at the pile toe
the movement may not be large enough to eliminate the drag-down force. The distribution
of negative friction is then shown in Figure 4.40b. The diagram in Figure 4.40c can be used
for design purposes, with the peak value calculated as described in Section 4.3 for coarse
soils and fill and by using equation 4.50 and Figure 4.39 for soft to firm clays.
It may be seen from Figure 4.40a to c that at no time does the maximum skin friction
operate as a drag-down force over the full length of the pile shaft. It is not suggested that
these simplified profiles of distribution of negative skin friction represent the actual condi-
tions in all cases where it occurs, since so much depends on the stage reached in the
consolidation of the fill, and the compression of the natural soil beneath the fill. The time
interval between the installation of the pile and the application of the working load is
Pile compresses elastically
relative to fill and
negative skin friction
is eliminated
Original surface of fill
Peak
W
0.IH
H
W
Length of shaft over
which calculated
yielding of pile toe
exceeds settlement
of fill
Yielding of pile
under combined
dragdown load
and applied load W
Yielding of pile due
to dragdown load
Compressible
bearing stratum
Residual
value
No load
on pile
(a)
(b)
(c)
Residual value of negative
skin friction
Peak value of negative
skin friction
Negative skin
friction reducing
Pile moves down
relative to fill
causing fill to
act in support
of pile
Peak value
Reduces
to zero
Fill settling
under
own
weight
Residual
Figure 4.40
Distribution of negative skin friction on piles terminated in compressible stratum (a) No
load on pile head (b) Compressive load on pile head (c) Design curve for loaded pile.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Skin friction factor, b
Depth of penetration (m)
0.4
0.5
0.6
Figure 4.39 Negative skin friction factors for piles driven into soft to firm clays (after Meyerhof(4.37)).
also significant. In old fill which has become fully consolidated under its own weight and
where it is not proposed to impose surcharge loading the negative skin friction may be
neglected, but shaft friction within the fill layer should not be allowed to help support the
pile. In the case of recently placed fill it may settle by a substantial amount over a long
period of years. The fill may also be causing consolidation and settlement of the natural soil,
within which the pile obtains its bearing. The case of recent fill placed over a compressible
soil which becomes stiffer and less compressible with depth is shown in Figure 4.41.
Modelling the load transfer by drag-down from fill and the underlying compressible soil
and the distribution of resistance in positive shaft friction can be undertaken by using a
pile–soil interaction analysis as described in Section 4.6. This procedure is particularly effec-
tive because the resulting t–z curves give a more accurate estimate in separate or combined
form of the distribution of axial forces over the depth of the pile shaft from the compression
load applied to the pile head and the shear stress on the pile surface from the drag-down loading,
than is possible from semi-empirical diagrams such as shown in Figures 4.38, 4.40, and
4.41. In particular the t–z curves indicate the depth H in Figure 4.41, that is, the depth to the
‘neutral point’ at which the shear stress changes from negative, caused by drag-down, to
positive, acting in support of the pile.
It is good practice to ignore the contribution to the support provided by friction over
the length of a pile in soft clay, where the pile is driven through a soft layer to less
compressible soil. This is because of the drag-down force on the pile shaft caused by heave
and reconsolidation of the soft clay. The same effect occurs, of course, if a pile is driven into
a stiff clay but the stiff clay continues to act in support of the pile if yielding at the toe is
permitted.
Very large drag-down forces can occur on long piles. In some circumstances they may
exceed the working load applied to the head of the pile. Fellenius(4.61) measured the
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
217
Original surface of fill
Yielding
W
H
0.1H
Distribution of negative
skin friction on pile
shaft
Depth depends on
relative compressibility
of fill and clay
Depth depends on
settlement of clay under
loading from clay relative
to permissible yielding of
pile toe
Figure 4.41 Distribution of negative skin friction on pile driven through recent fill into
compressible clay stratum.
progressive increase in negative skin friction on two precast concrete piles driven through
40 m of soft compressible clay and 15 m of less-compressible silt and sand. Reconsolidation
of the soft clay disturbed by pile driving contributed 300 kN to the drag-down load over a
period of 5 months. Thereafter, regional settlement caused a slow increase in negative skin
friction at a rate of 150 kN per year. Seventeen months after pile driving a load of 440 kN
was added to each pile, followed by an additional load of 360 kN a year later. Both these
loads caused yielding of the pile at the toe to such an extent that all negative skin friction
was eliminated, but when the settlement of the pile ceased under the applied load the
continuing regional settlement caused negative skin friction to develop again on the pile
shaft. Thus with a yielding pile toe the amount of negative skin friction which can be devel-
oped depends entirely on the downward movement of the pile toe relative to the settlement
of the soil or fill causing the drag-down force. If the drag-down force is caused only by the
reconsolidation of the heaved soil, and if the pile can be permitted to yield by an amount
greater than the settlement of the ground surface due to this reconsolidation, then negative
friction need not be provided for. If, however, the negative skin friction is due to the
consolidation of recent fill under its own weight or to the weight of additional fill, then
the movement of the ground surface will be greater than the permissible yielding of the pile
toe. Negative skin friction must then be taken into account, the distribution being as shown
in Figure 4.40c or Figure 4.41.
Much greater drag-down loads occur with piles driven onto a relatively unyielding
stratum. Johannessen and Bjerrum(4.62) measured the development of negative skin friction
on a steel pile driven through 53 m of soft clay to rock. Sand fill was placed to a thickness
of 10 m on the sea bed around the pile. The resulting consolidation of the clay produced a
settlement of 1.2 m at the original sea-bed level and a drag-down force of about 1500 kN at
the pile toe. It was estimated that the stress in the steel near the toe could have been about
190 N/mm2, which probably caused the pile to punch into the rock, so relieving some of the
drag-down load. The average unit negative skin friction within the soft clay was equal to
100% of the undrained shearing strength of the clay.
4.8.2
Safety factors for negative skin friction
Safety factors for piles subjected to negative skin friction require careful consideration. The
concept of partial safety factors can be applied to the two components of permanent working
load and negative skin friction. Thus if the negative skin friction Pn has been conservatively
estimated before deciding on a value of Qp to give a safety factor of 2.5 or more on the
combined loading, it is over-conservative to add this to the working load W on the pile in
order to arrive at the total allowable pile load. It is more realistic to obtain the required
ultimate pile load Qp by multiplying the working load only by the normal safety factor, and
then to check that the safety factor given by the ultimate load divided by the working load
plus the negative skin friction is still a reasonable value.
When applying the EC7 recommendations to the design of piles subjected to drag-down,
the resulting axial load is treated as a permanent unfavourable action in Table 4.1 (Section
4.1.4). This is classed as a geotechnical action in Clause 7.3.2.1(3)P which can be calculated
either by a pile–soil interaction analysis (Method (a)), or as an upper-bound force exerted
on the pile shaft (Method (b)). As noted above, Method (a) is the more effective of the two,
particularly in determining the depth to the neutral point. It is evident that if Method (b) is
218
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
used the depth H over which the upper-bound force is assumed to act is critical. If the depth
is over-estimated application of the action factor A1 of 1.35 in Table 4.20 will further
exaggerate the drag-down force.
Frank et al.(1.5) give a worked example to compare the application of the three design
approaches in EC7 to the case of a single pile carrying a compression load at the pile
head (structural action) and a drag-down force on the shaft (geotechnical action). The
magnitude and depth to the neutral point of the latter action were determined by an
interaction analysis. The partial factors applied to the actions and ground resistance are
shown in Table 4.20.
M2 is applied as an action factor and noted in the table because the drag-down is usually
calculated by effective stress analysis using a constant, for example,  in equation 4.50,
which is not directly related to the angle of shearing resistance of the soil.
The use of Method (a) requires, as a first step, a settlement analysis to determine the
settlement of the fill and underlying compressible soil. Clause 7.3.2.2(5)P requires the
design value of the ground in a settlement analysis to take account of the weight densities
of the material. However, the partial factors for M1 and M2 sets in Table A4 of EC7 Annex A
are unity (see Table 4.2 in Section 4.1.4 of this book).
When calculating drag-down on the shafts of uncased bored and cast-in-place piles, the
possibility of enlargement of the pile cross-section due to overbreak should be considered
as well as ‘waisting’ in the supporting soil layer. Clause 2.3.4.2 of EN 1992–1:2004(EC2)
does not consider the possibility of enlargement, but Table 4.9 in Section 4.1.4 can be used
as a guide to the required tolerance on pile diameter.
EC7 points out that drag-down and transient loading need not usually be considered to act
simultaneously in load combinations.
4.8.3
Minimizing negative skin friction
The effects of drag-down can be minimized by employing slender piles (e.g. H-sections or
precast concrete piles), but more positive measures may be desirable to reduce the magni-
tude of the drag-down forces. In the case of bored piles this can be done by placing in-situ
concrete only in the lower part of the pile within the bearing stratum and using a precast
concrete element surrounded by a bentonite slurry within the fill. Negative skin friction
forces on precast concrete or steel tubular piles can be reduced by coating the portion of the
shaft within the fill with soft bitumen.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
219
Table 4.20 Partial factor sets for a pile axially loaded at the head and subjected
to drag-down on the shaft
Design approach
Structural 
Geotechnical action
Resistance to
action
Shear strength 
compression
parameter
Load
DA1, combination1
A1 (1.35)
M1 (1.0)
A1 (1.35)
R1 (1.0)
DA1, combination 2
A2 (1.0)
M2 (1.25)a
A2 (1.0)
R4 (1.3)
Note
a Applied as partial action factor.
Claessen and Horvat(4.63) describe the coating of 380  450 mm precast concrete piles
with a 10 mm layer of bitumen having a penetration of 40 to 50 mm at 25	C. The skin
friction on the 24 m piles was reduced to 750 kN compared with 1600 to 1700 kN for the
uncoated piles.
Shell Composites Ltd. markets its Bitumen Compound SL for coating bearing piles. The
material has the following characteristics:
Penetration at 25	C:
53 to 70 mm
Softening Point (R and B):
57	C to 63	C
Penetration Index:
Less than 2
The bitumen is heated to 180	C (maximum) and sprayed or poured onto the pile to obtain
a coating thickness of 10 mm. Before coating, the pile surface should be cleaned and primed
with Shell Composites Bitumen Solvent Primer applied by brush or spray at a rate of about
2 kg/10 m2. Alternatively, the SL Compound can be fluxed with 29% of white spirit to
provide the primer. The bitumen slip layers should not be applied over the length of the shaft
which receives support from skin friction, and Claessen and Horvat recommend that a
length at the lower end of ten times the diameter or width of the pile should remain uncoated
if the full end-bearing resistance is to be mobilized.
Negative skin friction is a most important consideration where piles are installed in groups.
The overall settlement of pile groups in fill must be analysed as described in Section 5.5.
The above measures to minimize negative skin friction can be quite costly. In most cases
it will be found more economical to increase the penetration of the pile into the bearing
stratum thereby increasing its capacity to carry the combined loading.
4.9
References
4.1 TOMLINSON, M. J. The adhesion of piles driven in clay soils, Proceedings of 5th International
Conference, ISSMFE, London, Vol. 2, 1957, pp. 66–71.
4.2 TOMLINSON, M. J. The adhesion of piles in stiff clay, Construction Industry Research and
Information Association, Research Report No. 26, London, 1970.
4.3 BOND, A. J. and JARDINE, R. J. Effects of installing displacement piles in a high OCR clay,
Geotechnique, Vol. 41, No. 3, 1991, pp. 341–63.
4.4 RANDOLPH, M. F. and WROTH, C. P. Recent developments in understanding the axial capacity of
piles in clay, Ground Engineering, Vol. 15, No. 7, 1982, pp. 17–25.
4.5 SEMPLE, R. M. and RIGDEN, W. J. Shaft capacity of driven pipe piles in clay, Symposium on Analysis
and Design of Pile Foundations, American Society of Civil Engineers, San Francisco, 1984,
pp. 59–79.
4.6 RIGDEN, W. J., PETTIT, J. J., ST. JOHN, H. D., and POSKITT, T. J. Developments in piling for offshore
structures, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on the Behaviour of Offshore
Structures, London, Vol. 2, 1979, pp. 276–96.
4.7 WELTMAN, A. J. and HEALY, P. R. Piling in ‘boulder clay’ and other glacial tills, Construction
Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), Report PG5, 1978.
4.8 TRENTER, N. A. Engineering in glacial tills, Construction Industry Research and Information
Association (CIRIA), Report C504, 1999.
4.9 MEYERHOF, G. G. and MURDOCK, L. J. An investigation of the bearing capacity of some bored and
driven piles in London Clay, Geotechnique, Vol. 3, No. 7, 1953, pp. 267–82.
4.10 WHITAKER, T. and COOKE, R. W. Bored piles with enlarged bases in London Clay, Proceedings of
6th International Conference, ISSMFE, Montreal, Vol. 2, 1965, pp. 342–6.
220
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
4.11 SKEMPTON, A. W. Cast in-situ bored piles in London Clay, Geotechnique, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1959,
pp. 153–73.
4.12 FLEMING, W. G. K. and SLIWINSKI, Z. The use and influence of bentonite in bored pile construction,
Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), Report PG3, 1977.
4.13 KRAFT, L. M. and LYONS, C. G. Ultimate axial capacity of grouted piles, Proceedings of the 6th
Annual Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, 1974, pp. 485–99.
4.14 JONES, D. A. and TURNER, M. J. Load tests on post-grouted micropiles in London Clay, Ground
Engineering, September 1980, pp. 47–53.
4.15 BJERRUM, L. Problems of soil mechanics and construction in soft clay, Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference, ISSMFE. Moscow, Vol. 3, 1973, pp. 150–7.
4.16 TAYLOR, P. T. Age effect on shaft resistance and effect of loading rate on load distribution of bored
piles, PhD Thesis, University of Sheffield, October 1966.
4.17 BALLISAGER, C. C. Bearing capacity of piles in Aarhus Septarian Clay, Danish Geotechnical
Institute, Bulletin No. 7, 1959, pp. 14–19.
4.18 PECK, R. B., HANSON, W. E., AND THORNBURN, T. H. Foundation Engineering, 2nd edn, John Wiley,
New York, 1974.
4.19 DURGONOGLU, H. T. and MITCHELL, J. K. Static penetration resistance of soils, Proceedings of the
Conference on in-situ Measurement of Soil Properties, American Society of Civil Engineers,
Raleigh (North Carolina), Vol. 1, 1975, pp. 151–88.
4.20 VESIC, A. S. Design of pile foundations, NCHRP Synthesis 42, Transportation Research Board,
Washington, DC, 1977.
4.21 BEREZANTSEV, V. G. et al. Load bearing capacity and deformation of piled foundations,
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference, ISSMFE, Paris, Vol. 2, 1961, pp. 11–12.
4.22 KULHAWY, F. H. Limiting tip and side resistance, fact or fallacy, Symposium on Analysis and
Design of Pile Foundations, American Society of Civil Engineers, San Francisco, 1984,
Proceedings, pp. 80–98.
4.23 DUTT, R. N., MOORE, J. E., and REES, T. C. Behaviour of piles in granular carbonate sediments from
offshore Philippines, Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Paper No.
OTC 4849, 1985, pp. 73–82.
4.24 HIGHT, D. W., LAWRENCE, D. M., FARQUHAR G. B., and POTTS, D. M. Evidence for scale effects in the
end bearing capacity of open-end piles in sand, Proceedings of the 28th Offshore Technology
Conference, Houston, OTC 7975, 1996, pp. 181–92.
4.25 MEIGH, A. C. Cone penetration testing, CIRIA-Butterworth, 1987.
4.26 TE KAMP, W. C. Sondern end funderingen op palen in zand, Fugro Sounding Symposium, Utrecht, 1977.
4.27 DE GIJT, J. G. and BRASSINGA, H. E. Ontgraving beÏnvlodet de conusweerstand, Land and Water,
Vol. 1.2, January 1992, pp. 21–5.
4.28 BROUG, N. W. A. The effect of vertical unloading on cone resistance qc, a theoretical analysis and
a practical confirmation, Proceedings First International Geotechnical Seminar on Deep
Foundations on Bored and Auger Piles, ed. Van Impe, Balkema, Rotterdam, 1988, pp. 523–30.
4.29 HEIJNEN, W. J. Tests on Frankipiles at Zwolle, Netherlands, La technique des Travaux, No. 345,
January/February 1974, pp. I–XIX.
4.30 JARDINE, R., CHOW, F. C., OVERY, R., and STANDING, J. ICP Design Methods for Driven Piles in Sands
and Clays, Thomas Telford, London, 2005.
4.31 American Petroleum Institute, RP2A-WSD, Recommended practice for planning, designing and
constructing fixed offshore platforms – Working stress design, 20th ed, Washington, 1993.
4.32 CHOW, F. C. Investigations into displacement pile behaviour for offshore foundations, PhD Thesis,
Imperial College, London, 1997.
4.33 TAPPIN, R. G. R., van DUIVANDIJK., and HAQUE, M. The design and construction of Jamuna Bridge,
Bangladesh, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 126, 1998, pp. 162–80.
4.34 TOMLINSON, M. J. Discussion, British Geotechnical Society Meeting, 1996, Ground Engineering,
Vol. 29, No. 10. 1996, pp. 31–33.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
221
4.35 WHITE, D. J. and BOLTON, M. D. Comparing CPT and pile base resistance in sand, Proceedings of
the Institution of Civil Engineers, Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 158, (GE1), 2005, pp. 3–14.
4.36 TOGROL, E., AYDINOGLU, N., TUGCU, E. K., and BEKAROGLU. Design and Construction of large piles,
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Soil Mechanics, Rio de Janeiro, Vol. 2,
1992, pp. 1067–72.
4.37 MEYERHOF, G. G. Bearing capacity and settlement of pile foundations, Proceedings of the
American Society of Civil Engineers, GT3, 1976, pp. 197–28.
4.38 BURLAND, J. B., BUTLER, F. G., and DUNICAN, P. The behaviour and design of large diameter bored
piles in stiff clay, Proceedings of the Symposium on Large Bored Piles, Institution of Civil
Engineers and Reinforced Concrete Association, London, 1966, pp. 51–71.
4.39 WYLLIE, D. C. Foundations on Rock, E & FN Spon, London, 1st ed., 1991.
4.40 KULHAWY, F. H. and GOODMAN, R. E. Design of foundations on discontinuous rock, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Structural Foundations on rock, Sydney, Vol. 1, 1980, pp. 209–20.
4.41 KULHAWY, F. H. and GOODMAN, R. E. Foundations in rock. Chapter 15, Ground Engineering
Reference Book, F. G. Bell (ed.), Butterworth, London, 1987.
4.42 PELLS, P. J. N. and TURNER, R. M. End bearing on rock with particular reference to sandstone,
Proceedings of the International Conference on Structural Foundations on rock, Sydney, Vol. 1,
1980, pp. 181–90.
4.43 LORD, J. A., CLAYTON, C. R. I., and MORTIMORE, R. N. Engineering in chalk, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association, Report No 574, 2002.
4.44 LUMB, P. The residual soils of Hong Kong, Geotechnique, Vol. 15, 1965, pp. 180–94.
4.45 PILE DESIGN and CONSTRUCTION, GEO Publication No 1/96, Geotechnical Engineering Office,
Civil Engineering Dept, Government of Hong Kong.
4.46 BEAKE, R. H. and SUTCLIFFE, G. Pipe pile driveability in the carbonate rocks of the Southern
Arabian Gulf, Proceedings of the International Conference on Structural Foundations on Rock,
Balkema, Rotterdam, Vol. 1, 1980, pp. 133–49.
4.47 GEORGE, A. B., SHERRELL, F. W., and TOMLINSON, M. J. The behaviour of steel H-piles in slaty
mudstone, Geotechnique, Vol. 26, No. 1, 1976, pp. 95–104.
4.48 LEACH, B. and MALLARD, D. J. The design and installation of precast concrete piles in the Keuper
Marl of the Severn Estuary, Proceedings of the Conference on Recent Developments in the
Design and Construction of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1980, pp. 33–43.
4.49 OSTERBERG, J. O. and GILL, S. A. Load transfer mechanisms for piers socketted in hard soils or rock,
Proceedings of the 9th Canadian Symposium on Rock Mechanics, Montreal, 1973, pp. 235–62.
4.50 HORVARTH, R. G. Field load test data on concrete-to-rock bond strength for drilled pier founda-
tions, University of Toronto, publication 78–07, 1978.
4.51 ROSENBERG, P. and JOURNEAUX, N. L. Friction and end bearing tests on bedrock for high capacity
socket design, Canadian Geotechnical Journal. Vol. 13, 1976, pp. 324–33.
4.52 WILLIAMS, A. F. and PELLS, P. J. N. Side resistance rock sockets in sandstone, mudstone and shale,
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 18, 1981, pp. 502–13.
4.53 HOBBS, N. B. Review paper – Rocks, Proceedings of the Conference on Settlement of Structures,
British Geotechnical Society, Pentech Press, 1975, pp. 579–610.
4.54 HORVATH, R. G., KENNEY, T. C., and KOZICKI, P. Methods of improving the performance of drilled
piles in weak rock, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 20, 1983, pp. 758–72.
4.55 CHANDLER, R. J. and FORSTER, A. Engineering in Mercia mudstone, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association, Report No. 570, 2001.
4.56 SEEDHOUSE, R. L. and SANCTERS, R. V. Investigations for cooling tower foundations in Mercia
mudstone at Ratcliffe-on-Soar, Nottinghamshire, Proceedings of the Conference on
Engineering Geology of Weak Rock, A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Special Publication No. 8,
1993, pp. 465–72.
4.57 GANNON, J. A., MASTERTON, G. G. T., WALLACE, W. A. and MUIR-WOOD, D. Piled foundations in weak
rock, Construction Industry Research and Information Association, Report No. 181, 1999.
222
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
223
Mean (KN/m2)
Mean of values (KN/m2)
Characteristic all values (KN/m2)
BH1
BH2
BH3
cu shaft
85
115
130
110
95
cu base
75
80
90
95
75
4.58 LORD, J. A., HAYWARD, T., and CLAYTON, C. R. I. Shaft friction of CFA piles in chalk, Construction
Industry Research and Information Association, Report No. PR86, 2003.
4.59 NG, C. W. W., SIMONS, N., and MENZIES, B. A Short Course in Soil-Structure Engineering of Deep
Foundations, Excavations, and Tunnels, Thomas Telford, London, 2004, p. 86.
4.60 PELLS, P. J. N. and TURNER, R. M. Elastic solutions for design and analysis of rock socketted piles,
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 1979, Vol. 16, pp. 481–7.
4.61 FELLENIUS, B. H. Down drag on piles in clay due to negative skin friction, Canadian Geotechnical
Journal, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1972, pp. 323–37.
4.62 JOHANNESSEN, I. J. AND BJERRUM, L. Measurement of the compression of a steel pile to rock due
to settlement of the surrounding clay, Proceedings of the 6th International Conference, ISSMFE,
Montreal, Vol. 2, 1965, pp. 261–4.
4.63 CLAESSEN, A. I. M. and HORVAT, E. Reducing negative skin friction with bitumen slip layers,
Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol.
100, No. GT8, August 1974, pp. 925–44.
4.10
Worked examples
Example 4.1
A precast concrete pile for a jetty structure is required to carry a dead load of 240 kN and
an imposed load of 110 kN both in compression, together with an uplift load of 200 kN.
The pile is driven through 7 m of very soft clay into a stiff boulder clay. Determine the
required penetration of the 350  350 mm pile into the stiff clay to carry the specified
loading. Undrained shear strength tests were made on samples from three boreholes with
the following results:
Settlements are not critical to the structural design of the jetty, therefore the penetration
can be calculated by permissible stress methods by applying a safety factor of 2.5 to the
calculated ultimate bearing resistance. The shaft resistance within the soft clay will be
ignored because of possible sea-bed erosion and lateral pile movements.
Required total pile resistance in stiff clay  (240  110)  2.5  875 kN.
To allow for possible lower than mean cu values at pile base level take cu  0.75 
110 kN/m2.
Ultimate base resistance  9  0.75  110  0.352  91 kN.
Load to be carried by shaft resistance in stiff clay  875 – 91  784 kN.
Take a trial penetration of 10 m into the stiff day:
Average effective overburden pressure in layer  (0.65  9.81  7)  (1.1  9.81  5)
 98 kN/m2.
For 
Figure 4.6 gives 
 0.5, and for L/B  10/0.35  29, the
length factor  1.0, giving 
 0.5.
Ultimate shaft resistance  0.5  110  4  0.35  10  770 kN.
Total pile resistance  770  91  861 kN.
Factor of safety on compression load  861/(240  110)  2.5 which is satisfactory.
Factor of safety on uplift load  770  200  3.8 (satisfactory).
The above calculations using permissible stress methods can be checked for compliance
with the EC7 recommendations. Considering first the actions using the factors in Table 4.1:
Set A1, design value of actions  Fd  1.35  240  1.5  110  489 kN.
Set A2, design value of actions  Fd  1.0  240  1.3  110  383 kN.
The pile resistances are calculated from equation 4.10 for each borehole as follows:
BH1: Rcal  9  75  0.35  0.5  85  4  0.35  10  83  595  678 kN.
BH2: Rcal  83  80/75  595  115/85  893 kN.
BH3: Rcal  83  95/75  595  130/85  1015 kN.
The mean and minimum values of Rcal are
Rcal (mean)  (687  893  1015)/3  862 kN.
Rcal (min)  678 kN (BH1).
The above values are divided by correction factors 1.33 (mean) and 1.23 (min) for three
boreholes (Table 4.6) to give the characteristic values:
Rck (mean)  862/1.33  648 kN,
and
Rck (min)  672/1.23  551 kN.
The least value of Rck is taken as 551 kN to calculate the design value Rcd. Because the
jetty structure is relatively flexible Rck is not multiplied by the factor of 1.1.
Using design approach DA1 and combination 1 (sets A1  M1  R1), for a driven pile
in compression, the factors 
and
for M1 and R1 sets are unity (Tables 4.2 and 4.3).
Therefore design Rcd  (83  595) / 1.23  551 kN which is greater than Fd for the A1 set.
For DA1 and combination 2 (sets A2  M1  R4), M1 (structural actions) is unity and
R4 is 1.4. Hence design Rcd  (83  595) / 1.23  1.4  393 kN, whcih is greater than Fd
for the A2 set.
From the above check it can be concluded that the required penetration depth of 10 m into
the stiff clay as calculated by permissible stress methods with a safety factor of 2.5 complies
with the recommendations of EC7.
Example 4.2
A steel tubular pile 1.220 m in outside diameter forming part of a berthing structure is required
to carry a working load in compression of 16 MN and a uplift of 8 MN. The pile is driven with
s
b

p
cu
vo  11098  1.1,
224
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
a closed end into a deep deposit of normally consolidated marine clay. The undrained shearing
strength–depth profile of the clay is shown in Figure 4.42. Determine the depth to which the
pile must be driven to carry the working load with a safety factor of 2.0.
In dealing with problems of this kind it is a good practice to plot the calculated values of
ultimate shaft friction, end bearing and total resistance for various depths of penetration. The
required pile length can then be read off from the graph. This is a convenient procedure for
a marine structure where the piles may have to carry quite a wide range of loading.
Outside perimeter of pile = 
Overall base area of pile = 
From Figure 4.42, at 160 m,
From Figure 4.6a, the adhesion factor, 
is 1.0 over the full depth.
At 50 m below the sea bed:
Average shearing strength along shaft = 
From Figure 4.6b, adhesion factor for L/B value of 50/1.22 = 41 is 1.0.
From equation 4.8, total shaft friction on outside of shaft 
= 
From equation 4.4, end-bearing resistance = 
.
Thus total pile resistance = 8.50 MN
At 75 m below the sea bed:
Average shearing strength along shaft = 
Length factor for L/B value of 61 is 0.9.
Thus total skin friction on outside of shaft = 
End-bearing resistance = 
Thus total pile resistance = 16.77 MN.
Similarly the total pile resistances at depths of 100, 125, and 150 m below the sea bed are
26.19, 38.01, and 50.78 MN respectively.
The calculated values of pile resistance are plotted in Figure 4.42, from which it may be
seen that a penetration depth of 113 m is required to develop an ultimate resistance of
32 MN, which is the value required to support a compressive load of 16 MN with a safety
9  120  1.169
1000
 1.26 MN
1  0.9  60  3.83  75
1000
 15.51 MN
 120  60 kN/m2.
1
2
9  80  1.169
1000
 0.84 MN
1.0  1.0  40  3.83  50
1000
 7.66 MN.
 80  40 kN/m2.
1
2
p
cu
vo

260
0.65  9.81  160  0.25.
   1.2202  1.169 m2.
1
4
  1.220  3.83 m.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
225
factor of 2. At a depth of 113 m the shaft friction is 30 MN. Therefore, the safety factor on
uplift is 30/8, that is, nearly 4.
Checking the working stress on the steel,
For a wall thickness of 25 mm max. compressive stress =
= 170 Nmm2
This is 50% of the yield stress for high-tensile steel which is satisfactory for the easy
driving conditions. The thickness can be decreased to 16 mm in the lower 50 m of the pile.
Example 4.3
A building column carrying a dead load of 1100 kN and an imposed load of 300 kN is to be
supported by a single bored pile installed in firm to stiff fissured London Clay (Figure 4.43).
Select suitable dimensions and penetration depth to obtain a safety factor of 2 in total pile
resistance, or safety factors of 3 in end bearing and unity in shaft friction. Calculate the
immediate settlement at the working load.
A pile of 1 m diameter is suitable. A penetration depth of 13 m (12 m below cut-off level)
will be tried.
16  106
1
4(12702 12342)
226
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Undrained shear strength, kN/M2
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Undrained shear strength
versus depth
Ultimate resistance versus depth for 1220 m OD
tubular steel pile with closed end
Shaft friction
Total pile capacity
Average cu
cu
(gsub = 0.65Mg/m3)
s9vo= 0.26
Base resistance
Depth below sea bed (m)
0
10
20
30
40
50
100
200
300
Ultimate pile capacity, MN
Penetration for working load
of 16MN (safety factor = 2)
Figure 4.42
Average shearing strength along pile shaft (from Figure 4.43)
.
Take an adhesion factor of 0.45. Then from equation 4.7,
total shaft friction on pile shaft = 
Because the clay is fissured it is desirable to reduce the average shearing strength at pile
base level to obtain the end-bearing resistance. Thus
end-bearing resistance = 
For a safety factor of 2 on the total pile resistance,
allowable working load = 
For a safety factor of 3 on the base resistance and 1 on the skin friction,
allowable working load = 
The alternative of a bored pile with an enlarged base is now considered. Take the same
shaft diameter and a base diameter of 2 m, a base level for the pile being at 10 m below
ground level. The top of the base enlargement will be at 9 m and the base resistance must
be ignored for 2 m above this level (Figure 4.9).
Average shearing strength from cut-off level at 1 to 7 m =
1
2 (35 111)  73 kN/m2
(
1
3  965)1841  2163 kN.
1
2(1841 965)  1403 kN.
9  0.75  182 
1
4   12  965 kN.
0.45  108.5    1  12  1841 kN.

1
2(35182)  108.5 kN/m2
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
227
0
5
10
Depth below ground level (m)
15
20
100
Average
Characteristic
Undrained shear strength 
(kN/m2)
200
300
Figure 4.43 Characteristic and average shear strength values from four boreholes.
An adhesion factor of 0.3 should be used to allow for delays and softening effects while
drilling the enlarged base. Thus
total shaft friction on pile shaft = 
As before a reduction factor of 0.75 should be used on the shearing strength of 145 kN/m2
at a depth of 10 m. Thus from equation 4.4,
end-bearing resistance = 
For a safety factor of 2 on the total pile resistance,
allowable working load 
For a safety factor of 3 on base resistance and 1 on skin friction,
allowable working load 
Therefore a 1 m diameter bored pile with an enlarged base of 2 m diameter at a depth of
10 m below ground level is satisfactory for a working load of 1400 kN.
Considering the settlement of the straight-sided pile, the ultimate shaft friction of 1841 kN
exceeds the working load, and therefore the settlement of the pile will be no more than that
required to mobilize the ultimate resistance; i.e. a settlement of about 10 mm may be expected.
For the full mobilization of shaft resistance at the working load,
load on base = 1400  413 = 987 kN,
Unit pressure on base = 
Unit ultimate base resistance = 
In the absence of plate bearing test data, take K in equation 4.36 as 0.02. Thus
This is an acceptable value.
However, in view of the efficiency of modern pile drilling equipment it is likely that the
cost of under-reaming and concreting to form an enlarged base at 10 m will exceed the cost
drilling the extra 3 m for a straight-sided pile.
Checking the design of the straight-sided pile for compliance with the EC7 requirements,
from Table 4.9:
Factored pile diameter  0.95  1.0  0.95 m, giving area of base  0.71 m2 and
area of shaft for 12 m penetration  35.81 m2.
i  2  0.02  314
979  1000  13 mm.
9  0.75  145  979 kN/m2.
987
1
4  22  314 kN/m2,
 (
1
3  3075)413  1438 kN.

1
2(413  3075)  1744 kN.
9  0.75  145 
1
4  22  3075 kN.
0.3  73    1  6  413 kN.
228
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
It is assumed that the shear strength/depth realtionships in Figure 4.43 were based on an
adequate number of boreholes and soil samples, and that the straight line graphs are a
cautions estimate derived from the plotted data. Hence Figure 4.43 represents characteristic
values and the correlation factors need not be applied.
Calculating the mean and minimum pile resistances:
Rck (mean)  9  148  0.71  0.45  97.5  35.81
 946  1572  2518 kN
Rck (min)  946  (135 / 148)  1572  2435 kN
Taking the minimum value and allowing for the stiffness of the building structure:
Design Rck  2435  1.1  2678 kN
For DA1 combination 1, the partial factor sets are A1  M1  R1; from Table 4.1 the
A1 factors are 1.35 (permanent unfavourable) and 1.5 (variable unfavourable). Therefore
design value of actions:
Fd  1.35  1100  1.5  300  1935 kN
From Table 4.2, the M1 factors are all unity and R1 for combined compression is 1.15.
Therefore design value of resistance:
Rcd  2678 / 1.0  1.15  2329 kN which is greater than Fd of 1935 kN
For DA1 combination 2 (sets A2  M1  R4), the factors for permanent and variable
actions are unity and 1.3 respectively. Therefore
Fd  1.0  1100  1.3  300  1490 kN
M1 (structural action) is unity and R4 is 1.6, therefore
Rcd  2678 / 1.0  1.6  1674 kN which is greater than Fd of 1490 kN
Checking from equation 4.39, taking the drained deformation modulus of the clay at pile
base level as 140cu (for long-term loading), we get
= 0.4 + 12.2
= 13 mm
Example 4.4
A precast concrete pile 450 mm square forming part of a jetty structure is driven into a
medium dense over-consolidated sand. Standard penetration tests made in the sand gave an
  (413 2  987)  8 000
2  0.7854  30  106  0.5  987  1 000
2  140  145
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
229
average value of N of 15 blows/300 mm. The pile is required to carry a compressive load of
250 kN and an uplift load of 180 kN. Determine the required penetration depth of the pile
for a safety factor of at least 2.5 on both compressive and uplift loads.
The unit shaft friction developed on a pile in sand is rather low, and thus the
penetration depth in this case is likely to be governed by the requirements for uplift
resistance.
Take a trial penetration depth of 7 m below sea bed. From Figure 4.10 for N = 15, 
.
The submerged density of the sand may be taken as 1.2 Mg/m3. For an over-consolidated
sand we can take 
Table 4.10 gives 
say 1.5, giving 
From
Table 4.11, take 
Total shaft friction = 
= 
Factor of safety on uplift load = 
2 which is satisfactory.
Checking the base resistance using Berezantsev’s value of Nq in equation 4.16, from
Figure 4.13 with 
Thus
Total pile resistance 
Safety factor on compressive load = 
which is satisfactory.
Example 4.5
Isolated piles are required to carry a working load of 900 kN on a site where borings and
static cone penetration tests recorded the soil profile shown in Figure 4.44. Select suitable
types of pile and determine their required penetration depth to carry the working load with
a safety factor of 2.5. Previous tests in the area have shown that the ultimate base resistance
of piles driven into the dense sand stratum is equal to the static cone resistance.
The piles will attain their bearing within the sand stratum. Any type of bored and cast-in-
place pile will be uneconomical compared with the driven type. A driven and cast-in-place
pile is suitable.
Driven and cast-in-place pile
For 25-grade concrete and a working stress of 25% of the works cube strength (BS 8004),
working stress on concrete = 
. Therefore
required diameter of pile shaft
Say nominal shaft diameter of 450 mm.
Base pressure at ultimate load  900  2.5/(
 0.452  103)  14 MN/m2
For this value a penetration depth of about 29 m is required. Taking into account the
available resistance in shaft friction, the likely penetration depth will be about 28 m. From
Figure 4.44 and Table 4.12 take unit shaft friction, fs  0.012 qc
/4

900  1000  4
  6.25
 428 mm
0.25  25  6.25 N/mm2
777
250  3.1,
 417 360  777 kN.
Qb  25  1.2  9.81  7  0.452  417 kN.
   31	, Nq   25 (D/B   15).
360
180 
360 kN
1
2  1.5  1.2  9.81  7   tan 24.8	  7  4  0.45
	  0.8  0.8  31	  24.8	.
Ks  1.5.
KsKo 
Ko  1.
  31	
230
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
At 12 m, ultimate unit shaft friction resistance  fs  0.012  1  103  12 kN/m2
At 26 m, fs  0.012  5  103  60 kN/m2
At 28 m, fs  0.012  8  103  96 kN/m2
Total shaft friction 
Required ultimate base resistance 
 8 MN/m2
This resistance is likely to be available at 28 m as an average over a distance of 8 pile
diameters above the toe and 4 diameters below the toe. Over 4 diameters below the toe
(900  2.5 933)
/4  0.452  103
(12 60)  14(60 96)  2
2
   0.45  933 kN
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
231
0
5
12.0
26.0
Depth below ground level (m)
28.000
Loose becoming
medium-dense
fine sand
46.000
Dense medium-
fine sand
Rock
12.000
2.0
Ground water
15
25
20
Cone resistance (MN/m2)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Soft silty
clay  (cu=10 kN/m2)
Figure 4.44
232
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
qc1  (7  15)  0.5  11 MN/m2, and over 8 diameters above the toe qc2  (5  8) 
0.5  6.5 MN/m2 as equation 4.19, giving average qc at 28m of 8.75 MN/m2. Therefore
Base resistance  8.75  0.452 103  1392 kN
Total pile resistance  933  1392  2225 kN.
Factor of safety  2225 / 900  2.5 (satisfactory).
Example 4.6
Calculate the ultimate bearing capacity of a 914 mm OD  19 mm wall thickness tubular
steel pile driven with a closed end to a depth of 17 m below ground level in the soil
conditions shown in Figure 4.18a and compare the capacity with that of an open-end pile
driven to the same depth.
Pile characteristics are: External perimeter 2.87 m
Internal perimeter 2.75 m
For 38 mm shoe, net cross-sectional area at toe  0.1046 m2.
Gross base area  0.656 m2.
The shaft friction on the pile shaft is calculated from the characteristic curve shown in
Figure 4.18a. Ignore any shaft friction in the soft clay. The coefficient from Table 4.12
is 0.008.
At 6.5 m ultimate unit shaft friction  0.008  4  0.032 MN/m2
At 14.5 m ultimate unit shaft friction  0.008  9  0.072 MN/m2
At 17.0 m ultimate unit shaft friction  0.008  9.9  0.079 MN/m2
Total external shaft friction 6.5 to 17.0 m
 [(0.032 0.072)  8  (0.072  0.079)  2.5]  0.5  2.87  1.74 MN
From average curve in Figure 4.18a, base resistance  9.9  0.656  6.49 MN
Total ultimate pile resistance  1.74  6.49  8.23 MN
Figure 4.19 shows that the limiting value of about 10 MN/m2 for base resistance in fine
to coarse sand is not exceeded.
The total pile resistance can be checked by converting the cone resistance to the equivalent
angle of shearing resistance of the sand. Assume ground water level at ground level.
Effective overburden pressure at 17 m  8  6.5  10  10.5  157 kN/m2
From Figure 4.11, for qc  9.9 MN/m2,   37	. From Figure 4.13, Nq  70.
Therefore, ultimate unit bearing pressure  70 157 10–3  11 MN/m2, which is close
to the value taken directly from Figure 4.18a.
Adopting a factor of safety of 2.5, the allowable load by permissible stress methods is:
8.23/2.5  3.29 MN.
The allowable load can be checked for compliance with the EC7 recommendations. For an
allowable load of 3.29 MN, the design actions are for set A1, 1.35  3.29  4.44 MN, and
for set A2, 1.0  3.29  3.29 MN.
From plots of individual cone readings, shown typically for CPT 1 in Figure 4.45 the
average and characteristic cone resistances over the length of the shaft and at the base are
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
233
CPT1
CPT2
CPT3
CPT4
Average
Characteristic
Shaft, average qc MN/m2
6.0
7.5
8.4
8.5
7.6
7.35
Base, min qc MN/m2
8.2
9.7
10.1
10.7
9.7
9.3
0
5
10
15
20
5
CPT 1
10
qc (MN/m2)
15
Depth below ground level
Figure 4.45
For CPT1, Shaft friction  0.008  6.0  2.87  10.5  1.45 MN
Base resistance  8.2  0.656  5.38 MN
Rcal  5.38  1.45  6.83 MN
Similarly for CPT2: Rcal  6.36  1.81  8.17 MN
CPT3: Rcal  6.63  2.02  8.65 MN
CPT4: Rcal  7.02  2.05  9.07 MN
The mean and minimum values of Rcal are
Rcal (mean) (6.82  8.17  8.65  9.07)/4  8.18 MN
Rcal (min)  6.82 for CPT1
The above values are divided by the correlation factors 1.31 (mean) and 1.20 (min) for
four cone tests (Table 4.6) to give the characteristic values:
Rck (mean) 8.18/1.31  6.24 MN
Rck (min)  6.82/1.20  5.68 MN
The design value Rcd will be calculated from the minimum Rck of 5.68 MN. A ‘stiffness
factor’ will not be applied.
Using design approach DA1 combination 1 (sets A1  M1  R1) for a driven pile in
compression the factors b and s for M1 and R1 sets are unity (Tables 4.2 and 4.5).
Therefore, Rcd  5.68 MN which is greater than the design action for A1 of 4.44 MN.
For DA1 and combination 2 (sets A2  M2  R1) b and s are 1.25 (the value for 
)
and R4 is 1.3. Therefore design Rcd  5.68 / 1.25  1.3  3.49 MN, which is greater than
the design action for A2 of 3.29 MN.
The above calculations show that the allowable load of 3.29 MN as calculated by
permissible stress methods complies with the recommendations of EC7.
The ultimate resistance of the open end pile can be calculated by the ICP method.
Assuming that the sand has a D50 size of 0.03 mm, Figure 4.21 gives a value of 27	 for the
interface angle of friction, 	cv. From equation 4.24, the equivalent radius of the open-end pile is
R*  (0.4572  0.4382)0.5  0.130 m
The shear modulus G in equation 4.31 can be calculated from Figure 5.24 and equation 6.49.
Figure 5.24 gives E50  30 MN/m2. Take Poisson’s ratio as 0.2, giving G  30/2(1  0.2) 
12.5 MN/m2
Take the average roughness as 2  1  10–5 mm. From equation 4.30:
 2  12.5  2  10–5/0.457  0.001 MN/m2
This is small in relation to 
as calculated below and can be neglected.
The 10.5 m of embedment into the sand is divided into 9  1.0 m segments and an upper-
most segment of 1.5 m (the limiting height to the lowermost segment of 8.0  0.13 m  1.04 m
is not exceeded).
Calculating 
for the lowermost layer, the effective overburden pressure at the centre of
the layer is (8  6.50  10  10.0)  152 kN/m2, and the average qc is 9.5 MN/m2. Take
Pa  100 kN/m2. From equation 4.29, 
 0.029  9.5  (152/100)0.13  (0.5/0.13)0.38 
0.174 MN/m2. From equation 4.27:
Unit shaft resistance  0.174  tan 27	  0.087 MN/m2
Shaft resistance on segment  0.087  2.87  0.250 MN
The resistance of the remaining segments to the top of the sand layer is calculated in the
same way as shown in the following table.
rc
rc
rc

rd

234
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
235
Calculating the base resistance, qc at base  9.7 MN/m2 Dinner/DCPT  0.438/0.036  12.2
which is less than 0.83  9.7  103/100  80.5. Therefore a rigid basal plug will develop.
From equation 4.35, qb  9.7(0.5  0.25 log 914/36)  1.45 MN/m2 which is not less
than 0.15qc. Therefore Qb  1.45  0.656  0.95 MN, which is less than that of the
unplugged pile (Qb  9.7  0.1046  1.01 MN.
Total pile resistance  0.95  1.01  1.96 MN
Example 4.7
A bored and cast-in-place pile is required to carry a working load of 9000 kN at a site where
4 m of loose sand overlies a weak jointed cemented mudstone. Core drilling into the
mudstone showed partly open joints and RQD values increased from an average of 15% at
rockhead to 35% at a depth of 10 m. Tests on rock cores gave an average unconfined
compression strength of 4.5 MN/m2. Determine the required depth of the pile below rock-
head and calculate the settlement of the pile at the working load.
The stress on the shaft of a 1.5 m pile is 
This is satisfactory for concrete with a cube crushing strength of 25 MN/m2 (allowable
stress  6 MN/m2).
Load carried in shaft friction in the loose sand will be negligible.
From Figure 4.33 for 
The mass factor, j, for RQD from 15%
to 35% is 0.2. Therefore, , from Figure 4.34 is 0.65.
From equation 4.44, rock socket shaft friction  0.2  0.65  4500
 585 kN/m2
Taking a 7 m socket length, ultimate shaft friction  585 
 1.5  7  19297 kN
Therefore, factor of safety on shaft friction
Because of the open joints in the rock it will be advisable to assume that the base
resistance does not exceed the unconfined compression strength of the rock.
 19297
9000  2.1

quc  4.5 MN/m2,   0.2.
9
(4)  1.52  5.1 MN/m2
Depth of
h(m)
Segment
(m bql)
17–16
0.5
0.599
1.055
9.5
0.174
0.087
0.250
16–15
1.5
0.395
1.047
8.9
0.107
0.053
0.152
15–14
2.5
0.325
1.037
8.4
0.082
0.041
0.118
14–13
3.5
0.286
1.026
7.9
0.067
0.033
0.095
13–12
4.5
0.260
1.015
7.4
0.057
0.028
0.080
12–11
5.5
0.241
1.003
6.8
0.048
0.024
0.069
11–10
6.5
0.226
0.989
6.3
0.041
0.020
0.057
10–9
7.5
0.214
0.974
5.8
0.035
0.017
0.049
9–8
8.5
0.204
0.958
5.2
0.029
0.015
0.043
8–6.5
7.25
0.217
0.935
4.4
0.026
0.013
0.037
Total Qs  0.95 MN
(MN/m2)
rc  tan  	cv 
(MN/m2)
(MN/m2)
Qs (MN)
f 
rc 
qc 

vo
po 
0.13

h
R*
0.38
Total base resistance = 
Total pile resistance  19297  7952  27249 kN
Factor of safety = 
which is satisfactory
If the rock socket skin friction were to be only half the calculated value, no load would be
transferred to the pile base. Therefore, the pile head settlement will be caused by compres-
sion in the rock socket only.
From Section 5.5 the modulus ratio of a cemented mudstone is 150, and for a mass factor
of 0.2 the deformation modulus of the rock mass is 0.2  150  4.5  135 MN/m2. In
Figure 4.36 the modulus ratio Ec/Ed is 20  103/135  148 and for L/B  7/1.5  4.7 the
influence factor I is 0.25. The ratio D/B for a recessed socket is 4/1.5  2.7. There the reduction
factor from Figure 4.37 is about 0.8. Hence from equation 4.49:
Pile head settlement = 
Checking the calculated shaft friction from equation 4.45 and take b as 0.25,
fs  0.25 
 0.53 MN/m2 which agrees closely with the value from equation 4.44.
If the socket is grooved to an average depth of 25 mm over shortened socket length of
5.0 m with the grooves at vertical intervals of 0.75 m then:
In equation 4.47, 
and total length of travel  4.7  6.67 
31.35 m
From equation 4.47, RF  0.025  31.33/0.75  5.0  0.21
From equation 4.46, fs  0.8(0.21)0.45  4.5  1.78 MN/m2
Total shaft friction on 5 m socket length  1.78    1.5  5  42 MN
Factor of safety in shaft friction  42/9  4.7, therefore grooving the socket would
theoretically provide a much shorter socket length than the 7 m required for an ungrooved shaft.
Example 4.8
A tubular steel pile with an outside diameter of 1067 mm is driven with a closed end to near
refusal in a moderately strong sandstone (average quc = 20 MN/m2) overlain by 15 m of soft
clay. Core drilling in the rock showed a fracture frequency of 5 joints per metre. Calculate
the maximum working load which can be applied to the pile and the settlement at this load.
Only a small penetration below rockhead will be possible with sandstone of this quality,
and the rock will be shattered by the impact. Hence, frictional support both in the soft clay and
the rock will be negligible compared with the base resistance.
Pile driving impact is likely to open joints in the rock hence the base resistance should not
exceed the unconfined compression strength of the intact rock.
Total ultimate pile resistance = base resistance= 
For a safety factor of 2.5 allowed load = 17.9
2.5  7.2 MN

4  1.0672  20  17.9 MN
r  0.775 – 0.75  0.025 m
4.5
0.8  9  103  0.25
1.5  135
 9 mm
27 249
9000 3.0

4  1.52  4500  7952 kN
236
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
For a wall thickness of 19 mm in mild steel ( fy = 240 MN/m2)
Allowed load = 0.5  240  0.0626 = 7.5 MN
Therefore take a maximum working load of 7.2 MN.
Pile driving impact may increase the fracture frequency from 5 to 10, say, fractures
per metre giving a mass factor of 0.2. From Section 5.4 the modulus ratio of sandstone
is 300.
Deformation modulus = 0.2  300  20  1200 MN/m2
From equation 4.38:
Settlement of pile head 
 8.6 + 2.8
 11.4 mm (say 10 to 15 mm)
Example 4.9
A 5 m layer of hydraulic fill consisting of sand is pumped into place over the ground shown
in Figure 4.44. The calculated time/settlement curve for the surface of the hydraulic fill is
shown in Figure 4.46. Two years after the completion of filling a closed-end steel cased pile
with an outside diameter of 517 mm is driven to a penetration of 27 m to carry a working
load of 900 kN. Calculate the negative friction which is developed on the pile shaft and
assess whether or not any deeper penetration is required to carry the combined working load
and negative skin friction.
It can be seen from the time/settlement curve that about 120 mm of settlement will take
place from the time of driving the pile until the clay beneath the fill layer is fully consoli-
dated. This movement is considerably larger than the compression of the pile head under the
working load (about 10 mm of settlement would be expected under the working load of
900 kN). Therefore negative skin friction will be developed over the whole depth of the pile
within the hydraulic fill. Considering now the negative shaft friction within the soft clay, if
it is assumed that drag-down will not occur if the clay settles relatively to the pile by less
than 5 mm, then adding the settlement of the pile toe (10 mm at the working load) negative
7.2  15  1000
0.0626  2  105  0.5  7.2  1000
1.067  1200
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
237
Completion of
hydraulic fill
Commencement
of piling
Time in years
2.0
120 mm
450 mm
670 mm
Settlement in mm Load from fill 
(kN/m2)
0.5
0
Calculated ‘final’
settlement
Figure 4.46
skin friction will not be developed below the point where the clay settles by less than 15 mm
relative to site datum. After pile driving, the full thickness of the clay settles by 120 mm at
the surface of the layer. By simple proportion, a settlement of 5mm occurs at a point 12 
15/120  1.5 m above the base of the layer. This assumes uniform compressibility in the
clay, but there is decreasing compressibility with increasing depth such that the settlement
decreases to less than 15 mm at a point not less than 2 m above the base of the layer. A closer
estimate could be obtained by a t–z analysis. However, the above approximate assessment
will be adequate for the present case.
Adopting Meyerhof’s factor from Figure 4.39 for the negative skin friction:
Unit negative skin friction 2 m above the base of clay layer
Unit negative skin friction at top of clay stratum
 0.3  9.81  5  2  29 kN/m2
Unit negative skin friction 2 m below top of clay stratum (at groundwater level)
 0.3  9.81  [(5  2)  (2  1.9)]  41 kN/m2
Total negative skin friction in clay
Drainage of the fill will produce a medium-dense state of compaction for which Ko is 0.45
and Ks in equation 4.16 is 0.67 (Table 4.10) and 
. Therefore
Negative skin friction
 102 kN
Total negative skin friction on pile  102  783  885 kN
Total load on pile  885  900  1785 kN
From Example 4.5 the average CPT resistance at a penetration of 28 m is about 8.75 MN/m
and the shaft frictional resistance from 12 to 28 m is 933  517/450  1072 kN
Ultimate base resistance at 28 m  /4  0.5172  8.75  103  1837 kN
Total pile resistance  1072  1837  2909 kN
Safety factor on combined working load and downdrag  2909/1785  1.6 (satisfactory).
The working stress on the pile shaft must be checked under the combined loading. For a
wall thickness of 4.47 mm the steel area is 7193 mm2.
Permissible load on steel at 30% yield stress
If the pile is filled with concrete with a working stress of 25% of the strength:
Allowable load on concrete 
 1267 kN
Total allowed load
.
 1267 550  1817  kN

1
4  0.5082  0.25  25  1000
 0.3  255  7193
1000
 550 kN

1
2  0.67  9.81  2  5   tan  21	    0.517  5
	  0.7  30	  20	
   0.517[
1
2(29 41)2 
1
2(41 62)  8]  783 kN
 62 kN/m2
 0.3
vo  0.3  9.81[(5  2)(2  1.9)(8  0.9)]
238
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
If there is concern about long-term corrosion of the steel section in the hydraulic fill, the
cube strength of the concrete filling could be increased so that the whole of the load is
carried by the concrete.
Checking for compliance with the EC7 requirements, the pile is a concrete filled casing
therefore dimensional tolerances are not applied. The shaft resistance is fully mobilized over
the depth below the base of the fill. The partial action and resistance factors are selected
from Table 4.20.
For design approach DA1, combination 1, the partial factors are: Structural action,
A1  1.35. Drag-down action, A1  1.35, M1  1.0, A1  1.35. Resistance, R1  1.0.
Design value of actions  (900  885)  1.35  2410 kN
Design resistance  2909  1.0  2909 kN (greater than 2410 kN)
For design approach DA1, combination 2, Structural, A2  1.0. Drag-down, M2  1.25,
A2  1.0. Resistance, R4  1.3.
Design value of actions  900  1.0  885  1.25  2006 kN
Design resistance  2909/1.3  2273 kN (greater than 2006 kN)
The above calculations show that the penetration of 28 m for the pile satisfies the requirements
of EC7 in respect of the ultimate limit state GEO.
Resistance of piles to compressive loads
239
5.1
Group action in piled foundations
The supporting capacity of a group of vertically loaded piles can, in many situations, be
considerably less than the sum of the capacities of the individual piles comprising the group.
In all cases the elastic and consolidation settlements of the group are greater than those of
a single pile carrying the same working load as that on each pile within the group. This is
because the zone of soil or rock which is stressed by the entire group extends to a much
greater width and depth than the zone beneath the single pile (Figure 5.1). Even when a pile
group is bearing on rock the elastic deformation of the body of rock within the stressed zone
can be quite appreciable if the piles are loaded to their maximum safe capacity.
Group action in piled foundations has resulted in many recorded cases of failure or excessive
settlement, even though loading tests made on a single pile have indicated satisfactory
performance. A typical case of foundation failure is the single pile driven to a satisfactory
set in a compact or stiff soil layer underlain by soft compressible clay. The latter formation
is not stressed to any significant extent when the single pile is loaded (Figure 5.2a) but when
the load from the superstructure is applied to the whole group, the stressed zone extends
down into the soft clay. Excessive settlement or complete general shear failure of the group
can then occur (Figure 5.2b).
The allowable loading on pile groups is sometimes determined by the so-called
efficiency formulae, in which the efficiency of the group is defined as the ratio of the
Chapter 5
Pile groups under compressive
loading
Stressed
zone
(a)
(b)
Heavily
stressed zone
Figure 5.1 Comparison of stressed zones beneath single pile and pile group (a) Single pile
(b) Pile group.
Pile groups under compressive loading
241
average load per pile when failure of the complete group occurs, to the load at failure of a
single comparable pile. The various efficiency ratios are based simply on experience without
any relationship to soil mechanics principles. For this reason the authors do not consider this
to be a desirable or logical approach to the problem and prefer to base design methods on the
assumption that the pile group behaves as a block foundation with a degree of flexibility
which depends on the rigidity of the capping system and the superimposed structure. By
treating the foundation in this manner, normal soil mechanics practice can be followed in
the calculations to determine the ultimate bearing capacity and settlement. Load transfer in
shaft friction from the pile shaft to the surrounding soil is allowed for by assuming that the
load is spread from the shafts of friction piles at an angle of 1 in 4 from the vertical. Three
cases of load transfer are shown in Figure 5.3a to c.
Test pile
(a)
(b)
Fill or
weak soil
Soft compressible clay
Compact
stratum
Figure 5.2 Shear failure of pile group (a) Test load on single isolated pile when soft clay is not stressed
significantly (b) Load applied to group of piles when soft clay is stressed heavily.
Spread of load at 1 in 4
(a)
(b)
(c)
Soft
clay
Base of equivalent raft
foundation
D
D
2/3
D
2/3
D
Figure 5.3 Load transfer to soil from pile group (a) Group of piles supported predominantly by shaft
friction (b) Group of piles driven through soft clay to combined shaft friction and end
bearing in stratum of dense granular soil (c) Group of piles supported in end bearing on
hard rock stratum.
242
Pile groups under compressive loading
An important point to note in the application of soil mechanics methods to the design of
pile groups is that, whereas in the case of the single pile the installation method has a very
significant effect on the selection of design parameters for shaft friction and end bearing,
the installation procedure is of lesser importance when considering group behaviour. This is
because the zone of disturbance of the soil occurs only within a radius of a few pile diameters
around and beneath the individual pile, whereas the soil is significantly stressed to a depth
to or greater than the width of the group (Figure 5.1). The greater part of this zone is well
below the ground which has been disturbed by the pile installation.
Computer programs have been established to model pile–soil interaction behaviour from
which the settlement of pile groups and the loads on individual piles within the group can
be determined.
Some of the programs are
DEFPIG
Non-linear continuum analysis using interaction factors
GAPFIX
Non-linear continuum analysis, complete solution
M-PILE
Simplified continuum analysis using interaction factors
PGROUP
Complete linear continuum analysis
In the above programs soil behaviour is modelled on the basis of the theory of elasticity.
Poulos(5.1) states, ‘Despite the gross simplification which this model involves when applied
to real soil, it provides a useful basis for the prediction of pile behaviour provided that
appropriate elastic parameters are selected for the soil. A significant advantage of using
an elastic model for soil is that it provides a rational means of analysis of pile groups and
evaluation of immediate and final movement of a pile. In determining immediate move-
ments, the undrained elastic parameters of the soil are used in the theory, whereas for final
movements the drained parameters are used’. A useful comparison of the M-PILE and
PGROUP programs is given in the UK Department of Transport Publication BD 25/88.
The interaction factors depend on the geometry, stiffness and spacing of the piles and the
elastic modulus of the soil between them.
In view of the above reservations and the difficulties of obtaining representative values
of the undrained and drained deformation parameters (particularly the latter) from field
or laboratory testing of soils and rock, the authors believe that the equivalent raft method
is sufficiently reliable for most day-to-day settlement predictions. Nevertheless, it could
be convenient and time saving to use an available computer program particularly when
making studies to determine the effect of varying parameters such as pile diameter, length
and spacing.
In most practical problems piles are taken down to a stratum of relatively low com-
pressibility and the resulting total and differential settlements are quite small such that an
error of plus or minus 50% due to deficiencies in theory or unrepresentative deformation
parameters need not necessarily be detrimental to the structure carried by the pile group
(see also Section 11.1.4).
As an example of the relative accuracy of the methods Figure 5.4 shows a 44 pile group
where the piles spaced at 3 diameters centre to centre are taken down to a depth of 24 m into
a firm becoming stiff normally consolidated clay where the undrained shear strength and
compressibility vary linearly with depth. The group settlements calculated by the equivalent
raft method used the influence factors of Butler (Figure 5.19).
Pile groups under compressive loading
243
The comparative group settlements were
DEFPIG 
42 mm
PGROUP 
31 mm
Equivalent raft
30 mm
The principal problems concerned with pile groups are constructional effects such as
ground heave, the interference of closely spaced piles which have deviated from line during
driving, and the possibilities of damage to adjacent structures and services. It is, of course,
necessary to calculate the total and differential settlements of pile groups and overall piled
areas to ensure that these are within limits acceptable to the design of the superstructure.
The criteria of relative deflections, angular distortion, and horizontal strain which can be
tolerated by structures of various types have been reviewed by Burland and Wroth(5.2).
When checking group settlement calculations to verify compliance with serviceability
limit criteria, EC7 recommends a partial factor of 1.0 for actions and ground properties
unless otherwise specified.
5.2
Pile groups in fine-grained soils
5.2.1
Ultimate bearing capacity
It is sometimes the practice for regulatory authorities to require that each pile in a group
should be designed to carry a working load which has a conventional safety factor on
Total load on group 22.4 MN
GL
16.0 m
24.0 m
Rigid layer
Firm becoming
stiff normally
consolidated clay
48.0 m
30 MN/m2
Ef 20 MN/m2
Ed 60 MN/m2
Equivalent raft 14 × 14 m
16 no. 600 mm OD piles at 1.8 m centres
1 : 4
Figure 5.4 Pile group settlement by equivalent raft method.
244
Pile groups under compressive loading
its ultimate bearing capacity as determined for a given penetration by calculation, static
load testing, or an empirical method. Burland(5.3) has stated his strong opinion that this
requirement can result in grossly uneconomic foundation design, because it ignores the
capability of a raft to redistribute loads from the superstructure on to the piles forming the
group. Redistribution of loading can be permitted provided that
(1) The raft has sufficient flexibility (ductility) to perform this function without failure as
a structural unit
(2) The superstructure has sufficient flexibility to accommodate any resulting movements
in the raft
(3) The pile group has an adequate safety factor against failure or excessive settlement
when considered as an equivalent block foundation and
(4) Account is taken of the effects of ground heave or subsidence of the mass of soil
encompassed by the pile group during the construction stage (Section 5.7).
Burland recommends that redistribution should be effected by permitting piles carrying
the heavier loading to mobilize their ultimate resistance in shaft friction, thereby yielding
and transferring some of their load to surrounding piles within the group. This concept of
‘ductile foundations’ is discussed further in Section 5.10.
In all cases where piles are designed to transmit loading as a group terminating in a clay
or sand stratum, whether or not some of the piles are permitted to yield, it is essential to
consider the risks of general shear failure or excessive total and differential settlement of the
equivalent block foundation taking the form shown in Figure 5.5.
The ultimate bearing capacity (ultimate limit state) of the block foundation as shown in
Figure 5.5 can be calculated by using Brinch Hansen’s general equation(5.4). This was
referred to in Section 4.3 with reference to the bearing capacity factor Nq in equation 4.16.
The complete Brinch Hansen equation as applied to a shallow spread foundation embedded
in soil with a level ground surface is
Q/A
or
qu  cNc sc dc ic bcpo Nq sq dq iq bq 0.5 B N s d i b
(5.1)
Overall width
Overall length
L
B
D
Figure 5.5 Pile group acting as block foundation.
Pile groups under compressive loading
245
where c  cohesion intercept of soil
Nc, Nq and N  bearing capacity factors
sc, sq and s  shape factors
dc, dq and d  depth factors
ic, iq and i  load inclination factors
bc, bq and b  base inclination factors
  density of the soil
po  pressure of the overburden soil at foundation level.
For undrained conditions (  0	) the second term of the equation is omitted and cu
is substituted for c. For drained conditions, c (the cohesion intercept in terms of effec-
tive stress) is used instead of c. Values of the factors in equation 5.1 are shown in
Figures 5.6 to 5.10.
0
250
200
160
120
100
80
60
40
30
20
16
12
10
8
6
4
3
2
1
5
10
15
20
Ground level
Ground surface
D (not greater
than B)
Equivalent horizontal base
Key to dimensions
V
D
V
B/2
B
B

H
H
25
30
35
40
45
Angle of shearing resistance, f (°)
Nc
N
Nq
Bearing capacity factors, Nc, Nq, N
Figure 5.6 Bearing capacity factors Nc, Nq and N (after Brinch Hansen(5.4)).
246
Pile groups under compressive loading
Point of application
of resultant vertical
force V
Centroid of
foundation
Equivalent base of area A9
= B9× L9
Pressure distribution
on equivalent base
= B9× L9
Eccentricity applied
vertical load
Eccentricity with
respect to centroid
of foundation
Inclined load
V
L
ey
ex
ex
ex
=B – 2ex
B9= B –2ex
B9
B
L9 = L –2ey
v
B9
R
Figure 5.8 Transformation of eccentrically-loaded foundation to equivalent rectangular area carring
uniformly distributed load.
0.50
0.2
0.4
Breadth/length, B/L
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.8
Shape factor, s
Shape factor, sc
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.0
1.8
f =45°
=40°
=35°
=30°
=30°
=35°
=0–25°
=0–25°
= 40°
= 45°
Figure 5.7 Shape factors sc and s (after Brinch Hansen(5.4)).
The equation in similar form is given in EC7, Annex D, but the third term and the depth
factors have been omitted, in the latter case because the application of the Eurocode is essentially
for shallow spread foundations (D not greater than B). When applied to the block foundation
equivalent to a pile group, the depth of the group could be large relative to its width. Thus by
omitting the depth factors the value of qu could be over-conservative. The use of equation 5.1
in checking for compliance with the EC7 recommendations is described in Section 5.4.
0
0
0.2
0.4
Inclination factor, ic
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
Inclination factor, iq
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
H/BLc + V tan f
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0
0.2
0.4
Inclination factor, i
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
0.2
0.4
H/V + BLc cot f
H/V + BLc cot f
0.6
0.8
1.0
=40°
=40°
=20°
=20°
=30°
=30°
=10°
f=0°
f=10°
=40°
=20°
=30°
f =10°
Figure 5.10 Inclination factors ic, iq and i (after Brinch Hansen(5.4)).
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1.58
Values for D/B =∞ 
1.70
1.65
2.04
2.56
3.59
5.67
5
10
Depth/breadth, D/B
Depth factor, dc
15
20
=0 –10°
=20°
=25°
=30°
=35°
=40°
f=45°
Figure 5.9 Depth factor dc (after Brinch Hansen (5.4)).
248
Pile groups under compressive loading
Values of the shape factors sc and s for centrally applied vertical loading are obtained
from Figure 5.7, and sq from the equation:
(5.2)
Inclined loading is considered in relation to the effective breadth B and the effective
length L of the equivalent block foundation. The plan dimensions of the block, as derived
by Meyerhof (5.5), are shown in Figure 5.8. Thus for loading in the direction of the breadth:
B  B – 2ex
(5.3a)
where ex is the eccentricity of loading in relation to the centroid of the base.
Similarly,
L  L – 2ey
(5.3b)
The shape factors s are modified for inclined loading by the equations:
sCB  1 0.2iCB B/L
(5.4)
sCL  1 0.2iCL L/B
(5.5)
sqB  1 sin iqB B/L
(5.6)
sqL  1 sin iqL L/B
(5.7)
sB  1 – 0.4iB B/L
(5.8)
sL  1 – 0.4iL L/B
(5.9)
Where B is less than L, approximate values of the shape factors for centrally applied
vertical loading which are sufficiently accurate for most practical purposes are
sq  sc(sc1)
Nq
Shape of base
sc
sq
s
Continuous strip
1.0
1.0
1.0
Rectangle
10.2 B/L
10.2 B/L
1–0.4 B/L
Square
1.3
1.2
0.8
Circle (diameter B)
1.3
1.2
0.6
Values of the depth factor dc are obtained from Figure 5.9. The values on the right-hand
side of the figure are for D  infinity. dq is obtained from
(5.10)
The depth factor d can be taken as unity in all cases, also when   0º, dq  1.0. Where
 is greater than 25º dq can be taken as equal to dc. A simplified value of dc and dq where 
is less than 25º is 10.35 D/B. The use of the depth factors assumes that the soil above
foundation level is not significantly weaker in shear strength than that of the soil below this
level. However, in the case of pile groups, the piles are usually taken down through weak
soils into stronger material, when either the depth factors should not be used or the depth
dq  dc1
Nq
Pile groups under compressive loading
249
D should be taken as the penetration depth of the piles into the bearing stratum. Values of
the load inclination factors ic, iq, and i are shown in Figure 5.10 in relation to  and
the effective breadth B and length L of the foundation. Simplified values where the
horizontal load H is not greater than V tan 	cBL, and where c and 	 are the parameters
for cohesion and friction respectively of the soil beneath the base are given by the following
equations:
(5.11)
(5.12)
(5.13)
Equation 5.13 is strictly applicable only for c  0 and   30	 but Brinch Hansen advises
that it can be used for other value of .
The base of an equivalent block foundation, i.e. pile toe level, is usually horizontal but
where piles are terminated on a sloping bearing stratum, the base of the block can be treated
as horizontal at a depth equal to that of the lowest edge and bounded by vertical planes
through the other three edges (Figure 5.6). The base factors bc, bq and b are unity for a
horizontal base.
It is evident from the foregoing account of the application of the Brinch Hansen equation
that it is not readily adaptable from its original use in the design of relatively shallow spread
foundations to deep pile groups subjected to appreciable transverse loading. In such cases it
is preferable to use a computer program which can simulate interaction between the piles
and the surrounding soil and can give a visual display of the extent of any overstressed zones
in the soil below the group. Further aspects of group behaviour under transverse loading are
discussed in Section 6.4.
Equation 5.1 ignores friction on the sides of the block foundation. The contribution of
side shear is only a small proportion of the total where piles are taken down through a weak
soil into a stronger stratum. In cases of marginal stability side shear resistance can be
calculated as the shear resistance on a soil to soil interface on the sides of the group.
Where piles are installed in relatively small numbers there is a possibility of excessive
base settlement if two or more piles deviate from line and come into near or close contact at
the toe and the toe loads are concentrated over a small area. While failure would not occur
if the safety factor in end bearing was adequate, the settlement would be higher than that
which would occur when the piles were at their design spacing. This would lead to differ-
ential settlement between the piles in the group. A safeguard against this occurrence is the
adoption of a centre-to-centre spacing of piles in clay of at least three pile diameters, with a
minimum of 1 m. BS 8004 recommends a centre-to-centre spacing for friction piles of
not less than the perimeter of the pile or for circular piles three times the diameter. Closer
spacing can be adopted for piles carrying their load mainly in end bearing but the space
between adjacent piles must not be less than their least width. Special consideration must be
given to the spacing of piles with enlarged bases, including a study of interaction of stresses
and the effect of construction tolerances. German practices for driven piles and for bored
piles are shown in Figures 5.11 and 5.12 respectively, (see also BS EN 1536 and EN 12699).
i  i2
q
iq 1  1.5H
V
ic  1 
H
2cBL
250
Pile groups under compressive loading
5.2.2
Settlement
The first step in the settlement analysis is to determine the vertical stress distribution
below the base of the equivalent block foundation (Figure 5.3) using the curves shown in
Figure 5.13, where the stress at any depth z below this level is related to its length/breath
ratio. The curves assume that the foundation is rigid, but it is sufficiently accurate to assume
that the superstructure, pile cap, piles and soil surrounding them have the required degree
of rigidity.
≥2dF
Top of bearing
stratum
(a)
(b)
≥3d
dF
d
d
Figure 5.12 German practice for spacing of bored and cast in-situ piles in groups (a) Straight-sided
piles (b) Piles with enlarged bases.
e
e
e
d
d
dF2
≥2dF1
e ≥3d ≥1m + d
≥1.00
dF1
dF2
dF2
dF1
dF1
e
e
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.11 German practice for spacing of driven piles in groups (a) Vertical piles (b) Raking piles
(c) and (d) Raking winged piles.
Pile groups under compressive loading
251
The second step is to determine the depth of soil over which the stresses transmitted by
the block foundation are significant. This is usually taken as the depth at which the vertical
stress resulting from the net pressure at foundation level has decreased to 20% of the net
overburden pressure at that level (Figure 5.14). A deeper level should be considered for soft
highly compressible alluvial clays and peats.
0
0
0.1
1
2
3
5

Values of L/B
sz/q
z/B
1.5
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Figure 5.13 Calculation of mean vertical stress (
z) at depth z beneath rectangular area ab on
surface loaded at uniform pressure q.
252
Pile groups under compressive loading
The third step is to calculate the settlement of the foundation which takes place in two
phases. The first is immediate settlement (i) caused by elastic compression of the soil
without dissipation of pore pressure. It is followed by consolidation settlement (c) which
takes place over the period of pore pressure dissipation at a rate which depends upon the
permeability of the soil. There is also the possibility of very long-term secondary settlement
() or creep of the soil. In the case of the very soft soils referred to in the previous
paragraph, secondary settlement could be a significant proportion of the total. The equation
for calculating it is given at the end of Section 5.2.
The net immediate settlement of foundations on clays is calculated from the equation:
(5.14)
where qn  net foundation pressure
B  foundation width
  Poisson’s ratio
Eu  undrained deformation modulus
Ip  influence factor
Ev (or for drained conditions Ev) can be obtained by one or more of the following methods:
(1) From the stress–strain curves established in the field by plate-bearing tests
(Figure 5.15)
(2) From drained triaxial compression tests on good quality samples (to obtain Ev)
(3) From oedometer tests to obtain the modulus of volume compressibility (mv), when Ev
is the reciprocal of mv and
i 
qn  B  (1  2)  Ip
Eu
qn
Overburden
pressure, 9vo
Lowest level
considered in
settlement analysis
Combined
 9vo and z
9vo
z
z³0.29vo
Figure 5.14 Vertical pressure and stress distribution for deep clay layer.
Pile groups under compressive loading
253
1.5qn
qn
B
C
D
A
x
Axial strain
Compressive stress
Stress–strain curve
from plate loading test
Strain corresponding to 1.5 qn
Eu 1.5qn/x9
Strain corresponding 
to net foundation pressure qn 
Eu  qn/x
x9
Figure 5.15 Determining deformation modulus Eu from stress/strain curve.
(4) From relationships with the shear modulus (G) obtained in the field by pressuremeter
tests:
, where 
and 
are the undrained and drained values of Poisson’s
ratio respectively.
With regard to method (1) a typical stress/strain curve obtained by a plate-bearing test in
undrained conditions is shown in Figure 5.15. Purely elastic behaviour occurs only at low
stress levels (line AB in Figure 5.15). Adoption of a modulus of elasticity (Young’s modu-
lus) corresponding to AB could result in under-estimating the settlement. The usual proce-
dure is to draw a secant AC to the curve corresponding to a compressive stress equal to the
net foundation pressure at the base of the equivalent block foundation. More conservatively
the secant AD can be drawn at a compressive stress of 1.5 times or some other suitable mul-
tiple of the foundation pressure. The deformation modulus Eu is then obtained as shown in
Figure 5.15.
As an alternative to direct determination of Eu from field tests, it can be obtained from a rela-
tionship with the undrained shear strength cu, the plasticity index and over-consolidation ratio
of the clay established by Jamiolkowski et al.(5.6) (Figure 5.16). The latter value is derived
from oedometer tests or from a knowledge of the geological history of the deposit.(5.7) These
tests are used to calculate the long-term consolidation settlement of the foundation as
described below. Knowing the oedometer settlement (oed) provides another way of deter-
mining the immediate, consolidation and final settlements using the following relationships
established by Burland et al.(5.8)

u
E  2G(1 )
E  2G(1 u)
254
Pile groups under compressive loading
Figure 5.16 Relationship between Eu/cu ratio for clays with plasticity index and degree of
over-consolidation (after Jamiolkowski et al.(5.9)).
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
01
2
3
PI<30
PI>50
30< PI< 50
Over-consolidation ratio
4
5
6
7
8 910
Eu/cu
For stiff over-consolidated clays:
immediate settlement 
(5.15)
consolidation settlement 
(5.16)
final settlement 
(5.17)
For soft normally consolidated clays:
immediate settlement  0.1 
(5.18)
consolidation settlement 
(5.19)
final settlement 
(5.20)
The Eu/cu ratio is also strain dependent showing a reduction in the ratio with increasing
strain. Jardine et al.(5.9) showed this effect in London Clay from the results of undrained
triaxial tests on good quality samples (Figure 5.17). Normally loaded foundations, includ-
ing pile groups, usually exhibit a strain of 0.01% to 0.1%, which validates the frequently
used relationship Eu  400cu for the deformation modulus of intact blue London Clay.
oed
oed
oed
oed
i0.4 to 0.5oed
i0.5 to 0.6oed
Pile groups under compressive loading
255
Marsland (5.10) obtained Eu/cu equal to 348 for an upper glacial till, and 540 for a laminated
glacial clay at Redcar, North Yorks.
The influence factor Ip in equation 5.14 is obtained from Steinbrenner’s curves
(Figure 5.18) using the method developed by Terzaghi (5.11). Values of F1 and F2 in Figure 5.18
are related to the Poisson’s ratio () of the foundation soil. For a ratio of 0.5, Ip  F1. When the
ratio is zero, Ip  F1 F2. Some values of Poisson’s ratio are shown in Table 5.1.
When using the curves in Figure 5.18 to calculate the immediate settlement of a flexible
pile group, the square or rectangular area in Figure 5.5 is divided into four equal rectangles.
Equation 5.14 then gives the settlement at the corner of each rectangle. The settlement at the
centre is then equal to 4 times the corner settlement. In the case of a rigid pile group such
as a group with a rigid cap or supporting a rigid superstructure, the settlement at the centre
of the longest edge (twice the corner settlement) is obtained and the average settlement of
the group obtained from the equation:
(5.20a)
These calculations can be performed by computer using a program such as VDISP in the
OASYs GEO suite.
The curves in Figure 5.18 assume that Eu is constant with depth. Calculations based on a con-
stant value can over-estimate the settlement. Usually the deformation modulus in soils and rocks
average(centre cornercentre long edge)/3 
Figure 5.17 Relationship between Eu/cu and axial strain (after Jardine et al.(5.9)).
Eu/cu
3000
Axial strain (%)
Typical strain range
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Foundations
Table 5.1 Poisson’s ratio for various
soils and rocks
Clays (undrained)
0.5
Clays (stiff, drained)
0.1–0.3
Silt
0.3
Sands
0.1–0.3
Rocks
0.2
256
Pile groups under compressive loading
increases with depth. For materials with a linear increase, Butler(5.12) developed a method based
on the research of Brown and Gibson(5.13), for calculating settlements where Eu or Ev increases
linearly with depth through a layer of finite thickness. The value of the modulus at any depth z
below the base of the equivalent block foundation is given by the equation:
E  Ef (1 kz/B)
(5.21)
where Ef is the modulus at the base of the equivalent foundation.
To obtain k, values of Eu or Ev obtained by one or more of the methods listed above are
plotted against depth and a straight is drawn through the plotted points. The value of k is then
obtained using Figure 5.19 which also shows the values of the influence factor Ip. The curves
in this figure are based on normally consolidated clays having a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5 and
are appropriate to a compressible layer of thickness not greater than 9 times the breadth of
the foundation. For a rigid pile group the immediate settlement as calculated for a flexible
pile group is multiplied by a factor of 0.8 to obtain the average settlement of the rigid group,
and a depth factor is applied using the curves in Figure 5.20.
Where a piled foundation consists of a number of small clusters of piles or individual
piles connected by ground beams or a flexible ground floor slab the foundation arrangement
can be considered as flexible.
L/B `
L/B 1
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.1
L/B 1
L/B 10
L/B 5
L/B 
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Values of F1
and F2
 F1
 F2
(        )
(        )
L/B 2
L/B 5
L/B 2
L/B 10
L/B  
Figure 5.18 Values of Steinbrenner’s influence factor Ip (for v of 0.5, Ip  Fl, for v  0, Ip  F1F2.
Note
When using this diagram to calculate 
at the centre of a rectangular area take B as half the foundation width to
obtain H/B and L/B.
i
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.1
0.2
0.3
Influence factor I9p
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Influence factor I9p
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Influence factor I9p
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
L/B 51
L/B 52
L/B 55
D
Assumed incompressible 
layer
Poisson's ratio  5 0.5
L > B
Settlement at corner of
loaded area 5ri
qBIp
Ef
 5
Eo
Ef
q
B3L
k50.5
k510
k50
k55 k52 k51
k50.5
k510
k50
k55 k52 k51
k50.5
k510
k50
k55 k52 k51
H/B
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
H/B
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
H/B
H/B > 9
H
kH
B
Ed5Ef (1+      )
Figure 5.19 Values of the influence factor Ip for deformation modulus increasing linearly with depth
and modular ratio of 0.5 for normally consolidated days (after Butler(5.12)).
258
Pile groups under compressive loading
When making a settlement analysis for a pile group underlain by a layered soil strata
with different, but progressively increasing modulus values with depth, the strata are
divided into a number of representative horizontal layers. An average modulus value is
assigned to each layer. The dimensions L and B in Figure 5.20 are determined for each
layer on the assumption that the vertical stress is spread to the surface of each layer at an
angle of 30	 from the edges of the equivalent block foundation (Figure 5.21). The total
settlement of the piled foundation is then the sum of the average settlements calculated for
each layer.
The foregoing procedure is referred to in EC7, Annex F, as the Stress–Strain method.
The other procedure described in Annex F is the Adjusted Elasticity method. A typical
example of the latter is the use of the Christian and Carrier(5.14) influence factors shown in
Figure 5.20. These give the average settlement of the pile group from the equation:
Average settlement 
(5.22)
In the above equation Poisson’s ratio is taken as 0.5. The influence factors 1, and 0 are
related to the depth and the length/breadth ratio of the equivalent block foundation, and
the thickness of the compressible layer as shown in Figure 5.20. Eu is obtained by means of
one or more of the methods listed above.
i  10qnB/Eu
1.0
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0 0
1
10
H/B
Circle
Square
L/B5
L/B10
L/B  
L/B2
100
1000
D
H
B
µ0
D/B
0
5
10
15
20
0.9
0.8
 01 qB
E
1
Average settlement
 r 
Figure 5.20 Influence factors for calculating immediate settlements of flexible foundations of width B
at depth D below ground surface (after Christian and Carrier(5.14)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
259
Ground level
Base of equivalent raft
foundation for Layer 1
Ditto for Layer 3
Layer 3
Layer 2
L a y e
r
1
30˚
Ditto for Layer 2
4
1
Figure 5.21 Load distribution beneath pile group in layered soil formation.
The consolidation settlement c is calculated from the results of oedometer tests made on
clay samples in the laboratory. The curves for the pressure/voids ratio obtained from these
tests are used to establish the coefficient of volume compressibility mv.
In hard glacial tills or weak highly weathered rock it may be difficult to obtain satisfac-
tory undisturbed samples for oedometer tests. If the results of standard penetration tests
are available, values of mv (and also cu) can be obtained from empirical relationships
established by Stroud(5.7) shown in Figure 5.22.
Having obtained a representative value of mv for each soil layer stressed by the pile group,
the oedometer settlement oed for this layer at the centre of the loaded area is calculated from
the equation:
oed
(5.23)
where d is a depth factor, 
z is the average effective vertical stress imposed on the soil layer
due to the net foundation pressure qn at the base of the equivalent raft foundation and H is
the thickness of the soil layer. The depth factor d is obtained from Fox’s correction
curves(5.15) shown in Figure 5.23. To obtain the average vertical stress 
z at the centre of each
soil layer the coefficients in Figure 5.13 should be used. The oedometer settlement must now
be corrected to obtain the field value of the consolidation settlement. The correction is made
by applying a ‘geological factor’ g to the oedometer settlement, where
(5.24)
Published values of g have been based on comparisons of the settlement of actual
structures with computations made from laboratory oedometer tests. Values established by
Skempton and Bjerrum(5.16) are shown in Table 5.2.
cg oed
dmv
zH
260
Pile groups under compressive loading
10
(a)
(b)
8
6
 f1
 f2
4
2
0
0
10
20
30
Plasticity index
Plasticity index
40
50
Mass shear strength
c f1N (kN/m2)
Modulus of volume compressibility
 mv 
 (m2MN)
1
60
70
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
f2N
Figure 5.22 Relationship between mass shear strength, modulus of volume compressibility, plasticity
index, and standard penetration test N-values (after Stroud(5.7)) (a) N-value versus
undrained shear strength (b) N-value versus modulus of volume compressibility.
The total settlement of the pile group is then the sum of the immediate and consolidation
settlements calculated for each separate layer. A typical case is a gradual decrease in com-
pressibility with depth. In such a case the stressed zone beneath the pile group is divided
into a number of separate horizontal layers, the value of mv for each layer being obtained by
plotting mv against the depth as determined from the laboratory oedometer tests. The base
of the lowermost layer is taken as the level at which the vertical stress has decreased to
one-tenth of qn. The depth factor d is applied to the sum of the consolidation settlements
calculated for each layer. It is not applied to the immediate settlement if the latter has been
calculated from the factors in Figure 5.20.
Another method of estimating the total settlement of a structure on an over-consolidated
clay is to use equation 5.14, making the substitution of a deformation modulus obtained for
loading under drained conditions. This modulus is designated by the term 
, which is
substituted for Eu in the equation. It is approximately equal to 1/mv. The equation implies
a homogeneous and elastic material and thus it is not strictly valid when used to calculate
consolidation settlements. However, when applied to over-consolidated clays for which the
settlements are relatively small, the method has been found by experience to give reasonably
reliable predictions. Success in using the method depends on the collection of sufficient data
E 
v
0.50
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
LB
D
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
4
9
25
100
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
25
9
4
1
0.95
1.0
Depth factor
md

 corrected settlement
calculated settlement
LB
D
L/B100
L/B1
Figure 5.23 Depth factor d for calculating oedometer settlements (after Fox(5.15)).
262
Pile groups under compressive loading
correlating the observed settlements of structures with the determinations of Ev from plate
loading tests and laboratory tests on good undisturbed samples of clay. Butler(5.12) in his
review of the settlement of structures on over-consolidated clays has related Ev to the
undrained cohesion cu and arrived at the relationship Ev  130c for London Clay.
Various correlations between the soil modulus and the undrained shear strength of clays
for piles with a length to diameter ratio equal to or greater than 15 are shown in Figure 5.24.
In commenting on these data Poulos(5.1) stated that they should be taken as representing
values of the undrained modulus. He commented on the wide spread of the data suggesting
that this could be due to differences in the method of measuring cu and the soil modulus,
differences in the level of loading at which the modulus was measured, and differences
between the type and over-consolidation ratio of the various clays. Where the undrained
shear strength increases linearly with depth, equation 5.21 can be used to obtain Ev
and hence the total settlements from Figure 5.19. From an extensive review of published and
Table 5.2 Value of geological factor g
Type of clay
g value
Very sensitive clays (soft alluvial, estuarine, and marine clays) 
1.0–1.2
Normally consolidated clays 
0.7–1.0
Over-consolidated clays (London Clay,Weald, Kimmeridge, Oxford, and Lias Clays) 
0.5–0.7
Heavily over-consolidated clays (unweathered glacial till, Mercia Mudstone) 
0.2–0.5
120
100
80
60
40
Young's modulus Es (MN/m2)
20
0
100
Undrained shear strength Cu (kN/m2)
Curve
1    Driven
2
Bored
3
Driven (Es 750Cu)
4
Bored (lower bound) Es 200Cu
Poulos (1972)
Poulos (1972)
Aschenbrenner and Disen (1984)
Callanan and kulhawy (1985)
200
300
3
2
4
1
Pile type
Reference
Figure 5.24 Correlations for soil modulus for piles in clay (after Callanan and Kulhawy, for references
see Poulos(5.1)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
263
unpublished data, Burland and Kalra(5.17) established the relationship for London Clay:
Ev  7.5  3.9z (MN/m2) where z is the depth below ground level.
Generally, the authors prefer the more logical method of considering immediate and
consolidation settlements separately. This properly takes into account time effects and the
geological history of the site. Provided that a sufficient number of good undisturbed samples
have been obtained at the site investigation stage, the prediction of consolidation settlements
from oedometer tests made in the laboratory has been found to lead to reasonably accurate
results. The adoption of the method based on the total settlement deformation modulus
depends on the collection of adequate observational data, first regarding the relationship
between the undrained shearing strength and the deformation modulus, and secondly regard-
ing the actual settlement of structures from which the relationships can be checked. Any
attempt to obtain a deformation modulus from triaxial compression tests in the laboratory is
likely to result in serious error. The modulus is best obtained from the Eu/cu and Eu /Ev
relationships, which must be established from well-conducted plate bearing tests and field
observations of settlement.
The steps in making a settlement analysis of a pile group in, or transmitting stress to, a
fine-grained soil can be summarized as follows:
(1) For the required length of pile, and form of pile bearing (i.e. friction pile or end-bearing
pile), draw the equivalent flexible raft foundation represented by the group (see Figure 5.3)
(2) From the results of field or laboratory tests assign values to Eu and mv for each soil layer
significantly stressed by the equivalent raft
(3) Calculate the immediate settlement of i of each soil layer using equation 5.22, and
assuming a spread of load of 30	 from the vertical to obtain qn at the surface of each layer
(Figure 5.21). Alternatively calculate on the assumption of a linearly increasing modulus
(4) Calculate the consolidation settlement c for each soil layer from equations 5.23 and
5.24, using Figure 5.13 to obtain the vertical stress at the centre of each layer
(5) Apply a rigidity factor to obtain the average settlement for a rigid pile group.
The consolidation settlement calculated as described above is the final settlement after a
period of some months or years after the completion of loading. It is rarely necessary to cal-
culate the movement at intermediate times, i.e. to establish the time/settlement curve, since
in most cases the movement is virtually complete after a period of a very few years and it is
only the final settlement which is of interest to the structural engineer. If time effects are of
significance, however, the procedure for obtaining the time/settlement curve can be obtained
from standard works of reference on soil mechanics.
5.3
Pile groups in coarse-grained soils
5.3.1
Estimating settlements from standard penetration tests
Where piles are driven in groups to near-refusal into a dense sand or gravel it is unlikely that
there will be sufficient yielding of individual piles under working load to permit redistribu-
tion of superstructure loading to surrounding piles as described in Section 5.2.1. Sufficient
yielding to allow redistribution may occur where bored pile groups are terminated in sand,
or where piles are driven to a set pre-determined from loading tests to allow a specified
amount of settlement under working loads.
264
Pile groups under compressive loading
Provided that the individual pile has an adequate safety factor against failure under
compressive loading there can be no risk of the block failure of a pile group terminated in
and applying stress to a coarse soil. As in the case of piles terminated in a clay, there is a
risk of differential settlement between adjacent piles in small groups if the toe loads of a
small group become concentrated in a small area when the piles deviate from their intended
line. The best safeguard against this occurrence is to adopt a reasonably wide spacing
between the piles. Methods of checking the deviation of piles caused by the installation
method are described in Chapter 11.
The immediate settlement of the pile group due to ‘elastic’ deformation of the coarse soil
beneath the equivalent flexible raft foundation must be calculated. Equation 5.22 is applicable
to this case and the deformation modulus Ev is substituted for Eu as obtained from plate load-
ing tests in trial pits, or from standard penetration, pressuremeter or Camkometer tests, made
in boreholes. Schultze and Sherif (5.18) used case histories to establish a method for predicting
foundation settlements from the results of standard penetration tests using the equation:
(5.25)
where s is a settlement coefficient
p is the applied stress at foundation level
N is the average SPT N-value over a depth of 2B below foundation level, or ds if
the depth of cohesion-less soil is less than 2B
D and B are the foundation depth and width respectively
Values of the coefficient s and ds are obtained from Figure 5.25.
 
s. p
N 0.87(1 0.4D/B)
10.0
1.0
0.1
0.5
1
2
3 4 5
10
20
30 40 50
Breadth B (m)
Reduction factors for ds/B < 2
ds
ds/B
ds/B ≥2
B
L
P
D
L/B100
L/B
1
2
5
100
0.85
0.39
0.65
0.87
0.43
0.69
0.89
0.48
0.72
0.91
0.52
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.76

s.p
r
(1 + 0.4D/B)
N0.87
52
1
Coefficient of settlement s (mm/kNm2)
Figure 5.25 Determining foundation settlements from results of standard penetration tests (after
Schultze and Sherif(5.18)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
265
Burland and Burbidge(5.19) have developed an empirical relationship between standard
penetration test N-values and a term they have called the foundation subgrade compress-
ibility, af. This term is used in the equations:
(5.26)
and
(in mm per kN/m2)
(5.27)
where Ic
is a compressibility index
B
is the foundation width
is the immediate settlement in mm
is the increment of foundation pressure in kN/m2
Ic and af are related to the standard penetration test results shown in Figure 5.26 for normally
consolidated granular soils. In very fine and silty sands below the water table where N is
greater than 15 the Terzaghi and Peck correction factor should be applied, giving
N (corrected)  150.5(N15)
(5.28)
Where the material is gravel or sandy gravel, Burland and Burbidge recommend a
correction:
N (corrected)  1.25 N
(5.29)
It should be noted that the Ic values in Figure 5.26 are based on the average N-values over
the depth of influence, zI, of the foundation pressure. The depth of influence is related to the
width of the loaded breadth B in Figure 5.27 for cases where N increases or is constant with
depth. Where N shows consistent decrease with depth, zf is taken as equal to 2B or the base
of the compressive layer, whichever is the lesser. The average N in Figure 5.26 is the
arithmetic mean of the N-values over the depth of influence.
In a normally consolidated sand the immediate average settlement, i, corresponding to
the average net applied pressure, q, is given by
(5.30)
In an over-consolidated sand or for loading at the base of an excavation for which the
maximum previous overburden pressure was 
vo and where q is greater than 
vo, the imme-
diate settlement is given by
(5.31a)
where q is less than 
vo equation 5.31a becomes
(5.31b)
iqB0.7  Ic
3
  (in mm)
i   q 2
3
vo B0.7  Ic (in mm)
iqB0.7 Ic (in mm)
q
i
af 
pi
q
Ic 
af
B0.7
100
Upper limit
Lower limit
B is in metres
af
af
B0.7
102
mm/kN/m2
q1
D
D
ri

Ic 

Ic
10
1
0.11
10
100
Standard penetration test, N-value
(Blows/0.3 m)
-
Compressibility grades
VII
VI
IV III
II
I
V
Figure 5.26 Relationship between compressibility index and average N-value over depth of
influence (after Burland and Burbidge(5.19)).
100
10
1 1
10
100
B, metres
z1, metres
Figure 5.27 Relationship between breadth of loaded area and depth of influence zI (after Burland
and Burbridge(5.19)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
267
In the case of pile groups the width B is the width at the base of the equivalent raft as
shown in Figure 5.3. The Burland and Burbidge method was developed essentially for
shallow foundations and correlations with published settlement records given in their paper
were mainly confined to foundations where their depth was not greater than their width.
They state that the depth to width ratio did not influence the settlements to any significant
degree and hence a depth factor of the type shown in Figure 5.20 should not be applied.
However, a correction should be applied to allow for the foundation shape and for the thick-
ness of the compressible layer beneath the foundation where this is less than the depth of
influence, zI.
The correction factors are
Shape factor 
(5.32a)
Thickness factor 
(5.32b)
where L
is the length of the loaded area (LB)
B
is the width of the loaded area
Hs
is the thickness of the compressible layer (Hs
zI) 
Burland and Burbidge state that most settlements on granular soils are time-dependent,
i.e. they show a long-term creep settlement and a further time correction factor is applied
using the equation:
(5.33)
where t
is equal to or greater than 3 years
R3 is the proportion of the immediate settlement which takes place in the loaded
area
R is the creep ratio expressed as the proportion of the immediate settlement that
takes place per log cycle of time
Burland and Burbidge give conservative values of R and R3 as 0.2 and 0.3 respectively for
static loading and 0.8 and 0.7 respectively for fluctuating loads.
Summarizing all the above corrections, the average consolidation settlement is given by
(5.34)
The wide range of Ic values between the upper and lower limit shown in Figure 5.26 can
cause difficulty in obtaining a reasonably close estimate of pile group settlements, particularly
where the group is underlain by medium-dense sands. For example, the average Ic value for
a sand with an N-value of 10 is 6 compared with upper and lower limit values of 20 and 3
respectively, giving an upper limit of settlement of three times that calculated from the
average curve. However, in most cases piles are taken down to dense sands to obtain
c  fsflft[(q 2
3
vo)  B 0.7  Ic]  (in mm)
ft ti  1 R3 Rlogt
3
fl Hs
zI  2 Hs
zI 
fs  
1.25 LB
LB0.25
2
268
Pile groups under compressive loading
the maximum end-bearing resistance, where the settlement calculated from the upper limit
curve is likely to be relatively small.
5.3.2
Estimating settlements from static cone penetration tests
Where total and differential settlements are shown to be large and critical to the superstruc-
ture design, it is desirable to make static cone penetration tests (Section 11.1.4) from which
the soil modulus 
values can be derived and then to use the Steinbrenner (Figure 5.18) or
Christian and Carrier (Figure 5.20) charts to obtain the group settlement. Relationships
between the cone-resistance (qc) values and the drained Young’s modulus for normally con-
solidated quartz sands are shown in Figure 5.28. The E25 and E50 values represent the
drained modulus at a stress level of 25% and 50% respectively of the failure stress. In a gen-
eral review of the application of cone penetration testing to foundation design, Meigh(5.23)
stated that the E25 values are appropriate for most foundation problems but the E50 values
may be more relevant to calculating settlements of the single pile.
The E values in Figure 5.28 greatly overestimate settlements in over-consolidated sands.
Lunne and Christoffersen(5.24) established a relationship between initial tangent constrained
modulus (the reciprocal of the modulus of volume compressibility mv) and qc for normally
and over-consolidated sands as shown in Figure 5.29.
Ev
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
90
Medium dense,
Dense,
Very dense,
Dr5 46%
Dr5 70%
E25 5 2qc
E50
E25
1.5qc
200
100
50
Stress, s0
s0max
0.50 s0max
0.25 s0max
Strain, ea
s0
ea
s9vo 5 400 kN/m2
Dr5 90%
75
60
45
30
15
0
0
10
20
Cone resistance, qc (MN/m2)
Drained secant Young's modulus, at 25%
failure stress level,  E25 (MN/m2)
Drained secant Young's modulus, at 50%
failure stress level,  E50 (MN/m2)
30
40
50
Figure 5.28 Drained deformation modulus values (Ed) for uncemented normally consolidated quartz
sands in relation to cone resistance (after Meigh(5.20)), Robertson and Campanella(5.21)),
Baldi et al.(5.22)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
269
Another method of estimating the settlements of pile groups in granular soils based on static
cone penetration test values has been developed by Schmertmann(5.25) and Schmertmann
et al.(5.26) Their basic equation for the settlement of a loaded area is
(5.35)
where C1 is a depth correction factor (see below), C2 is a creep factor (see below), p is the
net increase of load on the soil at the base of the foundation due to the applied loading, B is
the width of the loaded area, Iz is the vertical-strain influence factor (see Figure 5.30), Ev
is the deformation modulus, and z is the thickness of the soil layer.
The value of the depth correction factor is given by
(5.36)
where 
is the effective overburden pressure at foundation level (i.e. at the base of the
equivalent raft).
Schmertmann(5.25) states that while the settlement of foundations on granular soils is usu-
ally regarded as immediate, i.e. the settlement is complete within a short time after the com-
pletion of the application of load, observations have frequently shown long-continuing
secondary settlement or creep. He gives the value of the creep factor as
(5.37)
C2  1 0.2log10
time in years
0.1

vo
C1  1 – 0.5
vo
p 
r  C1C2p
2B
0  Iz
Ev z
300
200
100
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Normally
consolidated
sand
Over-consolidated
sand (OCR > 2)
Cone resistance, qc (MN/m2)
Initial tangent constrained modulus, Mo
(MN/m2)
60
70
Figure 5.29 Initial tangent constrained modulus for normally consolidated and over-consolidated sand
related to cone resistance (after Lunne and Christoffersen(5.24)).
Schmertmann et al.(5.26) have established an improved curve for obtaining the vertical-strain
influence factor based on elastic half-space theory where the factor Iz is related to the
foundation width, as shown in Figure 5.30.
The vertical strain influence factor is obtained from one of the two curves shown in
Figure 5.30. For square pile groups (axisymmetric loading) the curve in Figure 5.30a should
be used. For long pile groups (the plane strain case) where the length is more than 10 times
the breadth, use the curve in Figure 5.30b. Values for rectangular foundations for L/B of less
than 10 can be obtained by interpolation.
The deformation modulus for square and long pile groups in normally consolidated sands
is obtained by multiplying the static cone resistance, qc, by a factor of 2.5 and 3.5 respec-
tively. The deformation modulus applicable for a stress increase of p above the effective
overburden pressure, 
, is given by the equation:
(5.38)
Where standard penetration tests only are available the static cone resistance (in MN/m2)
can be obtained by multiplying the SPT N-values (in blows/300 mm) by an empirical
Ev  E
vo(p/2)
vo
vo
270
Pile groups under compressive loading
Rigid foundation vertical strain influence factor Iz
Relative depth below foundation level
0
0
B
2B
3B
4B
0
B
2B
3B
4B
B
p
B/2
L/B1
L/B 10
B/2 for L/B 1
B for L/B >10
Depth to peak Iz
(use Ed2.5qcone)
(use Ed3.5qcone)
Peak Iz 0.5 + 0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(a)
(b)
p
s9vp
Dp p – s9vo
s9vo
s9vo
Figure 5.30 Schmertmann’s influence factors for calculating immediate settlements of foundations on
sands (after Schmertmann et al.(5.26)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
271
factor N for which Schmertmann suggests the following values:
Silts, sandy silts, and slightly cohesive silty sands: 
N  0.2
Clean fine to medium sands, slightly silty sands: 
N  0.35
Coarse sands and sands with a little gravel: 
N  0.5
Sandy gravel and gravels: 
N  0.6
Where static cone resistance data are available the relationships in Figures 5.28 or 5.29
can be used to obtain values of 
for substitution in equation 5.35.
The procedure for estimating settlements by the Schmertmann method is first to divide
the static cone resistance diagram into layers of approximately equal or representative values
of qc in a manner shown in Figure 5.31. The base of the equivalent raft representing the pile
group is then drawn to scale on this diagram and the influence curve is superimposed
beneath the base of the raft. The settlements in each layer resulting from the loading p at
the base of the equivalent raft are then calculated using the values of Ev and I2 appropriate
to each of the representative layers. The sum of these settlements is corrected for depth and
creep from equations 5.36 to 5.38. The various steps in the calculation are made in tabular
form as illustrated in Example 5.3.
Where piles are terminated in a coarse soil stratum underlain by compressible clay,
the settlements within the zone of clay stressed by the pile group are calculated by the
methods described in Section 5.2.2. The form of load distribution to be used in this
analysis to obtain the dimensions of the equivalent raft on the surface of the clay layer
is shown in Figure 5.21.
E 
v
Base of equivalent
raft foundation
0
B
2B
3B
4B 0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Long pile group L/B >10
Ground level
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
B
Layer 4
Settlements
calculated
over depth
 4B
Static cone
resistance qc
Iz
Layer 5
Figure 5.31 Establishing the vertical strain from static cone penetration tests.
272
Pile groups under compressive loading
5.4
Eurocode 7 recommendations for pile groups
Clause 7.6.2.1 of EC7 requires the stability of a pile group to be considered both in
relation to the risk of failure of an individual pile in the group and to the failure of the
group considered as an equivalent block foundation. Sub-clause (4) states that the block
foundation can be considered to act as a single large-diameter pile. However, no guidance
is given as to relationship between the diameter and depth of this pile to the shape, base
area and depth of the group. If it is assumed that the plan area of the large-diameter pile
is equal to the gross area of the group, then in the case of square (or rectangular) groups
the resulting calculations could give an over-conservative value of the design load. This
is because the perimeter and shape factors for rectangular bases are larger than those for
circular sections. Also it is reasonable to assume that the shaft friction of the pile should
be calculated on the basis of a soil-to-soil interface using the undisturbed shear strength
of the surrounding soil. Whereas when calculating the shaft friction on an individual
pile the installation method has an important influence on the resistance of a pile to soil
interface. Where a group of piles are driven into a clay the surrounding soil is strength-
ened by expulsion of pore water, and a sand is strengthened by densification.
Conversely, drilling for a group of bored piles could cause weakening of a clay due
to relaxation of a fissured structure or drilling in sand could result in loss of resistance
in friction.
If as an alternative to the large-diameter pile assumption the pile group is treated as an
equivalent block foundation, the partial factors for actions and material properties are the
same as used for piled foundations (Tables 4.1 and 4.2 in Section 4.1.4). The base resist-
ance factor for spread foundations, Rv, and the factor for sliding Rh, are both unity for
set 1 in DA1 (Table A5 in Annex A of EC7). There are no R4 resistance factors for spread
foundations.
Worked Example 5.1 at the end of this chapter shows that the assumption of a single
large-diameter pile under-estimates the resistance of a rectangular group in clay, compared
with calculations assuming a block foundation of the same dimensions as the prototype,
when using the calculation method described in Section 5.2.1.
Clause 7.6.4.2(2)P states that the assessment of settlement of pile groups should take
into account the settlement of the individual piles as well as that of the group, but it does
not make it clear whether the settlement analysis should assume that the group acts as an
equivalent large-diameter pile or as a block foundation. Presumably the latter is the case,
for which Clause 6.6.2, considering the settlement of spread foundations, requires the
depth of the compressible soil layer to be taken normally as the depth at which the effec-
tive vertical stress due to the foundation load is 20% of that of the effective overburden
stress, which may in many cases be roughly estimated as one to two times the foundation
width or less for lightly loaded foundation rafts. In the case of pile groups the authors
assume this to be the depth below the base of the equivalent rafts shown in Figure 5.3.
5.5
Pile groups terminating in rock
The stability of a pile group bearing on a rock formation is governed by that of the individual
pile. For example, one or more of the piles might yield due to the presence of a pocket
of weathered rock beneath the toe. There is no risk of block failure unless the piles are
terminated on a sloping rock formation, when sliding on a weak clay-filled bedding plane
Pile groups under compressive loading
273
might occur if the bedding is unfavourably inclined to the direction of loading (Figure 5.32).
The possibility of such occurrences must be studied in the light of the information available
on the geology of the site.
The settlement of a pile group may be of significance if the piles are heavily loaded.
Immediate settlements can be calculated as described in Section 5.2.2, and equations 5.14
and 5.22 are applicable, where Ed is reasonably constant with depth.
It is possible to obtain a rough estimate of the deformation modulus of a jointed rock mass
from empirical relationships with the unconfined compression strength of the intact rock.
BS 8004 gives a relationship as 
where j is the mass factor (see Section 4.7.3
for values) and Mr is the ratio of the elastic modulus of the intact rock to its unconfined
compression strength. BS 8004 gives the following values for Mr:
Values for Mr
Group 1
Pure limestones and dolomites
600
Carbonate sandstones of low porosity
Group 2
Igneous
300
Oolitic and marly limestones
Well-cemented sandstones
Indurated carbonate mudstones
Metamorphic rocks including slates and schists (flat
cleavage/foliation)
Group 3
Very marly limestones
150
Poorly cemented sandstones
Cemented mudstones and shales
Slates and schists (steep cleavage/foliation)
Group 4
Uncemented mudstones and shales
75
Chalk and Mercia Mudstone (Keuper Marl) are excluded from the above groups. Some
observed values of Ed for chalk are given in Table 5.3 and for Mercia Mudstone in Table 5.4.
Ed jMrqc
Clay-filled
bedding joints
Figure 5.32 Instability of pile group bearing on sloping rock surface.
274
Pile groups under compressive loading
It is likely that weathered rocks will show an increase in Ed with depth as the state of
weathering decreases from complete at rockhead to the unweathered condition. If it is
possible to draw a straight line through the increasing values the influence factors in
Figure 5.19 can be used in conjunction with equation 5.21 to obtain the settlement at the
centre of the loaded area. These curves were established by Butler(5.12) for a Poisson’s ratio
of 0.5, but most rock formations have lower ratios. Meigh(5.23) stated that the Poisson’s
ratio of Triassic rocks is about 0.1 to 0.3.
Meigh(5.23) derived curves for the influence factors shown in Figure 5.33 for various
values of the constant k in equation 5.39 where
(5.39)
and for a Poisson’s ratio of 0.2. He applied further corrections to the calculation of the
settlement at the corner of the foundation where
Settlement at corner 
(5.40)
The corrected settlement is given by
c (corrected) 
(5.41)
where
FB  correction factor for roughness of base (Figure 5.34)
FD  correction factor for depth of embedment (Figure 5.35)

qnBIp
Ef
FBFD
i 
qnBIp
Ef
k
(Ed Ef)B/H
Ef
Table 5.3 Values of deformation modulus of Chalk (after Lord et al.(4.43))
Density
Grade
‘Yield’ stress
Ultimate bearing
Secant modulus at
‘Yield’ modulus
(MN/m2)
capacity (MN/m2)
applied stress of
(MN/m2)
200 kN/m2 (MN/m2)
Medium/high
A
—
16
1500–3000
—
B
0.3–0.5
4.0–7.7
1500–2000
35–80
C
0.3–0.5
4.0–7.7
300–1500
35–80
Low
B and C
0.25–0.5
1.5–2.0
200–700
15–35
(Low)
Dc
0.25–0.5
—
200
20–30
Dm
—
—
6
—
Table 5.4 Values of deformation modulus
of Mercia Mudstone (Keuper
Marl) at low stress levels (after
Chandler and Davis(5.27))
Zone
Deformation modulus (MN/m2)
I
26–250
II
9–70
III
2–48
IV
2–13
Influence factor Ip
Influence factor Ip
Influence factor Ip
Ip
Base of equivalent raft foundation
Assumed incompressible
Settlement at corner of loaded area
Poisson's ratio   0.2
(Ed– Ef)
B
H
Ef
ri
Ef
Ed  Ef
Ef
Eo
q
H
D
q × B ×
B × L
k 


Diagrams applicable for H/B >10
Influence factor Ip
Influence factor Ip
0
0
2
4
6
H/B
H/B
H/B
H/B
H/B
Use for L/B>10
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
L/B1
L/B2
L/B3
k10 k5 k2 k1 k0.5 k0.25 k0.125 k0
k10 k5
k2
k1
k0.5
k0.25 k0.125
k0
k10 k5
k2
k1
k0.5
k0.25 k0.125
k0
k10 k5 k2 k1k0.5k0.25 k0.125
k0
k10 k5 k2 k1 k0.5 k0.25k0.125
k0
L/B5
L/B10
×
(1+       )
kH
B
Figure 5.33 Values of influence factor for deformation modulus increasing linearly with depth and
modular ratio of 0.2 in rock (after Meigh(5.23)).
276
Pile groups under compressive loading
The equivalent raft is assumed to have a rough base and is divided into four equal rec-
tangles and the settlement computed for the corner of each rectangle from equation 5.41.
The settlement at the centre of the pile group is then four times the corner settlement.
5.6
Pile groups in filled ground
The problem of negative skin friction or drag-down on the shafts of isolated piles embedded
in fill was discussed in Section 4.8. This drag-down is caused by the consolidation of the fill
under its own weight, or under the weight of additional imposed fill. If the fill is underlain
by a compressible clay the consolidation of the clay under the weight of the fill also causes
negative skin friction in the portion of the shaft within this clay. Negative skin friction also
1.0

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
H/B
Correction factor FB
FB
settlement for rough base
settlement for smooth base
2.0
2.5
Figure 5.34 Correction factors for roughness of base of foundation (after Meigh(5.23)).
1.0
0.9
Rock surface
GL
D
D/B
B
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.8
0.7
Correction factor FD
Figure 5.35 Correction factors for depth of embedment of foundation below surface of rock (after
Meigh(5.23)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
277
occurs on piles installed in groups but the addition to the working load on each of the piles
in the group is not necessarily more severe than that calculated for the isolated pile. The
basis for calculating the negative skin friction as described in Section 4.8.1, is that the ulti-
mate skin friction on the pile shaft is assumed to act on that length of pile over which the
fill and any underlying compressible clay move downwards relative to the shaft. The mag-
nitude of this skin friction cannot increase as a result of grouping the piles at close centres,
and the total negative skin friction acting on the group cannot exceed the total weight of fill
enclosed by the piles. Thus in Figure 5.36a
total load on pile group  working load
(5.42)
where  is the unit weight of fill, and D is the depth over which the fill is moving down-
wards relative to the piles.
Where the fill is underlain by a compressible clay, as in Figure 5.36b
total load on pile group  working load
(5.43)
where D is the total thickness of fill,  is the unit weight of compressible clay, and D is
the thickness of compressible clay moving downwards relative to the piles.
It should also be noted that the negative skin friction acting on the piles in the group does
not increase the settlement of the group caused by the working load on the piles. If the filling
has been in place for a long period of years any underlying compressible soil will have been
fully consolidated and the only additional load on the compressible soil causing settlement
of the group is that from the working load on the piles. However, if the fill is to be placed
only a short time before driving the piles, then any compressible soil below the fill will
consolidate. The amount of this consolidation can be calculated separately and added to the
BL(DD)
(BLD)
Working load
D
D
D
Bearing
stratum
for piles
L × B
L × B
(a)
(b)
Compressible
clay
Fill
Fill
Figure 5.36 Negative skin friction on pile groups in filled ground (a) Fill overlying relatively
incompressible bearing stratum (b) Fill placed on compressible clay layer.
278
Pile groups under compressive loading
settlement caused by the working load on the piles. The negative skin friction on the piles is
not included in the working load for the latter analysis.
EC 7 gives no specific guidance for the design of pile groups carrying compression load-
ing in filled ground. As in the case of the single pile calculation, the load distribution on
individual piles in the group is best undertaken by an interaction analysis as described
in Section 4.3.8. It is evident that treatment of the group as a single large-diameter pile as
recommended in Clause 7.6.2.1(4) for the determination of group stability is not valid for
application to an interaction analysis.
Clause 7.3.2.2(P) requires account to be taken of the weight density of materials in a
settlement analysis for piles in filled ground. As noted in the case of the single pile the partial
factors for weight in Table A.4 of EC 7 Annex A are unity (see Table 4.2 Section 4.1.4).
5.7
Effects on pile groups of installation methods
When piles are driven in groups into clay the mass of soil within the ground heaves and also
expands laterally, the volume of this expansive movement being approximately equal to the
volume occupied by the piles. High pore pressures are developed in the soil mass, but in the
course of a few days or weeks these pore pressures dissipate and the heaving directly caused
by pore pressure subsides. In soft clays the subsidence of the heaved soil can cause negative
skin friction to develop. It is not usual to add this negative skin friction to the working load
since it is of relatively short duration, but its effect can be allowed for by ignoring any
support provided in shaft friction to the portion of the pile shaft within the soft clay.
Methods of calculating the surface heave within a pile group have been discussed by
Hagerty and Peck(5.28). Chow and Teh(5.29) have established a theoretical model relating
the pile head heave/diameter ratio to the pile spacing/diameter ratio for a range of length/
diameter ratios in soft, firm and stiff clays.
It is not good practice to terminate pile groups within a soft clay since the reconsolidation
of the heaved and remoulded soil can result in the substantial settlement of a pile group, and
neighbouring structures can be affected. It may be seen from Figure 5.37 that there is little
difference between the extent of the stressed zone around and beneath a surface raft and
a group of short friction piles. The soil beneath the raft is not disturbed during construction
and hence the settlement of the raft may be much less than that of a pile group carrying the
same overall loading. This was illustrated by Bjerrum(5.30), who compared the settlement of
buildings erected on the two types of foundation construction on the deep soft and sensitive
clays of Drammen near Oslo.
A building where the gross loading of 65 kN/m2 was reduced by excavation for a base-
ment to a net loading of 25 kN/m2 was supported on 300 timber friction piles 23 m long. In
10 years the building had settled by 110 mm and the surrounding ground surface had settled
by 80 mm. A nearby building with a gross loading of 55 kN/m2 had a fully compensated
unpiled foundation, i.e. the weight of the soil removed in excavating for the basement bal-
anced the superstructure and substructure giving a net intensity of loading of zero on the
soil. Nearly 30 mm of heave occurred in the base of excavation and thus the settlement of
the building was limited to the re-consolidation of the heaved soil. The net settlement 9 years
after completing the building was only 5 mm.
Lateral movement of a clay soil and the development of high pore pressures can damage
structures or buried services close to a pile group. Adams and Hanna(5.31) measured the pore
Pile groups under compressive loading
279
pressures developed within the centre of a large group of driven piles at Pickering Nuclear
Power Station, Ontario. The horizontal ground strains were also measured at various radial
distances from the centre. The group consisted of 750 piles driven within a circle about 46 m
in diameter. Steel H-section piles were selected to give a minimum of displacement of the
15 m of firm to very stiff and dense glacial till, through which the piles were driven to reach
bedrock. From measurements of the change in the distance between adjacent surface
markers it was calculated that the horizontal earth pressure at a point 1.5 m from the edge
of the group was 84 kN/m2 while at 18.8 m from the edge the calculated pressure was only
1 kN/m2. Earth pressure cells mounted behind a retaining wall 9 m from the group showed
no increase in earth pressure due to the pile driving. Very high pore pressures were developed
at the centre of the piled area, the increase being 138 kN/m2 at a depth of 6 m, dissipating
to 41 kN/m2, 80 days after completing driving of the instrumented pile, when all pile driving
in the group had been completed.
The average ground heave of 114 mm measured over the piled area represented a volume
of soil displacement greater than the volume of steel piles which had been driven into the
soil, for which the theoretical ground heave was 108 mm.
Substantial heave accompanied by the lifting of piles already driven can occur with large
displacement piles. Brzezinski et al.(5.32) made measurements of the heave of 270 driven
and cast-in-place piles in a group supporting a 14-storey building in Quebec. The piles had
a shaft diameter of 406 mm and the bases were expanded by driving. The piles were driven
through 6.7 to 11 m of stiff clay to a very dense glacial till. Precautions against uplift were
Overall loading
100 kN/m2
75 kN/m2
75 kN/m2
50 kN/m2
50 kN/m2
25 kN/m2
25 kN/m2
50 kN/m2
75 kN/m2
25 kN/m2
Soft compressible clay
becoming stiffer and less
compressible with
increasing depth
Contours of vertical stress
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.37 Comparison of stress distribution beneath shallow raft foundation and beneath pile
groups (a) Shallow raft (b) Short friction piles (c) Long friction piles.
280
Pile groups under compressive loading
taken by providing a permanent casing to the piles and the concrete was not placed in the
shafts until the pile bases had been re-driven by tapping with a drop hammer to the extent
necessary to overcome the effects of uplift. The measured heave of a cross-section of the
piled area is shown in Figure 5.38. It was found that the soil heave caused the permanent
casing to become detached from the bases, as much as 300 mm of separation being
observed. Heave effects were not observed if the piles were driven at a spacing wider than
12 diameters. This agrees with the curves established by Chow and Teh(5.29) which show a
pile head heave of only about 1 mm for a spacing of 12 diameters.
Similar effects were observed by Cole(5.33). At three sites the heave was negligible at pile
spacings wider than 8 to 10 diameters. Cole observed that uplift was more a function of
the pile diameter and spacing than of the soil type or pile length. Where piles carry their load
mainly in end bearing, the effect of uplift is most damaging to their performance and on all
sites where soil displacement is liable to cause uplift, precautions must be taken as described
in Section 5.8. Heave is not necessarily detrimental where piles are carried by shaft friction
in firm to stiff clays in which there will be no appreciable subsidence of the heaved soil to
cause negative skin friction to develop on the pile shaft. On a site where a 12-storey block
of flats was supported by driven and cast in-situ piles installed in 5 m of firm London Clay
to terminate at the base of a 4 m layer of stiff London clay, about 0.5 m of heave was
observed in the ground surface after 70 piles had been driven within the 2420 m area of
the block. A pile was tested in an area where 220 mm of heave had occurred. The settlement
at 1300 kN (i.e. twice the working load) was 23 mm, while the settlement at the working
load was only 2.5 mm.
Heaving and the development of high pore pressures do not occur when bored and cast-
in-place piles are installed in groups. However, general subsidence around the piled area can
be caused by the ‘draw’ or relaxation of the ground during boring. In soft sensitive clays the
bottom of a pile borehole can heave up due to ‘piping’, with a considerable loss of ground.
These effects can be minimized by keeping the pile borehole full of water or bentonite slurry
during drilling and by placing the concrete within a casing which is only withdrawn after all
concrete placing is completed.
400
Number of piles
in group
13
3
12
Glacial
till
Clay
12
13
3
300
200
100
0
500
250
0
0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
Penetration in m
Estimated
ground heave
in mm
Movement of 
top of piling tube
in mm
Net heave after retapping
Maximum heave
after pile driving
Figure 5.38 Observations of heave due to pile driving in clay (after Brzezinski et al.(5.32)).
Pile groups under compressive loading
281
Detrimental effects from heave are not usually experienced when driving piles in
groups in coarse soils. A loose soil is densified, thus requiring imported filling to make
up the subsided ground surface within and around the group. Adjacent structures may be
damaged if they are within the area of subsidence. A problem can arise when the first piles
to be installed drive easily through a loose sand but, as more piles are driven, the sand
becomes denser thus preventing the full penetration of all the remaining piles. This prob-
lem can be avoided by paying attention to the order of driving, as described in Section 5.8.
Subsidence due to the loss of ground within and around a group in a coarse soil can be
quite severe when bored and cast-in-place piles are installed, particularly when ‘shelling’ is
used as the boring method (see Section 3.3.7). The subsidence can be very much reduced, if
not entirely eliminated, by the use of rotary drilling with the assistance of a bentonite slurry
(see Section 3.3.8).
5.8
Precautions against heave effects in pile groups
It will have been noted from Section 5.7 that the principal problems with soil heave and the
uplift of piles occur when large displacement piles are driven into clay. In coarse soils
the problems can be overcome to a great extent by using small displacement piles such as
H-sections or open-ended steel tubes. To adopt a spacing between piles of 10 or more diam-
eters is not usually practical if pile group dimensions are to be kept within economical
limits. Pre-boring the pile shaft is not always effective unless the pre-bored hole is taken
down to the pile base, in which case the shaft friction will be substantially reduced if not
entirely eliminated. Jetting piles is only effective in a coarse soil and the problems associated
with this method are described in Section 3.1.9. The most effective method is to re-drive any
risen piles, after driving all the piles in a cluster that are separated from adjacent piles by at
least 12 diameters has been completed.
In the case of driven and cast-in-place piles, a permanent casing should be used and the
re-driving of the risen casing and pile base should be effected by tapping the permanent
casing with a 3-tonne hammer, as described by Brzezinski et al.(5.32) Alternatively, the
‘Multitube’ method described by Cole(5.33) can be used. This consists of providing sufficient
lengths of withdrawable casing to enable all the piling tubes to be driven to their full depth
and all the pile bases to be formed before the pile shafts in any given cluster are concreted.
An individual cluster dealt with in this way must be separated from a neighbouring cluster
by a sufficient distance to prevent the uplift of neighbouring piles or to reduce this to an
acceptable amount. On the three sites described by Cole it was found possible to drive piles
to within 6.5 diameters of adjacent clusters without causing an uplift of more than 3 mm to
the latter. This movement was not regarded as detrimental to the load/settlement behaviour.
Cole stated that, although the ‘Multitube’ system required eight driving tubes to each piling
rig, the cost did not exceed that of an additional 2 m on each pile.
Curtis(3.26) states that it is possible to re-drive risen driven and cast in-situ piles using a
3-to 4-tonne hammer with a drop not exceeding 1.5 m. The head of the pile should be
protected by casting on a 0.6 m capping cube in rapid-hardening cement concrete.
Cole(5.33) stated that the order of driving piles did not affect the incidence of risen piles
but it did change the degree of uplift on any given pile in a group. Generally, the aim should
be to work progressively outwards or across a group, and in the case of an elongated group
from end to end or from the middle outwards in both directions. This procedure is particularly
important when driving piles in coarse soils. If piles are driven from the perimeter towards
282
Pile groups under compressive loading
the centre of a group, a coarse-grained soil will ‘tighten-up’ so much due to ground
vibrations that it will be found impossible to drive the interior piles.
It is desirable to adopt systematic monitoring of the behaviour of all piles installed in groups
by taking check levels on the pile heads, by carrying out re-driving tests, and by making
loading tests on working piles selected at random from within the groups. Loading tests
undertaken on isolated piles before the main pile driving commences give no indication of
the possible detrimental effects of heave. Lateral movements should also be monitored
as necessary.
5.9
Pile groups beneath basements
Basements may be required beneath a building for their functional purpose, for example, as
an underground car park or for storage. The provision of a basement can be advantageous in
reducing the loading which is applied to the soil by the building. For example, if a basement
is constructed in an excavation 7 m deep the soil at foundation level is relieved of a pressure
equivalent to 7 m of overburden, and the gross loading imposed by the building is reduced
by this amount of pressure relief. It is thus possible to relieve completely the net loading
on the soil. An approximate guide to the required depth of excavation is the fact that a
multistorey dwelling block in reinforced concrete with brick and concrete external walls,
lightweight concrete partition walls, and plastered finishes weighs about 12.5 kN/m2 per
storey. This loading is inclusive of 100% of the dead load and 60% of the design imposed
load. Thus a 20-storey building would weigh 250 kN/m2 at ground level, requiring a
basement to be excavated to a depth of about 20 m to balance the loading (assuming the
groundwater level to be 3 m below ground level and taking the submerged density of the soil
below water level).
Deep basement excavations in soft compressible soils can cause considerable constructional
problems due to heave, instability and the settlement of the surrounding ground surface.
Because of this it may be desirable to adopt only a partial relief of loading by excavating a
basement to a moderate depth and then carrying the net loading on piles taken down to soil
having a lesser compressibility.
In all cases where piles are installed to support structures it is necessary to consider the
effects of soil swelling and heave on the transfer of load from the basement floor slab to
the piles. Four cases can be considered as described below and shown in Figure 5.39.
Piles wholly in compressible clay (Figure 5.39a)
In this case the soil initially heaves due to swelling consequent on excavating the foundation,
and further heave results from pile driving. The heaved soil is then trimmed off to the correct
level and the basement slab concreted. If the concreting is undertaken within a few days or
a week after the pile driving there is a tendency for the heaved soil to slump down, particu-
larly in a soft clay which developed high pore pressures. A space may tend to open between
the underside of the concrete and the soil surface. When the superstructure is erected the
piles will carry their working load and if correctly designed they will settle to an acceptable
degree. This will in turn cause the basement slab to settle but pressure will not develop on
its underside because the soil within and beneath the settling piles will move down with
them. Thus the maximum pressure on the underside of the basement slab is due to the soil
swelling at an early stage before partial slumping of the heaved soil takes place and before
Pile groups under compressive loading
283
the piles carry any of their designed loading. The uplift pressure on the basement slab will
be greater if bored piles are used since no heaving of the soil is caused by installing the piles,
and if the basement slab is completed and attached to the piles soon after completing
the excavation, the swelling pressures on the underside of the slab will cause tension to be
developed in the piles. This is particularly liable to happen where bored piles are installed
from the ground surface before the excavation for the basement commences. Concreting
of the pile shaft is terminated at the level of the underside of the basement slab and the
construction of the basement slab usually takes place immediately after the completion of
excavation and before any heave of the excavation can take place to relieve the swelling pres-
sure. Generally, in any piled basement where bored piles are installed wholly in compressible
clay, the basement slab should be designed to withstand an uplift pressure equal at least to
one-half of the dead and sustained imposed load of the superstructure. Alternatively, a void
can be provided beneath the basement slab by means of collapsible cardboard or plastics
formers. The piles can be designed to be anchored against uplift or they can be sleeved over
the zone of swelling. Anchoring the piles against uplift by increasing the shaft length to
increase shaft friction below the swelling zone is often the most economical solution to the
problem. Where void formers made of cardboard or plastics are used to eliminate swelling
pressure beneath the basement slab, there is a risk of bio-degradation of the organic materials
causing an accumulation of methane gas in the void. Venting the underside of the slab can
be difficult and costly.
Providing an increased shaft length can be made more economical than sleeving the pile
shaft within the swelling zone. Fleming and Powderham(5.34) recommended that where piles
are reinforced to restrain uplift the friction forces should not be underestimated and they
suggest that if the forces are estimated conservatively it would be appropriate to reduce the
load factors on the steel, perhaps to about 1.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.39 Piled basements in various ground conditions (a) Wholly in compressible clay
(b) Compressible clay over bedrock (c) Soft clay over stiff clay (d) Loose sand becoming
denser with depth.
Hydrostatic pressure will, of course, act on the basement slab in water-bearing soil. The
piles must be designed to carry the net full weight of the structure (i.e. the total weight less
the weight of soil and soil water excavated from the basement).
When installing piles for ‘top-down’ construction the empty borehole from the pile head
below the lowest basement floor slab up to the ground surface is supported by temporary
casing. Steel columns are set on the pile heads and are surrounded with sand before the casing
is extracted. Particular care is necessary in establishing the position of the pile borehole and
maintaining verticality in drilling. If this is not done there could be considerable error in the
position of the pile head and difficulties in locating the column in the design position.
The tolerance in pile position permitted by the Institution of Civil Engineers’Specification
for Piling(2.5) is 75 mm and the permitted deviation from the vertical of a bored pile is 1 in 75.
(see also Section 3.4.12) Taking as an example a 3-storey basement with an overall depth
from ground surface to pile head level (beneath the lowest floor slab) of 15 m the centre of
the pile could be 275 mm from the design position. Consequently, either the column set in
its intended position in the superstructure would be off-plumb or the column would apply an
eccentric load to the pile head. The permitted tolerances should be kept in mind when con-
sidering the pile diameter and the design of reinforcement to provide for eccentric loading.
Piles driven through compressible clay to
bedrock (Figure 5.39b)
In this case soil swelling takes place at the base of the excavation followed by heave if driven
piles are employed. As before, the heaved soil tends to slump away from the underside of
the basement slab if the latter is concreted soon after pile driving. Any gap which might form
will be permanent since the piles will not settle except due to a very small elastic shortening
of the shaft. If bored piles are adopted, with a long delay between concreting the base slab
and applying the superstructure loading to the piles, the pressure of the underside of the
slab due to long-term soil swelling might be sufficient to cause the piles to lift from their
seating on the rock. The remedy then is to provide a void beneath the slab, and to anchor the
piles to rock or to sleeve them through the swelling zone.
Piles driven through soft clay into stiff clay
(Figure 5.39c)
This case is intermediate between the first two. There is a continuing tendency for the heaved
soft clay to settle away from the underside of the basement slab, because the settlement of the
piles taking their bearing in the stiff clay is less than that caused by the reconsolidation of the
heaved and disturbed soft clay. Uplift pressure occurs on the underside of the base slab if
bored piles are used, and a design value equal at least to one-half of the combined dead and
imposed load of the superstructure should be considered. Alternatively, the effects of heave
should be eliminated as described above.
Piles driven into loose sand (Figure 5.39d)
In this case it is presumed that the piles are driven through loose sand to an end bearing in
deeper and denser sand. The slight heave of the soil caused by excavating the basement is
an instantaneous elastic movement. No heave occurs because either pile driving causes some
settlement of the ground surface due to densification, or a loss of ground results due to pile
284
Pile groups under compressive loading
Pile groups under compressive loading
285
boring. When the superstructure load is applied to the piles they compress, but the soil follows
the pile movement, and any soil pressures developed on the underside of the basement slab
are relatively small. Hydrostatic pressure occurs in a water-bearing soil.
In all cases when designing piled basements the full design working load should be
considered as acting on the piles and, in the case of piles bearing on rock or granular
soils of low compressibility, the load on the underside of the basement slab can be limited
to that caused by the soil pressure (i.e. the overburden pressure measured from the ground
surface around the basement) and hydrostatic pressure. Sometimes a tall building is
constructed close to a low-rise podium (Figure 5.40) and both structures are provided with
a piled basement. Piling beneath the podium is required to reduce differential movement
between the heavily loaded tower block and the podium. Uplift of the latter may occur if the
weight of the superstructure is less that that of the soil removed in excavating for the base-
ment. In such a case the piles must be anchored below the zone of soil swelling and designed
to take or eliminate tension. The pressure on the underside of the podium basement slab
will be equal to the swelling pressure exerted by the soil unless a void former is used to
eliminate the pressure. A vertical movement joint passing completely through the basement
and superstructure should be provided between the tower and podium to allow freedom
of movement.
Tower block
Podium
Piles carring
net uplift
loads
Piles carring net
compressive loads
Movement joint
Basement
Figure 5.40 Tower block and podium supported by piled basement.
286
Pile groups under compressive loading
Measurements of the relative loads carried by the piles and the underside of the slab of a
piled basement raft were described by Hooper(5.35). The measurements were made during
and subsequently to the construction of the 31-storey building of the Hyde Park Cavalry
Barracks in London. The 90 m high building was constructed on the piled raft 8.8 m below
ground level. The 51 bored and cast-in-place piles supporting the raft had a shaft diameter
of 910 mm and an enlarged base 2400 mm in diameter (Figure 5.41a). The piles were
installed by drilling from ground level and concreting the shaft up to raft level before
commencing the bulk excavation.
17.2 m OD
19.2 m OD
9.4 m OD
Mv in m2/MN
0.1
0.2
0.3
10
15.5 m OD
20
30
0
OD level in m
25.6 m
2 440 mm bases
23.5 m
1.4 m
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
5
10
15
20
25
Settlement in mm
Building weight in MN
Ground floor
3rd floor
28th floor
Building
complete
Ws  WP
Calculated total
building weight
Measured weight Ws carried by soil
at underside of raft
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time in months
Settlement at centre of raft
Gravel
10
910 mm
bored
piles
London
Clay
10
Measured weight WP carried by piles
Building
occupied
(a)
(b)
Average
value
Figure 5.41 Piled raft foundations for Hyde Park Cavalry Barracks, London (a) Foundation arrangements
and soil characteristics (b) Distribution of loading between raft and piles.
Pile groups under compressive loading
287
The weight of the building (including imposed load but excluding wind load) was
calculated to be 228 MN. The weight of soil removed when excavating through gravel on to
the stiff London clay at raft level was 107 MN, giving a net load to be transferred by the raft
and piles to the London clay of 121 MN, or a net bearing pressure at raft level of 196 kN/m2.
Load cells were installed in three of the piles to measure the load transferred from the raft
to the pile shaft, and three earth pressure cells were placed between the raft and the soil to
measure the contact pressures developed at this interface. Settlements of the raft at various
points were also measured by means of levelling points installed at ground level.
The observations of pile loadings and contact pressures were used to estimate the
proportion of the total load carried by the piles and the basement raft from the initial stages
of construction up to 3 years after completing the building. The results of these calculations
are shown in Figure 5.41b and are compared with the calculated total weight of the building
at the various stages of construction. Hooper(5.35) estimated that at the end of construction
60% of the building load was carried by the piles and 40% by the underside of the raft. In
the post-construction period there was a continuing trend towards the slow transfer of more
load to the piles, about 6% of the total downward structural load being transferred to the
piles in the three-year period.
5.10
The optimization of pile groups to reduce
differential settlements in clay
Cooke et al.(5.36) measured the proportion of load shared between the piles and raft and also
the distribution of load to selected piles in different parts of a 43.3 m by 19.2 m piled raft
supporting a 16-storey building in London Clay at Stonebridge Park. There were 351 piles
in the group with a diameter of 0.45 m and a length of 13 m. The piles were uniformly
spaced on a 1.6 m square grid. The overall loading on the pile group was about 200 kN/m2
At the end of construction the piles carried 78% of the total building load, the remainder
being carried by the raft. The distribution of the load to selected piles near the centre, at the
edges, and at the corners of the group is shown in Figure 5.42. It will be seen that the loads
carried by the corner and edge piles were much higher than those on the centre piles. The
loading was distributed in the ratio 2.2:1.4:1 for the corner, edge, and centre respectively.
Advantages can be taken of the load sharing between raft and piles and between various
piles in a group to optimize the load sharing whereby differential settlement is minimized
and economies obtained in the design of the structural frame and in the penetration depth
and/or diameter of the piles (Section 5.3). The procedure in optimization is described by
Padfield and Sharrock(5.37). Central piles are influenced by a larger number of adjacent piles
than those at the edges. Hence, they settle to a greater extent and produce the characteristic
dished settlement. Therefore, if longer stiffer piles are provided at the centre they will attract
a higher proportion of the load. The outer piles are shorter and thus less stiff and will yield
and settle more, thus reducing the differential settlement across the group. The alternative
method of varying the settlement response to load is to vary the cross-sectional dimensions.
The centre piles are made long with straight shafts and mobilize the whole of their bearing
capacity in shaft friction at a settlement of between 10 and 15 mm. The shorter outer piles
can be provided with enlarged bases which require a greater settlement to mobilize the total
ultimate bearing capacity (see Section 4.6). An example of this is given by Burland
and Kalra(5.17).
288
Pile groups under compressive loading
Randolph(1.1) pointed out that where the ratio of the width of a pile group to the pile
length is greater than unity the pile cap contributes significantly to the load transfer from
the superstructure to the soil. Hence, the stiffness of a piled raft where the piles are
arranged to cover the whole foundation area will be similar to that of the raft structure
without the piles. Thus by concentrating the piles in the central area and using shorter
piles (or no piles) around the edges, the bending moments due to dishing of the raft are
considerably reduced. In the case of a uniformly loaded foundation area analyses show
that piles of length greater than 70% of the foundation width situated over the central 25%
to 40% of the raft area are required. Hence, instead of conventionally spreading the piles
uniformly over the whole foundation area, as little as 30% to 50% of the cumulative length
of all the piles is needed.
Load distribution between the piles is achieved through the continuous pile cap which
must be designed to be stiff enough to achieve this. With perfect optimization differential
settlement can be reduced to zero. The analysis to achieve optimization is complex
and involves interaction factors discussed in Section 5.4. A computer is required to perform
the necessary calculations. It is also necessary to check that the stress is not excessive on the
shafts of the central piles which are designed to carry a high proportion of the load.
5.11
References
5.1
POULOS, H. G. Pile behaviour – theory and application, Geotechnique, Vol. 39, No. 3, 1989,
pp. 365–415.
5.2
BURLAND, J. B. and WROTH, C. P. General report on Session 5: Allowable and differential settle-
ments of structures, including settlement damage and soil structure interaction, Proceedings
of the Conference on Settlement of Structures, Cambridge, 1974, Pentech Press, London, 1975,
pp. 611–54.
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Pile load, kN
Erection of super structure begun
31/2 storeys
61/2 storeys
16 storeys end of construction
12 storeys
Corner
Edge
loads
and live
Full dead
Interior
1974
1975
1976
Figure 5.42 Load distribution on piled raft in London Clay (after Cooke et al.(5.36)).
5.3
BURLAND, J. B. Interaction between structural engineers and geotechnical engineers, The
Structural Engineer, Vol. 84, No. 8, 2006, pp. 29–37.
5.4
HANSEN, J. B. A general formula for bearing capacity, Danish Geotechnical Institute, Bulletin
No. 11, 1961; also, A revised and extended formula for bearing capacity, Danish Geotechnical
Institute, Bulletin No. 28, 1968, and Code of Practice for Foundation Engineering, Danish
Geotechnical Institute, Bulletin No. 32, 1978.
5.5
MEYERHOF, G. G. Some recent research on bearing capacity, Canadian Geotechnical Journal,
Vol. 1, 1963, pp. 16–26.
5.6
JAMIOLKOWSKI, M. et al. Design parameters for soft clays, Proceedings of the 7th European
Conference on Soil Mechanics, Brighton, 1979, pp. 21–57.
5.7
STROUD, M. A. The standard penetration test in insensitive clays, Proceedings of the European
Symposium on Penetration Testing, Stockholm, 1975, Vol. 2, pp. 367–75.
5.8
BURLAND, J. B., BROMS, B. B., and DE MELLO, V. Behaviour of foundations and structures,
Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Soil Mechanics, Tokyo, Session 2, 1977.
5.9
JARDINE, R., FOURIE, A., MASWOSE, J., and BURLAND, J. B. Field and laboratory measurements of soil
stiffness, Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Soil Mechanics, San Francisco,
Vol. 2, 1985, pp. 511–14.
5.10 MARSLAND, A. In-situ and laboratory tests on glacial clays at Redcar, Proceedings of a Symposium
on Behaviour of Glacial Materials, Midlands Geotechnical Society, 1975, pp. 164–80.
5.11 TERZAGHI, K. Theoretical Soil Mechanics, John Wiley, New York, 1943, p. 425.
5.12 BUTLER, F. G. General Report and state-of the-art review, Session 3, Proceedings of the Conference
on Settlement of Structures, Cambridge, 1974, Pentech Press, London, 1975, pp. 531–78.
5.13 BROWN, P. T. and GIBSON, R. E. Rectangular loads on inhomogeneous soil, Proceedings of the
American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 99 (SM10), 1973, pp. 917–20.
5.14 CHRISTIAN, J. T. and CARRIER, W. D. Janbu, Bjerrum and Kjaernsli’s chart reinterpreted, Canadian
Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 15, 1978, pp. 123–8.
5.15 FOX, E. N. The mean elastic settlement of a uniformly-loaded area at a depth below the ground
surface, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference, ISSMFE, Rotterdam, Vol. 1, 1948,
pp. 129–32.
5.16 SKEMPTON, A. W. and BJERRUM, L. A contribution to the settlement analysis of foundations on clay,
Geotechnique, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1957, pp. 168–78.
5.17 BURLAND, J. B. and KALRA, J. C. Queen Elizabeth Conference Centre: geotechnical aspects,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 80, No. 1, 1986, pp. 1479–503.
5.18 SCHULTZE, E. and SHERIF, G. Predictions of settlements from evaluated settlement observations
for sand, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference, ISSMFE, Moscow, Vol. 1, 1973,
p. 225.
5.19 BURLAND, J. B. and BURBIDGE, M. C. Settlement of foundations on sand and gravel, Proceedings of
the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 78, No. 1, 1985, pp. 1325–37.
5.20 MEIGH, A. C. Cone Penetration Testing–Methods and Interpretation, CIRIA/Butterworth, 1987.
5.21 ROBERTSON, P. K. and CAMPANELLA, R. G. Interpretation of cone penetration tests, parts 1 and 2,
Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 20, 1983, pp. 718–45.
5.22 BALDI, G., BELLOTI, R., GHIONNA, V., JAMIOLKOWSKI, M., and PASQUALINIE. Cone resistance of dry
medium sand, Proceedings of the 10th International Conference, ISSMFE, Stockholm, Vol. 2,
1981, pp. 427–32.
5.23 MEIGH, A. C. The Triassic rocks, with particular reference to predicted and observed performance
of some major structures, Geotechnique, Vol. 26, 1976, pp. 393–451.
5.24 LUNNE, T. and CHRISTOFFERSEN, H. P. Interpretation of cone penetration data for offshore sands,
Proceedings of the Offshore Technology Conference 15, Houston, 1983, Vol. 1, pp. 181–92.
5.25 SCHMERTMANN, J. H. Static cone to compute static settlement over sand, Journal of the Soil
Mechanics and Foundations Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 96, No. SM3,
May 1970, pp. 1011–43.
Pile groups under compressive loading
289
290
Pile groups under compressive loading
5.26 SCHMERTMANN, J. H., HARTMAN, J. P., and BROWN, P. R. Improved strain influence diagrams,
Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. GT8, 1978, pp. 1131–5.
5.27 CHANDLER, F. W. and DAVIS, A. G. Further work on the engineering properties of Keuper Marl
Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA), Report 47, 1973.
5.28 HAGERTY, A. and PECK, R. B. Heave and lateral movements due to pile driving, Journal of the Soil
Mechanics and Foundation Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, No. SM11,
November 1971, pp. 1513–32.
5.29 CHOW, Y. K. and TEH, C. I.A theoretical study of pile heave, Geotechnique, Vol. 40, No. 1, 1990, pp. 1–14.
5.30 BJERRUM, L. Engineering geology of normally-consolidated marine clays as related to the
settlement of buildings, Geotechnique, Vol. 17, No. 2, 1967, pp. 83–117.
5.31 ADAMS, J. I. and HANNA, T. H. Ground movements due to pile driving, Proceedings of the
Conference on the Behaviour of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1970, pp. 127–33.
5.32 BRZEZINSKI, L. S., SHECTOR, L., MACPHIE, H. L., and VAN DER NOOT, H. J. An experience with heave
of cast-in-situ expanded base piles, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 10, No. 2, May 1973,
pp. 246–60.
5.33 COLE, K. W. Uplift of piles due to driving displacement, Civil Engineering and Public Works
Review, March 1972, pp. 263–9.
5.34 FLEMING, W. G. K. and POWDERHAM, A. J. Soil down-drag and heave on piles, Institution of Civil
Engineers, Ground Engineering Group, notes for meeting on 25/10/89.
5.35 HOOPER, J. A. Observations on the behaviour of a piled-raft foundation on London Clay,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 55, No. 2, December 1973, pp. 855–77.
5.36 COOKE, R. W., BRYDEN SMITH, D. W., GOOCH, M. N., and SILLETT, D. F. Some observations on the
foundation loading and settlement of a multi-storey building on a piled raft foundation in London
Clay, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 7, No. 1, 1981, pp. 433–60.
5.37 PADFIELD, C. J. and SHARROCK, M. J. Settlement of structures on clay soils, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association (CIRIA), Special Publication 27, 1983.
5.12
Worked examples
Example 5.1
Bored piles 500 mm in diameter drilled to a depth of 13.9 m below ground level into a firm
to stiff clay are arranged in a group consisting of 10 rows each of seven piles, each carrying
a dead load of 250 kN and an imposed load of 110 kN. From the results of tests on samples
from three boreholes, the characteristic undrained shear strength of the clay increases from
60 kN/m2 at 1.5 m below ground surface to 110 kN/m2 at the base of the pile group. The fis-
sured strength of the clay at pile toe level is 80 kN/m2. Profiles of the undrained deforma-
tion modulus Eu and the coefficient of compressibility mv are shown in Figure 5.43.
Determine the overall stability and settlement of the pile group.
The first step is to calculate the factor of safety of the individual pile under the combined
dead and imposed loads, from equations 4.4 and 4.7:
Ultimate bearing capacity980/40.520.45(60110)/20.512.4
 141 745  886 kN
Factor of safety  886/360  2.5 which is satisfactory, and because of the increasing
strength of the clay below toe level, block failure of the group should not occur. However,
for the purpose of comparison with the recommendation in EC7 Clause 7.6.2.1 to assume
that the pile group acts as a single large-diameter pile, the stability of the group will be
checked for compliance with the EC7 rules.
Pile groups under compressive loading
291
Determining the stability of the group assuming that it acts as a block foundation, and
using the procedure, in Sections 5.1 and 5.2.1, the shaft resistance of the block is calculated
on the fissured strength of the clay as a result of general relaxation of the mass of soil
surrounding the group. Because there is a relatively small pile-to-soil contact around the
periphery of the group an adhesion factor will not be applied.
Unit shear resistance on sides of block  0.75  (60  110)/2  63.75 kN/m2
Total shear resistance  2  12.4  (9.9 6.6)  63.75  26086 kN
For calculating the base resistance from equation 5.1, Nc from Figure 5.6 is 5.14 (the classic
value for a shallow foundation on clay in undrained shear), sc is 1.3, dc for D/B  1.5 and
  0	 is 1.0 (Figure 5.9), ic is 1.0 for a centrally applied vertical load, and bc is 1.0.
Taking the intact shear strength of the clay at base level as 110 kN/m2:
Base resistance of foundation1105.141.31.51.01.065.3472 039 kN
Total resistance of foundation  26086 72039  98125 kN
Factor of safety against general shear failure  98125/70360  4.0
Modulus of volume compressibility mv in MN/m2
0
5
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
9.30
13.30
17.30
21.30
25.30
29.30
Eu
mv
10
15
20
25
30
Depth below ground level in m
0
20
40
60
80
100
Deformation modulus Eu in MN/m2
Base of 
equivalent
raft
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
18.40  15.20
13.80  10.50
23.00  19.90
27.60  24.60
32.20  29.30
Layer 5
Centre line
Incompressible stratum
1.5
10 rows of 7 piles
in group 9.90  6.60
D  13.90
9.30
1.4
60º
Figure 5.43 Profiles of the undrained deformation modulus Eu and the coefficient of compressibility mv.
292
Pile groups under compressive loading
Checking for compliance with EC7, the stability of the individual pile is calculated using
the procedure described in Section 4.2.3. The calculations are not included in this example.
The same procedure is used for checking the equivalent large-diameter pile for compliance.
The partial factors are as follows:
For actions (Table 4.1: Set A1, permanent unfavourable  1.35, variable unfavourable  1.5
Set A2, permanent unfavourable  1.0, variable unfavourable  1.3
Design value of actions Set A1, Fd  (1.35 250 1  5 110) 70  35175 kN
for Set A2  (1.0 250 1.3 110) 70  27510 kN
Soil parameter resistances for undrained shear strengths (Table 4.2): M1  1.0, M2  1.4
Base resistances for bored piles (Table 4.4), R1  1.25, R2  1.1, R3  1.0
Shaft resistances for bored piles (Table 4.4), R1  1.0, R2  1.1, R3  1.3
Combined resistances (Table 4.4), R1  1.15, R2  1.1, R3  1.0
The correlation factor 3 in Table 4.6 for mean values of cu and three test profiles is divided
by 1.1 because the pile loads on the group will be redistributed by a stiff pile cap. Therefore
correlation factor for mean strengths 3  1.33/1.1  1.21.
Calculating for design approach DA1, Combination1 (Sets A1  M1  R1), an adhesion
factor of 0.45 will be used for the concrete–soil interface of the equivalent pile.
Mean group resistance of pile  9 80 65.34 0.45 85 177.6
 47045 6793  53838 kN
Characteristic group resistance of pile  Rck  53838/1.21  44 494 kN
Design value of combined resistance  Rcd  44494/1.01.15  38690 kN
which is greater than the design action of 35125 kN.
For design approach DA1, Combination 2 (Sets A2M2R1): Rcd44 494/1.4 1.0
 31781 kN
(27510 kN)
Checking the equivalent pile for separate shaft and base resistances:
For DA1 Combination 1, Rcd  47045/1.211.01.256793/1.211.01.0
 311045 61436718 kN (35175 kN)
For DA1 Combination 2, Rcd  47045/1.21 1.4 1.256793/1.21 1.4 1.0
26227 kN (
27510 kN)
The lowest design resistance of the equivalent large-diameter pile from the above calculations
is 26227 kN; this can be compared with the ultimate bearing capacity of the block foundation
calculated by the method in Sections 5.1 and 5.21 of 98125 kN when divided by a nominal
safety factor of 2.5 gives an allowable bearing capacity of 39250 kN. This shows that for the
particular group dimensions of Example 5.1, the EC7 concept of an equivalent large-diameter
pile gives an over-conservative design.
For the arrangement of the piles shown in Figure 5.43, the overall dimensions of the group
are 91.1  9.9 m, 61.1  6.6 m. The spread of the load shown in Figure 5.3a applies.
Depth to centre of equivalent raft
Dimensions of equivalent raft
and 
Pressure at level of equivalent raft 
The settlements are calculated over the zone of soil down to the level of the incompressible
stratum, that is at a depth of 20 m below the base of the equivalent raft. It is convenient to
divide the soil into five 4 m layers commencing at 9.30 m and extending to 29.30 m. The
immediate and consolidation settlements are then calculated for each layer.
Immediate settlement in Layer 1
From Figure 5.43, average Eu  39 MN/m2. From Figure 5.20, for H/B  4/10.5  0.38,
and L/B  13.8/10.5  1.3, 1  0.15, and for D/B  9.3/10.5  0.9, and L/B  1.3,
0  0.93. Therefore from equation 5.22:
Immediate settlement 
The settlements in the underlying four layers are calculated in a similar manner, the
calculations for all five layers being tabulated thus
i  0.15  0.93  174  10.5  1 000
39  1000
 6.5 mm
qn 
70  360
10.5  13.8  174 kN/m2
9.90 (
1
4  7.80  2)  13.8 m
 6.60 (
1
4  7.80  2)  10.5 m

2
3  13.90  9.3 m
Pile groups under compressive loading
293
Layer
B (m)
L (m)
qn (kN/m2)
1
0
Eu (MN/mv2)
i (mm)
1
10.5
13.8
174
0.15
0.93
39
6.5
2
15.1
18.4
90
0.06
0.93
52
1.5
3
19.7
23.0
55
0.03
0.92
64
0.5
4
24.3
27.6
37
0.02
0.92
76
0.2
5
28.9
32.2
27
0.01
0.93
88
0.1
Total immediate settlement
8.8
The immediate settlement can be checked from equation 5.21 because the deformation
modulus increases linearly with depth. At the level of equivalent raft Eu is 32 MN/m2 and at
20 m below this level it is 97 MN/m2. Therefore from equation 5.21:
97  32(120k/10.5)
k  1.1
294
Pile groups under compressive loading
Layer
Depth to centre
z (m)
z/B
z
mv (MN/m2)
oed (mm)
of layer (m)
1
11.3
2
0.19
0.80174
0.09
50.1
2
15.3
6
0.57
0.51174
0.07
24.8
3
19.3
10
0.95
0.33174
0.05
11.5
4
23.3
14
0.33
0.22174
0.04
6.1
5
27.3
18
0.71
0.15174
0.04
4.2
Total oedometer settlement
96.7
Dividing equivalent raft into four rectangles, each 6.95.25 m. From Figure 5.20 for
L/B  6.9/5.25  1.3, H/B  20/5.25  3.8 and k 1.1, Ip is 0.13. From equation in Figure 5.19:
Settlement at corner of rectangle 
Settlement at centre of equivalent raft  43.714.8 mm
Oedometer settlement for Layer 1
Depth to centre of layer  9.32.011.3 mm
From Figure 5.13 with L/B  13.8/10.5  1.3 and z/B  2/10.5  0.19, stress at the centre
of layer  0.8174 kN/m2. From Figure 5.43 average mv at centre of layer  0.09 MN/m2.
Therefore
oedometer settlement from equation 5.23  oed
 50.1 mm
The oedometer settlements for all five layers are calculated in a similar manner and are
tabulated thus.
 0.09  0.80  174  4  1000
1000
 174  5.25  0.13  1000
32  1000
 3.7 mm
From Figure 5.23 the depth factor d for
, is 0.78
and for London Clay the geological factor g is about 0.5. Therefore
corrected consolidation settlement  c  0.50.7896.7  37.7 mm.
Total settlement of pile group  ic  8.837.7  46.5 mm.
In practice a settlement between 30 and 60 mm would be expected.
Example 5.2
Part of the jetty structure referred to in Example 4.4 carries bulk handling equipment with
a total dead and imposed load of 6 MN. Design a suitable pile group to carry this equipment
and calculate the settlement under the dead and imposed loading.
It has been calculated in Example 4.4 that a 450450 mm precast concrete pile driven
to 7 m below the sea bed could carry a working load of 250 kN in compression with a safety
DLB  9.3013.8  10.5  0.77
Pile groups under compressive loading
295
factor on the ultimate resistance of a single pile of 3.1. For uniformity in design and
construction it is desirable to adopt a pile of the same dimensions to carry the bulk handling
plant. A group of forty-two piles arranged in seven rows of six piles should be satisfactory.
Spacing the piles at centres equal to three times the width the dimensions of the group are
61.35  8.10 m by 51.35  6.75 m. A suitable pile cap in the form of a thick slab
would be 10.59.01.25 m deep. Take a depth of water of 12 m and a height of 4 m from
water level to the underside of the pile cap.
Weight of pile group above sea-bed level
 9.81([10.59.01.252.5]{420.452[(121.5)(42.5)]})  5233kN
Working load on each pile 
Safety factor on ultimate load of 777 kN (Example 4.4)  777/267  2.9, which is
satisfactory.
Because the piles are driven into a uniform sand carrying their load partly in skin friction
and partly in end bearing the distribution of load shown in Figure 5.3a applies.
Depth below sea bed to equivalent raft 
Thus the dimensions of the equivalent raft are
In calculating settlements it is only necessary to consider the dead and imposed loading
from the bulk handling plant. The piles and pile cap settle immediately as they are con-
structed and the pile cap is finished to a level surface.
Pressure on sand below raft due to weight of plant 
At level of raft, effective overburden pressure 
From Figure 5.26 for a standard penetration test N-value of 15 blows/300 mm, Ic is 410-2.
Assume for the purposes of illustration that the previous overburden pressure was
75 kN/m2. Then from equation 5.31b the immediate settlement for an effective pressure
increase of 63 kN/m2 is:
From Figure 5.27 the depth of influence zI for B of 9.1 m is 5 m. This is less than the thick-
ness of the compressible layer. Hence the thickness factor, fs, is unity. From equation 5.32a:
Shape factor, fs  
1.25 10.4 9.1
10.4 0.1 0.25
2
1.05
i  63  9.10.7  4  102
3
 3.9 mm
1.2  9.81  4.67  55 kN/m2
6  1000
10.4  9.1  63 kN/m2
B  6.75 (
1
4  2  4.67)  9.1 m
L8.1 (
1
4 2 4.67)10.4 m
2
3  7  4.67 m
(6 5.233)
42
 1 000  267 kN
296
Pile groups under compressive loading
The time factor for settlement at 30 years and static loading condition from equation 5.33 is
Therefore from equation 5.34, consolidation settlement  1.0512.5 3.9
 10.2 mm
The imposed loading would be intermittent in operation.
Checking from equation 5.25, for ds greater than 2B and L/B  1.1, Figure 5.25
gives s  1.1.
Immediate settlement 
Therefore the pile group would be expected to settle between 5 and 10 mm under the dead
and imposed loading from the bulk handling equipment.
Example 5.3
The driven and cast-in-place piles in Example 4.5 each carry a working load of 900 kN and
are arranged in a group of 20 rows of 15 piles spaced at 1.60 m centres in both directions.
Calculate the settlement of the pile group using the static cone resistance diagram in Figure
4.44. Length of pile group  191.6  30.4 m. Width of pile group  141.6  22.4 m.
The transfer of load from the piles to the soft clay in skin friction is relatively small, and
therefore the distribution of load shown in Figure 5.3b applies.
Depth to equivalent raft foundation 
below the surface of the sand
stratum or 22 m below ground level, as shown in Figure 5.44.
Length of equivalent raft L  30.4
Width of equivalent raft B  22.4
Pressure on soil beneath raft
The settlement can be calculated by the Schmertmann method. It is convenient to divide
the cone resistance diagram shown in Figure 4.44 into three layers between the base of the
equivalent raft and rock head. The sub-division of these layers and the superimposition of
the Schmertmann curves beneath the base of the raft are shown in Figure 5.44. The settlement
is calculated over a period of 25 years.
 270  1000
35.4  27.4  278 kN/m2
(2  10 
1
4)  27.4 m
(2  10 
1
4)  35.4 m

2
3  15  10 m

1.1  63
150.87 10.4  4.67
9.1 
 5 mm
ft  1 0.3 0.2 log30
3
 2.5
Pile groups under compressive loading
297
From Figure 5.44,
Iz
Layer
For L/B  1
For L/B  10
1
0.20
0.24
2
0.36
0.30
3a
0.46
3b
0.40
0.39
Layer
For L/B  1
Ed
For L/B  10
1
5  2.5  12.5 MN/m2
5  3.5  17.5 MN/m2
2
16  2.5  40 MN/m2
16  3.5  56 MN/m2
3
20  2.5  50 MN/m2
20  3.5  70 MN/m2
For axisymmetric loading (L/B  1) from equation 5.35:
Uncorrected settlement is given by:
Layer 1  278  0.20  6  1000
12.5  1000
 27 mm
Soft clay
Sand
Ground level
Pile group
0
B/2 5 11.2 m
Base of equivalent raft
35.4 3 27.4 m
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Rock
0
0
5
10
Cone resistance, MN/m2
15
20
25
5
10
15
Depth, metres
20
25
28
30
35
40
45
46
Layer 1
(av. 5 MN/m2)
Layer 2 (av. 16 MN/m2)
Layer 3 (av. 20 MN/m2)
22
33.2
Figure 5.44

298
Pile groups under compressive loading
Layer 2
Layer 3a
Layer 3b
Total  69 mm
Similarly, for L/B 10 the uncorrected settlements are
Layer 1  19 mm
Layer 2  9 mm
Layer 3  21 mm
Total  49 mm
By interpolation the settlement for L/B  1.3 is 66 mm
Effective overburden pressure at base of raft
From equation 5.36 
From equation 5.37 
Corrected settlement at 25 years
say between
50 and 70 mm
Example 5.4
Nuclear reactors, their containment structures, and ancillary units weighing 900 MN are to
be constructed on a base 7032 m sited on 8 m loose to medium-dense sand overlying a
moderately strong sandstone. Rotary cored boreholes showed that below a thin zone of weak
weathered rock the RQD value of the sandstone was 85% and the average unconfined
compression strength was 14 MN/m2. Design a suitable piled foundation and calculate the
settlement.
Overall loading on base
Under this loading the settlement of the sand will be excessive. A piled foundation is
required and relatively few large-diameter piles will be more economical than a large
number of lightly loaded piles.
Adopt piles 1.5 m in diameter taken 2 m below weak weathered rock on to the moderately
strong sandstone. It will be possible to permit loading of the concrete forming the bored

900
70  32  0.402 MN/m2
  0.62 1.48 6661 mm
C2  1 0.2lg 25
0.1  1.48
C1  1 0.5  214
278  0.62
 9.81[(2  1.9)(10  0.9)(10  0.9)]  214 kN/m2
 278  0.4  10.3  1000
50  1000
 23 mm
 278  0.46  2.5  1 000
50  1000
 6 mm
 278  0.36  5.2  1000
40  1 000
 13 mm
Pile groups under compressive loading
299
piles to the maximum working stress on the concrete of the pile shaft. For 25-grade concrete,
max. working stress  0.25  25  6.25 MN/m2 (factor of safety on quc  2.2) and since
max. working load on pile 
required number of piles 
900/11  82.
A suitable arrangement of piles consists of fourteen rows of six piles placed at 5 m centres
in both directions.
Length of pile group L  13  5  65 m
Width of pile group B  5  5  25 m
The transfer of load in skin friction to the sand is relatively small and the piles can
be regarded as end bearing on the rock. The base of the equivalent raft will be shown in
Figure 5.3c.
Overall loading at base of raft 
From Section 4.7.3 for RQD of 85%, mass factor  0.7 and from Section 5.5 the modulus ratio
of a well-cemented sandstone is 300, deformation modulus of sandstone Ed 
0.730014 2940 MN/m2, say 3000 MN/m2.
From Figure 5.20 with 
, and L/B = 65/25  2.6, 
, and with D/B 
(8  2)/25  0.4 and L/B  2.6, 
. From equation 5.22: 
settlement of foundation
Example 5.5
A site, where the ground conditions consist of 5.5 m of soft organic silty clay overlying 35 m
of stiff to very stiff over-consolidated clay followed by rock, is reclaimed by placing and
compacting 4 m of sand fill covering the entire site area. Six months after completing the
reclamation a 12-storey building imposing an overall dead load and sustained imposed load
of 160 kN/m2 on a ground floor area of 48 m by 21 m is to be constructed on the site. The
average undrained shearing strength of the stiff clay stratum is 90 kN/m2 at the surface
of the stratum, increasing to 430 kN/m2 at rockhead. Measurements of the deformation
modulus and modulus of volume compressibility show a linear variation, with average
values at the top and bottom of the stiff clay stratum as follows:
At top: 
At bottom: 
Design suitable piled foundations and estimate the settlement of the completed building.
Because of the heavy loading it is economical to provide large-diameter bored and cast in-situ
piled foundations. A suitable arrangement consists of fourteen rows of six piles (Figure 5.45).
Trial-and-adjustment calculations show that a pile diameter of 1200 mm is suitable.
The pile spacing must be a minimum of 3 diameters, giving a spacing of at least 3.6 m.
Eu  120 MNm2, mv  0.04 m2MN
Eu  40 MNm2, mv  0.08 m2MN
 1.1  0.95  0.55  25  1000
3000
 5 mm.
0  0.95
1  1.1
HB  
900
65  25  0.55 MN/m2
1
4   1.52  6.25  11 MN,
300
Pile groups under compressive loading
1200 mm bored
piles
0.00
9.50
10.5 m
16.50
12-storey building
Ground level
GWL
7.00
Soft organic
silty clay
Sand fill (  2.1 mg/m3)
48.75 18.75
3.75
Stiff to very
stiff clay
30°
L  52.25
B  22.25
23.50
30.50
37.50
44.50
Cu  430 kN/m2
mv  0.04 m2/MN
Ed  120 MN/m2
Cu  90 kN/m2
mv  0.08 m2/MN
Layer 2
Layer 3
Layer 4
Rock
L  60.25
L  68.25
L  76.25
B  38.25
B  46.25
B  30.25
qn 139 kN/m2
(sat  1.6 Mg/m3)
4.00
Ed  40 MN/m2
Figure 5.45
Adopt a spacing of say 3.75 m in both directions. Thus the dimensions of the pile group are
5  3.75  18.75 m and 13  3.75  48.75 m.
Average load carried by piles 
The central two rows of piles carry higher loads than the outer two rows on each side.
A likely loading for the centre rows is 2200 kN per pile. The required penetration of the
piles will be calculated on this loading. The exterior piles will be taken to the same depth
but adopting a reduced diameter as required by the lesser loading.
The piles carry negative skin friction due to the consolidation of the soft clay under the
imposed loading of the sand fill. At 6 months, settlement of the soft clay will be continuing
at a very slow rate and it is appropriate to use Figure 4.39 to calculate the negative skin
friction in this layer.
48  21  160
14  6
 1920 kN per pile
Pile groups under compressive loading
301
Unit negative skin friction at top of layer
Unit negative skin friction at groundwater level (see Figure 5.45)
Unit negative skin friction at bottom of layer
Therefore total negative skin friction in soft clay:
Because the pile will settle due to yielding of the stiff clay when the full working load is
applied, the pile will move downwards relative to the lower part of the soft clay. Thus negative
skin friction will be developed only over about 80% of the length within the soft clay. Thus
approximate total negative skin friction in soft clay  0.8746  597 kN
The negative skin friction in the sand can be calculated using the coefficients for Ks in
Table 4.10. Although the compacted sand fill is dense it will be loosened by pile boring to
give a coefficient Ks of 1 and a value of  of 30	. From equation 4.16:
negative skin friction on pile in sand fill
Total negative skin friction on pile  359  597  956 kN
Total applied load on piles in centre rows  956  2200  3156 kN
The required pile penetration depth is calculated on the basis of the building loading, with
a check being made to ensure that the safety factor on the combined building load and
negative skin friction is adequate.
Required ultimate pile resistance for overall safety factor of 2 (Section 4.6) 
2 2200  4400 kN
Take a trial penetration depth of 10 m into the stiff clay stratum. At the pile base level
cub  190 kN/m2 and the average value of cu on the shaft is 140 kN/m2. Thus
Ultimate base resistance 
Load to be carried in skin friction 
The adhesion factor for a straight-sided pile can be taken as 0.45. Therefore from
equation 4.7:
total load  2 465  0.45  140    1.2  l
4 400 1 935  2465 kN

1
4    1.22  9  190  1935 kN

1
2  1  9.81  2.1  4   tan 30	    1.2  4  359 kN
   1.2  [
1
2(4.7 8.8)  3
1
2(8.8 43.3)  2.5]  746 kN
 0.30  9.81[(2.1  4)(1.6  3)(0.6  2.5)]  43.3 kN/m2
 0.30  9.81[(2.1  4)(1.6  3)]  8.8 kN/m2
 0.30
vo  0.30  9.81  2.1  4  4.7 kN/m2
302
Pile groups under compressive loading
from which l  10.4 m (say 10.5 m) and the trial depth is satisfactory.
Checking the criterion of a safety factor of 3 in end bearing and unity in skin friction,
allowable load 
which roughly equals the building load
plus the negative skin friction. Checking the overall safety factor on the combined loading,
Safety factor  (19352465)/3156  1.4
This is satisfactory since the negative skin friction on the piles will not contribute to the
settlement of the pile group.
The transfer of load from the pile group to the soil will be as shown in Figure 5.3b.
Depth below ground level to base of equivalent raft 
The dimensions of the equivalent raft are:
Pressure on base of equivalent raft due to building load
Calculating the immediate settlement
At a level of equivalent raft, Eu  Ef  65 MN/m2
At rockhead, Eu  120 MN/m2
From equation 5.21, 120  65(128 k/22.25)
k  0.7
Divide equivalent raft into four rectangles, each 26.111.1 m
From Figure 5.19 for L/B  26.1/11.1  2.3, H/B  28/11.1  2.5, and k  0.7, Ip is 0.14.
Settlement at corner of rectangle 
Settlement at centre of equivalent raft  4  3.3  13.2 mm
Calculating the consolidation settlement
To calculate the settlement of the pile group due to the building loads only, the 28 m layer
of clay between the equivalent raft and rockhead is divided into four 7 m layers.
Oedometer settlement in Layer 1.
From Figure 5.13 with and z/B  3.5/22.2  0.16 and L/B  52.2/22.2  2.3, stress at centre
of rectangle  0.83  139  118 kN/m2. Modulus of volume compressibility   0.07 m2/MN.
Then from equation 5.23:
oedometer settlement uncorrected by depth factor 
 0.07  118  7  1000
1000
 57.8 mm
139  11.1  0.14  1000
65  1000
 3.3 mm
 48  21  160
52.25  22.25 139 kN/m2
B  18.75 (
2
3  10.5  2 
1
4)  22.25 m
L  48.75 (
2
3  10.5  2 
1
4)  52.25 m
 4 5.5 (
2
3  10.5)  16.5 m
(
1
3  1935)2465  3110 kN,
Pile groups under compressive loading
303
The settlements in the remaining layers are calculated similarly, the results for the four
layers are tabulated as follows:
Layer
Depth to centre
z (m)
z/B
z (kN/m2)
mv (MN/m2)
oed (mm)
of layer (m)
1
20.00
3.5
0.16
118
0.07
57.8
2
27.00
10.5
0.47
88
0.06
37.0
3
34.00
17.5
0.79
64
0.05
22.4
4
41.00
24.5
1.10
50
0.04
14.0
Total uncorrected oedometer settlement
131.2
The above summation must be corrected by a depth factor which is given by Figure 5.23,
with 
and 
as 
To obtain the consolidation settlement c the summation is also multiplied by the geolog-
ical factor g, which is 0.5 for an overconsolidated clay. Therefore
total consolidation settlement 
Total settlement of pile group due to building load onlyi+c13.2+55.869.0 mm
To this figure must be added the consolidation settlement of the stiff clay due to the sand
filling. The immediate settlement is not taken into account since this will have taken place
before commencing the construction of the building.
Oedometer settle due to 4 m of sand fill for an average mv of 0.06 m2/MN in clay layer
Correcting for the geological factor as equation 5.24:
c  0.5  4.9  2.4 mm
A time-settlement calculation would show that about one-third of this settlement would
be complete before completing the pile installation. Thus
settlement of 12-storey building due to combined loading from building and sand layer
Therefore it would be reasonable to assume that the final settlement of the building would
be between 50 and 100 mm.
It will be noted that the negative skin friction on the piles was not added to the loading on
the equivalent raft when calculating the settlement of the building. However, it is necessary
to check that the individual piles will not settle excessively under the combined building
load and negative skin friction.
 69.0 (
2
3  2.4)  70.6 mm
 0.06  9.81  2.1  4  1000
1000
 4.9 mm
0.85  0.5  131.2  55.8 mm
d  0.85.
LB  2.35,
 16.5/52.25  22.25  0.48
DLB
Maximum load on pile  3156 kN. If shaft friction on pile is fully developed, the
end-bearing load is 3156 – 2465  691 kN, and thus
End-bearing pressure
Ultimate unit base resistance
From equation 4.36, with K  0.01,
Therefore individual piles will not settle excessively and the critical factor is the overall
settlement of the complete pile group, for which a movement of 50 to 100 mm over a long
period of years is by no means excessive.
i  0.01  611
1 710  1 200  4  mm
 9  190  1710 kN/m2

691
1
4  1.22  611 kN/m2
304
Pile groups under compressive loading
6.1
The occurrence of uplift and lateral loading
When vertical piles are installed beneath buoyant structures such as drydocks, basements
and pumping stations they are required to resist uplift loads. Where the hydrostatic pressure
always exceeds the downward loading, as in the case of some underground tanks and
pumping stations, the anchorages are permanently under tension and cable anchors may be
preferred to piles. However, in the case of the shipbuilding dock floor in Figure 6.1, for
example, the anchorages may be under tension only when the dock is unwatered before the
commencement of shipbuilding. As the loading on the floor from ship construction
increases to the stage at which the uplift pressure is exceeded, the anchor piles are required
to carry compressive loads. Cable anchors might not then be suitable if the dock floor was
underlain by soft or loose soil.
Vertical piles are used to restrain buildings against uplift caused by the swelling of clay
soils. Swelling can occur, for example, when mature trees are removed from a building
site. The desiccated soil in the root zone of the trees gradually absorbs water from the
surrounding clay, and the consequent swelling of the clay may amount to an uplift of 50 to
100 mm of the ground surface, causing severe damage to buildings sited over the root zone.
In sub-tropical countries where there is a wide difference in seasonal climatic conditions,
i.e. a hot dry summer and a cool wet winter, the soil zone affected by seasonal moisture
changes can extend to a depth of several metres below the ground surface. In clay soils these
changes cause the ground surface to alternately rise and fall with a differential movement of
50 mm or more. The depth to which these swelling (or alternate swelling and shrinkage)
movements can occur, usually makes the use of piled foundations taken below the zone
of soil movements more economical and technically more suitable than deep strip or pad
foundations.
Vertical piles must have a sufficient depth of penetration to resist uplift forces by the
development of shaft friction in the soil beneath the zone of soil movements (Figure 6.2).
Uplift on bored piles can be reduced by casting the concrete in the upper part of the pile
within a smooth polyvinylchloride (pvc) sleeve, or by coating a precast concrete or steel
tubular pile with soft bitumen (see Section 4.8.3). Uplift can be further reduced by supporting
the superstructure clear of the ground surface, or by providing a compressible layer beneath
pile caps and ground beams (see Figure 7.15). Piles in large groups may also be lifted due
to ground heave, as described in Section 5.7.
In countries where frost penetrates deeply below the ground surface, frost expansion of
the soil can cause uplift on piles, resulting in severe effects in ‘permafrost’ regions, as
Chapter 6
The design of piled foundations to
resist uplift and lateral loading
described in Section 9.4. Floating ice on lakes and rivers can jam between piles in groups
causing them to lift when water levels rise or when the ice sheet buckles.
The most frequent situation necessitating design against lateral and uplift forces occurs
when the piles are required to restrain forces causing the sliding or overturning of struc-
tures. Lateral forces may be imposed by earth pressure (Figure 6.3a), by the wind (Figure
6.3b), by earthquakes, or by the traction of braking vehicles (Figure 6.3c). In marine struc-
tures lateral forces are caused by the impact of berthing ships (Figure 6.4), by the pull from
mooring ropes, and by the pressure of winds, currents, waves, and floating ice. A vertical
pile has a very low resistance to lateral loads and, for economy, substantial loadings are
designed to be resisted by groups of inclined or raking piles (sometimes referred to as ‘bat-
ter’ piles). Thus in Figure 6.5 the horizontal force can be resolved into two components,
producing an axial compressive force in pile A and a tensile force in pile B. It is usual to
ignore the restraint offered by the pile cap; thus the magnitude of each component is
306
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Dock flooded
Piles acting neutrally
Ground-water level
All piles in tension
Piles in bending
and compression
Piles in 
compression
Ship under
construction
Dock empty
Figure 6.1 Tension/compression piles beneath floor of shipbuilding dock.
Zone
of dessicated
soil
Tree removed
Roots left to decay
Uplift on
pile in this
zone
Pile anchored
against uplift
in this zone
Compressible layer
Figure 6.2 Uplift on pile due to swelling of soil after removal of mature tree.
obtained from a simple triangle of forces as shown. Where lateral forces are transient in
character, for example, for wind loadings, they may be permitted to be carried wholly or
partly by the pile cap where this is bearing on the ground (see Section 7.8). If raking piles
are installed in fill or compressible soil which is settling under its own weight or under a
surcharge pressure, considerable bending stresses can be induced in the piles, requiring a
high moment of resistance to withstand the combined axial and bending stresses as
discussed in Section 6.4.
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
307
Tie rod
Wholly
compression
Wholly tension
Sheet-piling
Alternating
tension and
compression
Chimney
Wind
Bridge pier
Braking and
acceleration
loads
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.3 Raking piles to resist overturning forces. (a) Piled anchorage to tie rods restraining
sheet-piled retaining wall (b) Raking piles to withstand wind forces on chimney (c) Raking
piles to withstand traction forces from vehicles on bridge.
Fender
Bollard
Figure 6.4 Raking and vertical piles in breasting dolphin.
6.2
Uplift resistance of piles
6.2.1 General
The simplest method of restraining piles against uplift is to employ a pile shaft that is
sufficiently long to take the whole of the uplift load in shaft friction. However, where there
is rock beneath a shallow soil overburden it may not be possible to drive the piles deeply
enough to mobilize the required frictional resistance. In such cases the shaft resistance must
be augmented by adding dead weight to the pile to overcome the uplift load, or by anchoring
the pile to the rock.
Adding dead weight to counteract uplift loading is not usually feasible or economical.
The piles may be required to carry alternating uplift and compressive loads, in which case
the added dead weight would result in a large increase in the compressive loading. In the
case of shipbuilding dock floors (Figure 6.1), dead weight in the form of a thick floor would
add considerably to the construction costs, and in piled dolphins (Figure 6.4) the provision
of a massive pile cap could make a substantial addition to the load on the compression
rakers. Experience has shown that anchors in the form of grouted-in bars, tubes or cables
are the most economical means of providing the required uplift resistance for piles taken
down to a shallow rock layer.
6.2.2 The uplift resistance of friction piles
The resistance of straight-sided piles in shaft friction to statically applied uplift loads is
calculated in exactly the same way as the shaft friction on compression piles, and the
calculation methods given in Sections 4.2 to 4.5 can be used. However, for cyclic loading
the frictional resistance is influenced by the rate of application of the load and the degree of
degradation of the soil particles at the interface with the pile wall. In the short term, the
uplift resistance of a bored pile in clay is likely to be equal to its frictional resistance in com-
pression; however, Radhakrishna and Adams(6.1) noted a 50% reduction in the uplift
308
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Pile cap
Tension pile B
Compression
pile A
Triangle of
forces
p
q
H
r
Q
R
P
H
Figure 6.5 Restraint of horizontal force by raking piles.
resistance of cylindrical augered footings and a 30% to 50% reduction in belled footings in
clay when sustained loads were carried over a period of 3 to 4 months. It was considered that
the reduction in uplift was due to a loss of suction beneath the pile base and the dissipation
of negative pore pressures set up at the initial loading stage. These authors pointed out that
such reductions are unlikely for piles where the depth/width ratio is greater than 5.
The ICP method(4.30) can be used to determine the tension capacity of driven piles
carrying tension loading. For piles in clay the method does not differentiate between shaft
resistance in compression or tension, i.e. equations 4.20 to 4.24 can be used without modi-
fication for either type of loading. Conditions are different for piles in sands where the
degradation of the soil particles at the pile–soil interface has a greater effect on stability.
Also in the case of tubular steel piles the radial contraction across the diameter under ten-
sion loads is a further weakening effect on frictional resistance, particularly for open end
piles. Accordingly, equation 4.27 is modified to become
(6.1)
where 
and 
are calculated as described for compression loading in Section 4.3.7. For
open end piles in tension f as calculated by equation 6.1 is reduced by a factor of 0.9.
Cyclic loading generally results in a weakening of shaft capacity. The reduction can be
significant for offshore structures where piles are subjected to repetitive loading from wave
action. The degree of reduction depends on the amplitude of shear strain at the pile–soil
interface, the susceptibility of the soil grains to attrition, and the number and direction of the
load-cycles, i.e. one-way or two-way loading. The amplitude of the shear strain depends in
turn on the ratio of the applied load to the ultimate shaft capacity. In clays the repeated load
applications increase the tendency for the soil particles to become re-aligned in a direction
parallel to the pile axis at the interface which may eventually result in residual shear
conditions with a correspondingly low value of 
. In sands, it is evident that the greater the
number of load-cycles the greater the degree of degradation, although the residual silt-sized
particles produced by a silica sand will have an appreciable frictional resistance.
Degradation, both in sands and clays, takes place initially in the region of the soil-line
where the amplitude of the tensile strain is a maximum; it then decreases progressively down
the shaft but may not reach the pile toe if the applied load is a relatively small proportion of
the ultimate shaft capacity.
Jardine et al.(4.30) recommend cyclic shear tests in the laboratory using the site-specific
materials as a means of quantifying the reduction in friction capacity. In clays the interface
shear is likely to occur in undrained conditions; accordingly, the laboratory testing pro-
gramme should provide for simple cyclic undrained shear tests. An alternative to laboratory
testing suggested by Jardine et al. is to simulate the relative movement between pile and soil
under repetitive loading by finite element or t–z analyses (Section 4.6).
EC7 adopts a criterion for avoiding the ultimate limit state for single piles or pile groups
in tension by the expression similar to that for compression loading, that is
(6.2)
where Ftd is the design value for actions in tension on a pile or pile group and Rtd is the
design value of resistance in tension of the pile or the foundation. Partial factors for actions
are as shown for compression piles in Table 4.1.
Ftd  Rtd
	cv

rd
rc
f(0.8 
rc
rd)tan 	cv   
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
309
Two modes of failure are to be examined:
(1) The pull-out of the pile from the ground mass and
(2) Uplift of a block of ground containing the piles.
For condition (1) the risk of pull-out of a cone of soil adhering to the pile is to be considered.
The adverse effects of cyclic loading as described above are to be taken into account.
EC7 permits the ultimate tensile resistance to be determined by pile loading tests. It is
recommended that more than one test should be made, and in the case of a large number of
piles at least 2% should be tested. Correlation factors (see Table 4.7) are applied to the test
results to obtain the characteristic tension resistance Rtk.
Analytical methods as described in Chapter 4 for compression loading are permitted by
EC7 to be used for calculating resistance to tension loading. The correlation factors shown
in Table 4.6 are applied to the results of the calculations to obtain characteristic values (Rstk).
The factors depend on the number of ground test results used to provide the basis for 
the calculations. The partial factor for shaft resistance, 
, is then applied to obtain Rstd. The
partial factors shown in Tables 4.3–4.5 depend on the type of pile. It will be noted that
the factors are generally higher than those for shaft resistance in compression reflecting
the potentially more damaging effects of failure of a foundation in uplift.
The ‘model pile’ and the design approaches, as described in Section 4.1.4, are used in
conjunction with analytical methods of determining tension resistance. Determination by
dynamic pile testing appears to be excluded by EC7. Presumably this is because the method
measures shaft resistance in compression requiring an empirical correction to obtain the
tension value and because the direction, speed and duration of loading are such that
predictions could be misleading.
Where vertical piles are arranged in closely spaced groups the uplift resistance of the
complete group may not be equal to the sum of the resistances of the individual piles. This
is because, at ultimate-load conditions, the block of soil enclosed by the pile group is lifted.
The manner in which the load is transferred from the pile to the soil is complex and depends
on the elasticity of the pile, the layering of the soil and the disturbance to the ground caused
by installing the pile. A spread of load of 1 in 4 from the pile to the soil provides a simplified
and conservative estimate of the volume of a coarse soil available to be lifted by the pile
group, as shown in Figure 6.6. For simplicity in calculation, the weight of the pile embedded
st
310
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Block of soil
lifted by piles
1
4
Figure 6.6 Uplift of group of closely spaced piles in fine-grained soils.
in the ground is assumed to be equal to that of the volume of soil it displaces. If the weight
of the block of soil is calculated by using a diagram of the type shown in Figure 6.6, then
the safety factor against uplift can be taken as unity, since frictional resistance around the
periphery of the group is ignored in the calculation. The submerged weight of the soil should
be taken below groundwater level.
In the case of fine-grained soils the uplift resistance of the block of soil in undrained shear
enclosed by the pile group in Figure 6.7 is given by the equation:
(6.3)
where Qu is the total uplift resistance of the pile group, L and B, are the overall length and
width of the group, respectively, H is the depth of the block of soil below pile cap level, 
is the value of average undisturbed undrained shear strength of the soil around the sides of
the group, and W is the combined weight of the block of soil enclosed by the pile group plus
the weight of the piles and pile cap. Submerged densities are used for the soil and portion
of the structure below groundwater level when calculating W.
A safety factor of 2 should be used with equation 6.3 to allow for the possible weakening
of the soil around the pile group caused by the method of installation. For long-term
sustained loading a safety factor of 2.5 to 3 would be appropriate.
If either of the above two methods is used to calculate the combined uplift resistance of a pile
group, the allowable resistance must not be greater than that provided by the sum of the skin-
frictional resistance of the individual piles in the group divided by the appropriate safety factor.
EC7 (Clause 7.6.3.1) recommends calculating the uplift resistance of a block of soil sur-
rounding the pile group in a manner similar to that described above. The design value of the
uplift load combined with the uplift force from buoyancy on the underside of the soil block,
Vdstd, are resisted by the design values of the friction on the vertical outer surfaces of the
block, Td, and the stabilizing forces, Gstbd, of the mass of soil composing the block, the pile
cap, or other substructures supported by the piles, and the weight of any soil overburden
above these structures. The resistances of the piles to pull-out are not included in the stabi-
lizing forces but are considered separately since they provide no resistance if failure is by
lifting of the mass of soil.
cu
Qu(2LH2BH )cu W
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
311
Block of soil
lifted by piles
B×L
H
Figure 6.7 Uplift of group of piles in coarse-grained soils.
Because buoyancy is a destabilizing factor, EC7 (Clause 2.4.7.4) requires verification of
stability by the UPL criteria as given by the equation:
(6.3a)
where 
(6.4)
and 
Vdstd  design value of the permanent destabilizing vertical action on the substructure
Gstbd  design value of the permanent stabilizing vertical actions
Gdstd  design value of the permanent destabilizing actions
Qdstd  design values of the variable actions
Rd  any additional resistance to uplift
Rd  considered as a permanent vertical action.
The partial factors for actions for the ultimate limit state (UPL) verification are set out in
Annex A of EC7 as shown in Table 6.1. For verification of the uplift resistances of the soil
surrounding the block, and of the pull-out resistances of the piles in the group, where
derived by calculations using soil parameters the partial factors shown in Table 6.2 are used.
6.2.3 Piles with base enlargements
When bored piles are constructed in clay soils, base enlargements can be formed to anchor
the piles against uplift. The enlargements are made by the belling tools described in
Vdstd Gdstd Qdstd
Vdstd  Gstbd Rd
312
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Table 6.1 Partial factors for actions (f) for uplift
limit-state (UPL) verifications
Action
Symbol
Value
Permanent
Unfavourablea
Gdst
1.0
Favourableb
Gstb
0.9
Variable
Unfavourablea
Qdst
1.5
Notes
a denotes destabilizing.
b denotes stabilizing.
Table 6.2 Partial factors for soil parameters and
resistances
Soil parameter
Symbol
Values
Angle of shearing resistancea

1.25
Effective cohesion
c
1.25
Undrained shear strength
cu
1.40
Tensile pile resistance
st
1.40
Anchorage resistance
a
1.40
Note
a This value is applied to tan .
The factors in Tables 6.1 and 6.2 may be modified when
the British National Annex is published.
Section 3.3.1. Enlargements cannot be formed in coarse soils unless the borehole is drilled
with the support of a bentonite slurry. The size and stability of an enlargement made in this
way is problematical. Full-scale loading tests are essential to prove the reliability of the ben-
tonite method for any particular site. Reliable predictions cannot be made of the size and
shape of base enlargements formed by hammering out a bulb of concrete at the bottom of a
driven and cast in-situ pile as described in Section 2.3.2. End enlargements formed on pre-
cast concrete or steel piles, although providing a substantial increase in compressive resist-
ance when driven to a dense or hard stratum, do not offer much uplift resistance since a gap
of loosened soil is formed around the shaft as the pile is driven down.
In the case of bored piles in fine-grained soils installed using belling tools, resistance to
uplift loading provided by the straight-sided portion of the shaft is calculated over the depth
H in Figure 6.8 minus the overall depth of the under-ream. Failure under short-term loading
takes place in undrained shear on the pile to clay interface. The mobilized resistance should
take into account the effects of installation as described in Section 4.2.3. Uplift resistance
of the projecting portion of the enlarged base is assumed to be provided by compression
resistance of the soil overburden.
Resistance to long-term uplift loading on piles in fine-grained soils is calculated by effec-
tive stress methods as described for clayey sands in the following paragraphs.
Meyerhof and Adams(6.2) investigated the uplift resistance of a circular plate embedded in
a partly clayey 
soil and established the equation
(6.5)
where Qu is the uplift resistance of the plate, B is the diameter of the plate, H is the height
of the block of soil lifted by the pile (Figure 6.9), c is the cohesive strength of the soil, s is
a shape factor (see below),  is the density of the soil (the submerged density being taken
below groundwater level), D is the depth of the plate, Ku is a coefficient obtained from
Figure 6.9,  is the angle of shearing resistance of the soil, and W is the weight of the soil
resisting uplift by the plate.
Qu  cBH s  1
2     B(2DH) HKu tan  W
(c)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
313
b
B
H
Qu
Figure 6.8 Uplift of single pile with base enlargement in fine-grained soil (  0).
If equation 6.5 is adapted to a pile with an enlarged base the weight of the pile is taken in
conjunction with the weight of the soil when calculating W.
It will be noted that for deeply embedded plates or pile enlargements, H does not extend
up to ground level and its value can be obtained from tests made by Meyerhof which gave
the following results:
The shape factor s for deep foundations (including piles) is equal to 1mH/B, where m
depends on the angle of shearing resistance  of the soil. Meyerhof’s values of m and the
maximum permissible values of the shape factor are as follows:
The value of Qu calculated from equation 6.5 must not exceed the combined resistance of
the enlarged base (considered as a buried deep foundation) and the pile shaft friction. These
components are calculated as described in Chapter 4.

20
25
30
35
40
45
48
m
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.50
0.60
max. s
1.12
1.30
1.60
2.25
3.45
5.50
7.60

20
25
30
35
40
45
48
H/B
2.5
3
4
5
7
9
11
314
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Ku
f
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.6
0.8
1.0
B
Anchor plate
c
Qu
Po
D
H
Soil cylinder of
weight W resisting
uplift by anchor plate
W
Figure 6.9 Uplift of circular plate in partly clayey (c  ) or sandy (c  0) soil (after Meyerhof and
Adams(6.2)).
The shaft length is taken as the overall depth of the pile, from which the depth of the
enlargement and any allowance made for the shrinkage of the soil away from the pile at the
ground surface are deducted. Where piles in clay have to carry long-term sustained uplift
loading, and the ratio of the depth of these piles to the width of the enlarged base is less
than 5, the uplift resistance, as calculated by equation 6.5 or the methods in Chapter 4,
should be reduced by one-half.
Where piles with base enlargements are installed in groups the uplift resistance of the
group can be calculated as described in Section 5.2.1.
6.2.4 Anchoring piles to rock
Rock anchors are provided for tension piles when the depth of soil overburden is insufficient
to develop the required uplift resistance on the pile in shaft friction. In weak rocks such as
chalk or marl it is possible to drive piles into the rock, or to drill holes for bored piles so that
the frictional resistance can be obtained on the pile shaft at its contact surface with the rock.
However, driving piles into a strong rock achieves only a small penetration and so shatters
the rock that no worthwhile resistance can be obtained. The cost of drilling into a strong rock
to form a bored pile is not usually economical compared with that of drilling smaller and
deeper holes for anchors as described below, although drilling-in large-diameter piles to
carry ship berthing forces in marine structures is sometimes practised (see Section 8.2).
Anchorages in rock are formed after driving an open-ended tubular pile to seat the toe of
the pile into the rock surface. The pile must not be driven too hard at this stage as otherwise
the toe will buckle, thus preventing the entry of the cleaning-out tools and the anchor drilling
assembly. The soil plug within the pile is removed by baling, washing or ‘airlifting’. If a
bored pile is to be anchored, the borehole casing is drilled below rock level to seal off the
overburden. All the soil within the piling tube is cleaned out, and drilling pipes with
centralizers are lowered down to the rock level. The anchor hole is then drilled to the required
depth. The cuttings washed out of the hole are removed by reverse circulation up the drilling
pipe or through a conductor tube up to the surface. The anchor, which can consist of a high-
tensile steel bar or a stranded cable, is fed down the hole. A small-bore nylon tube is taped to
the anchor and used to inject the grout at the bottom of the drilling hole (Figure 6.10). At this
level the bar or cable is provided with a compression fitting to ensure that the full bonded
length of the anchor acts in resisting uplift. Stranded cables are parted (after removing the
sheath) and the strands are degreased over the lower part which is bonded to the grout.
Grout is injected through the nylon tube to fill the annulus completely, and it is also
allowed to fill the piling tube to the required level. Where the anchors are stressed, the bar
or cable is carried up to the top of the pile or pile cap to which the stress from the anchor
is transferred by a stressing head and jack. The anchor is greased and sheathed in a plastic
tube supplemented by wrapping with waterproof tape to protect the unbonded length from
corrosion. The space surrounding the sheathed length can be filled with grout or concrete,
or left as a void. The latter is usually required in the case of piles in marine structures to
allow them to flex under lateral loading.
Unstressed or ‘dead’ anchors can consist of steel tubes installed by drilling them down
into rock. On reaching the required depth, grout is pumped down the drilling pipe where it
emerges at the drilling bit and fills the annulus between the anchor tube and the rock. A seal-
ing plate prevents the grout from entering the space between the anchor tube and the drilling
pipe, as shown in Figure 6.11. The grout is allowed to fill the pile to the height necessary to
cover the top of the anchor tube, so as to protect it from corrosion and to serve as the
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
315
medium transferring the uplift load from the pile on to the anchor. Where large uplift loads
are carried, the transfer of load is effected by welding a mild steel strip on to the interior sur-
face of the pile and the exterior of the anchor tube to act as a shear key, as described in the
following section. The drilling bit is left in place at the bottom of the tube where it acts as a
compression fitting, but the drilling rods are disconnected at a special coupling.
6.2.5 The uplift resistance of drilled-in rock anchors
The resistance to pull-out of anchors drilled and grouted into rock depends on five factors,
each of which must be separately evaluated. They are as follows:
(1) The safe working stress on the steel forming the anchor
316
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Locking nut
Pocket filled
with concrete
Dock floor slab
M.S. plate welded to pile
to transfer compressive loading
Steel tubular pile
Flexible p.v.c. sheath
High-tensile steel tendon
wrapped by tape (bond breaker)
Top of weathered rock
Seal
Grout plug
Top of hard rock
Open drill hole
Cement grout
Anchor tendon unwrapped
Compression fitting
Bottom of grouting pipe
Bond
length
Weathered rock plug
removed by airlift
or baling
Soil overburden
Encapsulation
length
20 mm grout
injection pipe
Figure 6.10 Stressed bar tendon in steel tubular pile supporting dock floor.
(2) The allowable bond stress between the anchor and the grout
(3) The allowable bond stress between the grout and the rock
(4) The dead weight of the mass of rock and any overlying soil which is lifted by the anchor,
if prior failure does not occur due to the preceding three factors and
(5) The dead weight of the mass of rock and any soil overburden which is lifted by a group
of closely spaced anchors.
The allowable bond stress between the anchor and the grout depends on the compressive
strength of the grout, the amount of keying or roughening given to the steel surface, the
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
317
Drilling pipe removed
Steel tubular pile
Grout plug
Sea bed
Spiral shear connector
(12 mm M.S.bar)
Shear connectors
51 mm (2") I.D
grout injection pipe
Grout
Open drill
hole
Sealing plate
311 mm (12¼") diameter
expendable
drilling bit
Top of hard
rock
Spacer
244.5 mm(9   ")O.D.
anchor tube
8
5
Figure 6.11 ‘Dead’ anchor in raking steel tubular pile for mooring dolphin.
diameter of the anchor and the influence of the bottom compression fitting in short anchors.
The anchor diameter is of significance since with large-diameter high-capacity anchors there
is an appreciable diminution of diameter caused by the inward radial strain that occurs under
the tensile load. This creates a tendency to weaken the bond between the steel and the grout.
Specifications for anchorage materials and grouting cements and recommendations
for the bond strength at the grout to tendon interface are given in British Standard 8081,
Code of Practice for Ground Anchors. This code provides a wealth of useful and practical
information on the design, installation, and testing of anchors in soils and rock. The code
recommendations for ultimate bond strength are
Plain bar
not greater than 1 N/mm2
Clean strand or deformed bar not greater than 2 N/mm2
Locally noded strand
not greater than 3 N/mm2
Mixes of pumpable normal Portland cement grout have compressive strengths in the
range of 14 to 21 N/mm2 at 3 days. Special grouts are formulated for injection into the
annulus between an anchor and a tubular pile or between a pile and a surrounding sleeve.
The grouts incorporate plasticizers, expanding agents and fibrous bonding materials. By
adopting a water/cement ratio of about 0.5 compressive strengths of the order of 24 N/mm2
are attainable at 3 days. Alternatively for marine work a mix consisting of 100 parts of API
Oilwell B cement to 34 parts of seawater will develop a characteristic cube strength of about
22 N/mm2 at 3 days. However, when such special grouts are used to transfer the load
between large-diameter piles and a surrounding sleeve, correspondingly high bond stresses
cannot be achieved. This is because of the shrinkage of the grout in the relatively wide annu-
lus and the diminution in the diameter of the inner member due to the inward radial strain
when under tensile load.
The transfer of load from a pile to the sleeve can be effected wholly through shear keys
formed on the inner surface of the sleeve, and outer surface of the pile, and these should be
in the form of beads of weld metal or welded-on steel strips.
The ultimate grout to steel bond strength on the surface of tubular piles on pile sleeves
either with or without mechanical shear connectors can be calculated by an equation
recommended by the UK Department of Energy(6.3) as follows:
(6.6)
where fbuc  characteristic bond strength in N/mm2
fcu  characteristic grout compressive strength in N/mm2
K  stiffness factor (see below)
CL  coefficient for grout length to pile diameter ratio
Cs  surface condition factor
h  minimum shear connector outstand in mm
s  nominal shear connector spacing in mm
The stiffness factor is given by
(6.7)
K  1
m
D
t 
1
g 	
D
t  p 
D
t  s
1
fbucK·CL(9Cs1100h/s)  ( fcu)0.5
318
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
where m is the modular ratio of steel to grout (take conservatively as 18 in absence of other data
for long term, i.e. 28 days or more), D is the outside diameter, t is the wall thickness. The
suffixes g, p, and s refer to the grout, pile and sleeve respectively.
The basis of equation 6.6 was a research programme described in references 6.4 (a) to (c).
This covered a limited range of geometry of the pile connections. For this reason the
Department of Energy have applied limits to the values of CL as follows: 
L/Dp
CL
2
1.0
4
0.9
8
0.8
12
0.7
Where L is the nominal grouted connection length, referred to in EC7 (Section 8) as the
tendon bond length. Obtain intermediate values for L/Dp
12 by linear interpolation.
The surface condition factor Cs should be taken according to the following:
(i) If shear connectors are present and satisfy requirement h/s0.005 take Cs as 1.0.
(ii) For plain pipe connections and for connections with shear connectors but with
h/s
0.005, in the absence of test data take Cs  0.6.
The values in (i) and (ii) refer to shotblasted or lightly rusted surface conditions. Other
conditions (e.g. painted surfaces) should receive special consideration.
Equation 6.6 should be applied only to connections which satisfy the geometrical limits
given below, and where mechanical shear connectors are used they are present both on pile and
sleeve surfaces in contact with grout; the connectors are at uniform spacing along the length
of the connection; outstand and spacing of shear connectors on pile and sleeve are the same;
shear connectors on driven piles should cover sufficient length to ensure contact with grout
after driving; shear connector cross-section and welds on each grout/steel interface should be
designed to transmit total load applied to the grouted connection. The geometrical limits are
Sleeve geometry 50  (D/t)s  140
Pile geometry 24  (D/t)p  40
Grout annulus geometry 10 (D/t)g  45
L/Dp 2
Shear connector height ratio 0*h/Dp 0.006
Shear connector spacing ratio 0*Dp/s8
Shear connector ratio 0*h/s0.04
Shear connector shape factor 1.5w/h3 (consistent with welded square bar or
hemispherical weldbeads)
where w is the nominal width of the shear connector including welds.
The American Petroleum Institute recommendations(3.5) are much simpler. The equations are:
For operating and environmental conditions combined with dead loads and maximum or
minimum live loads appropriate to normal operations of the platform:
(6.8)
fba  0.138  0.5fcu h
s (MN/m2)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
319
For design environmental conditions with dead loads and maximum or minimum live loads
appropriate for combining with extreme conditions:
(6.9)
where fba is the allowable axial load transfer strength (steel to grout bond strength) and other
terms are as previously defined.
It is evident from equations 6.8 and 6.9 that the first term represents the bond strength
value for the plain pipe. The equations are again subject to limitations as follows:
Grout compression strength to be greater than 17.25 N/mm2 but less than 110 N/mm2
Ratio Dp/tp not more than 40
Ratio Ds/ts not more than 80
Ratio Dg/tg greater than 7, not more than 45
Ratio Dp/s greater than 2.5, not more than 8
Ratio h/s not greater than 0.10
Ratio w/h greater than 1.5, not less than 3
Product fcuh/s equal to or not less than 5.5 MN/m2
The allowable bond stress between grout and rock depends on the compressive strength
of the intact rock, the size and spacing of joints and fissures in the rock, the keying of the
rock effected by the drilling bit, and the cleanliness of the rock surface obtained by the
flushing water. The size of the drill hole and the size of the annular space between the anchor
and the wall of the hole are also important. Usually the diameter of the drill hole is taken as
1.7 to 2.5 times the diameter of the anchor. The lower end of the range is used in a strong
massive rock and the higher end in a weak fractured rock. A large-diameter hole or a thick
annulus gives rise to problems due to the shrinkage of the grout and the consequent
weakening of the grout-to-rock bond. These difficulties can be overcome to some extent by
using a special bonding grout as described above. Also, by using a compression fitting at the
bottom of the anchor, part of the grout column is put in compression. The smaller the annu-
lus and the shorter the bonded length, the higher is the compressive stress on the grout and
hence its ability to lock into the surrounding rock. The value of the bond between grout and
rock will be small if the rock softens to a slurry under the action of drilling and flushing.
This occurs with chalk, weathered marl, and weathered clayey shales. Some observed values
of bond stress at failure for drill holes of up to 75 mm in diameter are given in Table 6.3.
If the bond stress between the grout and the rock is a critical factor in designing the
anchors, the allowable value should be obtained by increasing the length of the anchor rather
than by increasing the diameter of the drill hole, for the reasons already stated. However, in
certain conditions it is possible that the bond stress will not be reduced in direct proportion
to the increase in bond length. This is because of the possibility of progressive failure in a
hard rock. The maximum stretch in the anchor occurs at the top of the bonded length, and
this may cause local bond failure with the rock or the pulling out of a small cone of rock
(Figure 6.12a). Progressive failure then extends down to the bottom of the anchor. By
limiting the bond length and sheathing the upper part of the anchor, referred to in EC7
(Section 8) as the tendon free length, within the rock (Figure 6.12b), the pulling-out of a
cone of rock is prevented and the whole column of grout is compressed and acts in bond
resistance with the rock.
fba  0.184 0.67fcu h
s (MN/m2)
320
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
The pull-out resistance of the mass of rock (as shown in Figure 6.12b) is the final criterion
of the performance of an individual anchor. The actual shape of the mass of rock lifted (if
failure does not occur due to the failure of the steel-to-grout or rock-to-grout bond) depends
on the degree of jointing and fissuring of the rock and the inclination of the bedding planes.
Various forms of failure are sketched in Figure 6.13. A cone with a half angle of 30	 gives
a conservative value for the pull-out resistance and represents conditions for a heavily
jointed or shattered rock. Wyllie(4.39) suggests that the base of the cone should be taken at
the mid-point of the bonded length (Figure 6.12b), but this arrangement would not apply for
the case of a compression fitting at the bottom of the anchor. Because shear at the interface
between the surface of the cone and the surrounding rock is neglected, a safety factor of
unity can be taken on the weight of the rock cone, where the rock is bedded horizontally or
at moderate angles from the vertical (Figure 6.13a). Where the bedding planes or other joint
systems are steeply inclined, as shown in Figure 6.13b to d, either an increased factor should
be allowed, or an attempt should be made to calculate the uplift resistance of the rock mass
by rock mechanics’ principles. The submerged weight should be taken for rock below
groundwater level or below the sea. The uplift resistance of the cylinder or cone of soil
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
321
Table 6.3 Examples of bond stress between grout and rock
Type of rock
Bond stress between 
Reference
grout and rock at 
failure N/mm2
Chalk (Grade I)
0.21
Littlejohn(6.5)
Chalk (Grade III)
0.80
Littlejohn(6.5)
Keuper Marl (Zones I and II)
0.17–0.25
Littlejohn(6.5)
Chalk
1.0
Hutchinson(6.6)
Weathered shaley slate
0.27
Unpublished(6.7)
Hard shaley slate
1.0–1.7
Unpublished(6.7)
Billings shale (Ottawa)
3.0
Freeman et al.(6.8)
Sandstone
0.6
Unpublished(6.7)
Initial bonded length
Pull out
Cone of failure
of rock in uplift
position suggested
by Wyllie
30° half angle
of cone
Bonded
length (L)
Sheathed length
L/2
Cone of rock
lifts out
Maximum stress
in anchor
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.12 Pull-out of cone of rock (a) Fully bonded anchor (b) Upper part sheathed, lower part
bonded.
322
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.13 Pull-out failure in rock anchors (a) Horizontally bedded rock (thinly bedded) (b) Steeply
inclined bedding planes with anchor raked in direction of bedding joints (c) Horizontally
bedded rock (d) Alternating thinly and thickly bedded rocks.
Bar or cable anchor
in rock
Uplift cone
in rock
Position of cone
suggested by Wyllie
Rock head
L/2
30°
B
H
Ground level
Anchor pile
B
H
30°
L
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14 Approximate method of calculating ultimate uplift resistance of rock anchors with soil
overburden (a) Clay overburden (b) Granular soil overburden.
overburden above the rock cone can be calculated as described in Section 6.2.3. The
dimensions B and H in equations 6.3 and 6.5 are as shown in Figure 6.14. Shaft friction on
the pile does not operate to resist uplift for this mode of failure. The mode of failure of a
group of anchors, assuming no failure occurs in the bond between grout and steel or grout
and rock, is shown in Figure 6.15. The anchors can be splayed out as shown in Figure 6.16
to increase the volume of rock bounded by the group.
The calculation of the volume of rock Vc in a single cone with a half-angle of 30	 at various
angles of inclination  to a horizontal rock surface can be performed with the aid of the curve
for Vc/L3 in Figure 6.17a. The effect of overlapping cones of rock in groups of vertical or
raking anchors can be calculated by reference to Figures 6.17a and b. These charts enable the
overlapping volumes Vm and Vn to be calculated for a group of anchors arranged on a
rectangular grid. They are not applicable to a diagonal (i.e. ‘staggered’) pattern. All the
anchors in the group are assumed to be arranged at the same angle of inclination to the hor-
izontal and the charts are based on a cone with a 30	 half-angle. The charts are not valid if
the sum of (P/n)2 and (S/m)2 is less than 4 when composite overlapping occurs. In such a case
the total volume acting against uplift should be estimated from the geometry of the system.
Because of the various uncertainties in the design of rock anchors as described above, it
is evident that it is desirable to adopt stressed anchors with every anchor individually
stressed and hence checked for pull-out resistance at a proof load of 1.5 times the working
load. However, it should be noted that the technique of stressing anchors by jacking against
the reaction provided by the pile does not check the pull-out resistance of the cone of rock:
this is clear from Figure 6.10. The resistance offered by the mass of rock can be tested only
by providing a reaction beam with bearers sited beyond the influence of the conjectural rock
cone. Tests of this description are very expensive to perform and it is usual to avoid them by
adopting conservative assumptions for the dimensions of the cone, and applying a safety
factor to the calculated weight if required.
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
323
Anchors
Shaded area
shows block of
rock resisting
uplift
Top of rock
30˚
30˚
Figure 6.15 Failure condition at group of anchors in rock.
Rockhead
Pile
Drilled
anchor
Figure 6.16 Splaying anchors in group to increase uplift resistance.
In addition to dealing with the use of anchorages for restraining uplift on structures, EC7
(Section 8) makes recommendations covering anchorages for retaining walls, slopes, cuttings
and tunnels. Only their applications relevant to uplift on structures will be described below.
EC7 requires tension piles, where used as anchors, to be designed as described for compression
piles in Section 7 of the Code. In the case of anchorages formed by grouting tendons into
drilled holes, EC7 requires their design and installation to be in accordance with BS EN
1537: 1999, Ground anchors, which could eventually supersede the more comprehensive
BS 8081 referred to above.
BS EN 1537 defines temporary anchors as those with a design life of less than two years,
and permanent anchors as those with a design life of two years or more. The ultimate limit-
states to be considered are the same as those listed at the beginning of this section. In addition,
BS EC7 and EN 1537 require design measures against the following:
(1) Structural failure of the anchor head
(2) Distortion or corrosion of the anchor head
324
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
3.2
3.0
2.8
L
2.6
2.4
2.2
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.8
(a)
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
(Vertical)
Angle of inclination θ of anchor to
horizontal in degrees
Volume of cone
Vc
Overlap
volume DV
u
30° 30°
Anchor
n
m/L
n/L
Vc/L3
m/L and n/L
Vc/L3
m
Figure 6.17 (a) Chart for calculating volumes of single or over-lapping cones with vertical or inclined axes.
(3) loss of anchorage force by excessive displacement of the anchor head or by creep and
relaxation
(4) failure or excessive distortion on parts of the structure due to the applied anchorage
force and
(5) interaction of groups of anchorages with the ground and adjoining structures.
BS EN 1537 requires construction steel in anchors to be in accordance with EC2 and EC3.
Prestressing steel used for tendons is to comply with pr EN 10138, Design of prestressing
steel, and EC2 part 1–5, Use of unbonded and external prestressing tendons. Cement grouts
are to comply with BS EN 445, 446 and 447; resin grouts may be used subject to appropri-
ate tests for the particular application. Admixtures and inert fillers are permitted to be
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
325
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.6
1.6
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.2
0
0
0.2
Surface of rock
Volume of cone
for single
anchor 5 Vc
Overlap volume Vm
M number of ranks
Anchor positions
N number of lines
Overlap volume
Vn
Total volume enclosed by group of overlapping cones
p
p
p
S
S
S
Anchors
5V5Vc [MN –N(M–1)
]
Vm
Vc
Vn
Vc
–M(N–1)
S
m
P
n
P
L
S
L
L
m
L
n
S
m
5
5
×
×
P/n & Vm
        Vc
 Vm
Vc
&
P
n
&
         Vn
        Vc
S/m & 
 Vn
Vc
(b)
Figure 6.17 (b) Charts for calculating total volume of rock enclosed by groups of anchors arranged
on rectangular grid pattern.
used in grout mixes provided that they do not contain materials liable to cause corrosion of
the tendons. Resin grouts are permitted.
BS EN 1537 gives detailed consideration to the selection, design, fabrication, and installa-
tion of plastics sheathing used for corrosion protection. Temporary anchors are not required
to be sheathed provided that they have protection from corrosion suitable for their design life.
Drilling for anchorages is required to be within a deviation limit of not more than 1/30 of
the anchor length. The procedure for making permeability tests in the drilled holes using
water and grout to investigate the possibility of grout loss is described.
BS EN 1537 defines three types of test on anchorages:
(1) Investigation test
(2) Suitability test
(3) Acceptance test
The investigation test is made to establish the ultimate resistance of the anchor at the
grout/ground interface and to determine the characteristics of the anchorage in the working
load range. The suitability test is made to confirm that a particular anchorage system will be
adequate for the ground conditions on the project site. In the case of permanent anchorages,
the test is made with sheathed tendons and is required to establish acceptable limits of creep
or load loss at the proof and lock-off loads. In cases where no investigation tests are made
the suitability test is undertaken to demonstrate anchorage characteristics and to provide
criteria for acceptance creep and load loss.
The acceptance test is made at the project construction stage on each working anchor with
the following requirements:
(1) To demonstrate that the proof load can be sustained
(2) To determine the apparent tension free length
(3) To ensure that the lock-off load is at the design load level, excluding friction and
(4) To determine creep or load loss characteristics at the serviceability limit-state where
necessary.
The acceptance tests are to be made after lock-off and before the anchorage becomes
operational.
BS EN 1537 gives detailed information on the procedure for conducting anchorage tests,
the interpretation of the results, monitoring of behaviour, and record keeping. Items such as
health and safety, and environmental matters including air and water pollution, noise and
vibration are dealt with.
For the purpose of design verification characteristic values of anchorage resistance Rak
obtained from pull-out tests are divided by the partial factor a to determine the design
resistance Rad.
Rad  Rad /a
(6.10)
values of a related to the Ground Resistance R series (see Section 4.1.4) are shown in
Table 6.4. Correlation factors can be applied to obtain Rad from suitability tests. Figures for
these factors are not given in Annex A of EC7, but it is specified that at least three tests
should be made for each distinct condition of ground and structure.
326
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Where Rad is derived by calculation, the design approach DAI as described in Section
4.1.4 is to be used, with verification of stability against uplift of the structure by application
of the UPL partial factors as described in Section 6.2.2 for friction piles.
To verify the serviceability limit-state of a structure restrained against uplift by
prestressed anchorages, the tendons are regarded as elastic prestressed springs. The analysis
is required to consider the most adverse combinations of minimum and maximum
anchorage stiffness, and minimum and maximum prestress. To prevent damaging effects of
interaction between close-spaced groups of anchors EC7 and BS EN 1537 require tendons to
be spaced at least 1.5 m apart.
6.3 Single vertical piles subjected to lateral loads
The ultimate resistance of a vertical pile to a lateral load and the deflection of the pile as the
load builds up to its ultimate value are complex matters involving the interaction between a
semi-rigid structural element and the soil, which deforms partly elastically and partly
plastically. Taking the case of a vertical pile unrestrained at the head, the lateral loading on
the pile head is initially carried by the soil close to the ground surface. At a low loading the
soil compresses elastically but the movement is sufficient to transfer some pressure from the
pile to the soil at a greater depth. At a further stage of loading the soil yields plastically and
transfers its load to greater depths. A short rigid pile unrestrained at the top and having a
length to width ratio of less than 10 to 12 (Figure 6.18a) tends to rotate, and passive resistance
develops above the toe on the opposite face to add to the resistance of the soil near the ground
surface. Eventually the rigid pile will fail by rotation when the passive resistance of the soil
at the head and toe are exceeded. The short rigid pile restrained at the head by a cap or brac-
ing will fail by translation in a similar manner to an anchor block which fails to restrain the
movement of a retaining wall transmitted through a horizontal tied rod (Figure 6.18b).
The failure mechanism of an infinitely long pile is different. The passive resistance of the
lower part of the pile is infinite, and thus rotation of the pile cannot occur, the lower part
remaining vertical while the upper part deforms to a shape shown in Figure 6.19a. Failure
takes place when the pile fractures at the point of maximum bending moment, and for the
purpose of analysis a plastic hinge capable of transmitting shear is assumed to develop at
the point of fracture. In the case of a long pile restrained at the head, high bending stresses
develop at the point of restraint, for example, just beneath the pile cap, and the pile may
fracture at this point (Figure 6.19b).
The pile head may move horizontally over an appreciable distance before rotation or
failure of the pile occurs, to such an extent that the movement of the structure supported by
the pile or pile group exceeds tolerable limits. Therefore, having calculated the ultimate load
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
327
Table 6.4 Partial resistance factors (a)
for prestressed anchorages
Resistance
Symbol
Set
R1
R4
Temporary
at
1.1
1.1
Permanent
ap
1.1
1.1
and divided it by the appropriate safety factor, it is still necessary to check that the
permissible deflection of the pile is not exceeded.
There are many inter-related factors which govern the behaviour of laterally loaded piles.
The dominant one is the pile stiffness, which influences the deflection and determines
whether the failure mechanism is one of the rotation of a short rigid element, or is due to
flexure followed by the failure in bending of a long pile. The type of loading, whether
sustained (as in the case of earth pressure transmitted by a retaining wall) or alternating (say,
from reciprocating machinery) or pulsating (as from the traffic loading on a bridge pier),
influences the degree of yielding of the soil. External influences such as scouring around
piles at sea-bed level, or the seasonal shrinkage of clay soils away from the upper part of the
pile shaft, affect the resistance of the soil at a shallow depth.
Methods of calculating ultimate resistance and deflection under lateral loads are presented
in the following sections of this chapter. No attempt is made to give their complete theoret-
ical basis. Various simplifications have been necessary in order to provide simple solutions
to complex problems of soil–structure interaction, and the limitations of the methods are
stated where these are particularly relevant. Most practical calculations are processes of trial
328
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Fracture
L
L
He
H
Fracture
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.19 Long vertical pile under horizontal load (a) Free head (b) Fixed head.
Load H
e
L
Centre of
rotation
H
L
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.18 Short vertical pile under horizontal load.
and adjustment, starting with a very simple approach to obtain an approximate measure of
the required stiffness, and embedment depth of the pile. The process can then be elaborated
to some degree to narrow the margin of error, and to provide the essential data for calculat-
ing bending moments, shearing forces and deflections at the working load. Very elaborate
calculation processes are not justified, because of the non-homogeneity of most natural soil
deposits and the disturbance to the soil caused by installing piles. None of these significant
factors can be reproduced in their entirety by the calculation methods.
EC7, Section 7.7 requires the design of transversely loaded piles to be consistent with the
design rules previously described in Chapter 4 for piles under compression loading. Failure
mechanisms to be considered are failure of a short rigid pile by rotation or translation, and
failure of a long slender pile in bending with local fracture and displacement of the soil near
the pile head.
Pile load tests, when undertaken as a means of determining the transverse resistance, need
not necessarily be taken to the stage of failure, but the magnitude and line of action of the
test load should conform to the design requirements. The effects of interaction between piles
in groups and fixity at the pile head are required to be considered.
Where transverse resistance is determined by calculation, the method based on the
concept of a modulus of horizontal subgrade reaction as described in Section 6.3.1 is per-
mitted. The structural rigidity of the connection of the piles to the pile cap or substructure
is to be considered as well as the effects of load reversals and cyclic loading.
For any important foundation structure which has to carry high or sustained lateral loading,
it is advisable to make field loading tests on trial piles having at least three different shaft
lengths, in order to assess the effects of embedment depth and structural stiffness. For less
important structures, or where there is previous experience of pile behaviour to guide the
engineer, it may be sufficient to make lateral loading tests on pairs of working piles by jack-
ing or pulling them apart. These tests are rapid and economical to perform (see Section
11.4.4) and provide a reliable check that the design requirements have been met.
6.3.1 Calculating the ultimate resistance of short rigid 
piles to lateral loads
The first step is to determine whether the pile will behave as a short rigid unit or as an
infinitely long flexible member. This is done by calculating the stiffness factors R and T for
the particular combination of pile and soil. The stiffness factors are governed by the stiffness
(EI value) of the pile and the compressibility of the soil. The latter is expressed in terms of
a ‘soil modulus’, which is not constant for any soil type but depends on the width of the pile
B and the depth of the particular loaded area of soil being considered. The soil modulus k
has been related to Terzaghi’s concept of a modulus of horizontal subgrade reaction(6.9). In
the case of a stiff over-consolidated clay, the soil modulus is generally assumed to be
constant with depth. For this case
(6.11)
For short rigid piles it is sufficient to take k in the above equation as equal to the Terzaghi
modulus k1, as obtained from load/deflection measurements on a 305 mm square plate. It is
related to the undrained shearing strength of the clay, as shown in Table 6.5.
stiffness factor R 
4 EI
kB (in units of length)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
329
For most normally consolidated clays and for granular soils the soil modulus is assumed
to increase linearly with depth, for which
(6.12)
where soil modulus K  nhx/B
(6.13)
Values of the coefficient of modulus variation nh were obtained directly from lateral loading
tests on instrumented piles in submerged sand at Mustang Island, Texas. The tests were made
for both static and cyclic loading conditions and the values obtained, as quoted by Reese
et al.(6.10), were considerably higher than those of Terzaghi(6.9). The investigators recommend
that the Mustang Island values should be used for pile design and these are shown together
with the Terzaghi values in Figure 6.20.
Other observed values of nh are as follows:
Soft normally-consolidated clays: 350 to 700 kN/m3
Soft organic silts: 150 kN/m3
Having calculated the stiffness factors R or T, the criteria for behaviour as a short rigid
pile or as a long elastic pile are related to the embedded length L as follows: 
Brinch Hansen’s method(6.12) can be used to calculate the ultimate lateral resistance of
short rigid piles. The method is a simple one which can be applied both to uniform and
layered soils. It can also be applied to longer semi-rigid piles to obtain a first approximation
of the required stiffness and embedment length to meet the design requirements before
undertaking the more rigorous methods of analysis for long slender piles described in
Sections 6.3.4 and 6.3.5. The resistance of the rigid unit to rotation about point X in
Figure 6.21a is given by the sum of the moments of the soil resistance above and below this
point. The passive resistance diagram is divided into a convenient number n of horizontal
elements of depth L/n. The unit passive resistance of an element at a depth z below the
Pile type
Soil modulus
Linearly increasing
Constant
Rigid (free head)
L  2T
L  2R
Elastic (free head)
L  4T
L  3.5R
stiffness factor T 
5 EI
nh (in units of length)
330
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Table 6.5 Relationship of modulus of subgrade reaction (k1) to undrained
shearing strength of stiff over-consolidated clay 
Consistency
Firm to stiff
Stiff to very stiff
Hard
Undrained shear strength (cu) kN/m2
50–100
100–200
200
Range of k1 MN/m3
15–30
30–60
60
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Relative density DR (%)
Terzaghi
Coefficient of subgrade modulus variation nh (MN/m3)
Reese et al.
Dense
Very
dense
Medium
dense
Loose
Very
loose
Figure 6.20 Relationship between coefficient of modulus variation and relative density of sands (after
Garassino et al.(6.11)).
Bending
moment
Point of application of equivalent
free-headed load
Fixed head
H
H
Ground
surface
e
L
L/n
x
X
e
Z
B
Point of 
virtual
fixity
Element
Shearing
force
Max.
zf
Pz
e1
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.21 Brinch Hansen’s method for calculating ultimate lateral resistance of short piles (a) Soil
reactions (b) Shearing force diagram (c) Bending moment diagram.
ground surface is then given by
pz  pozKqzcKcz
(6.14)
where poz is the effective overburden pressure at depth z, c is the cohesion of the soil at depth
z, and Kqz and Kcz are the passive pressure coefficients for the frictional and cohesive
components respectively at depth z. Brinch Hansen(6.12) has established values of Kq and Kc
in relation to the depth z and the width of the pile B in the direction of rotation, as shown in
Figure 6.22.
The total passive resistance on each horizontal element is 
and, by taking
moments about the point of application of the horizontal load:
(6.15)
The point of rotation at depth x is correctly chosen when 
, that is, when the passive
resistance of the soil above the point of rotation balances that below it. Point X is thus
determined by a process of trial and adjustment. If the head of the pile carries a moment M
instead of a horizontal force, the moment can be replaced by a horizontal force H at a
distance e above the ground surface where M is equal to H  e.
Where the head of the pile is fixed against rotation, the equivalent height e1 above ground
level of a force H acting on a pile with a free head is given by
(6.16)
e1 
1
2 (e  zf)
M  0
M  
zx
z0pz L
n
 (e  z)B  
zL
zxpz L
n
 (e  z)B
pz  Ln  B
332
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
400
200
100
50
20
10
5
2 0
5
10
15
20
z/B
8.14
13.2
17.6
24.5
35.8
61.4
10.2
118
272
759
0°
5°
10°
15°
20°
25°
30°
35°
40°
45°
0
5
10
15
20
z/B
1
2
5
10
20
60
80
40
Kq
Kc
5°
10°
15°
20°
25°
30°
35°
40°
45°
222
81.4
17.7
35.3
9.91
5.88
3.50
1.93
0.62
f
f
Kq0 for f0°
Figure 6.22 Brinch Hansen’s coefficients Kq and Kc.
where e is the height from the ground surface to the point of application of the load at the
fixed head of the pile (Figure 6.21a), and zf is the depth from the ground surface to the
point of virtual fixity. The depth zf is not known at this stage but for practical design
purposes it can be taken as 1.5 m for a compact granular soil or stiff clay (below the
zone of soil shrinkage in the latter case), and 3 m for a soft clay or silt. The American
Concrete Institute(6.13) recommend that zf should be taken as 1.4R for stiff, over-consoli-
dated clays and 1.8T for normally consolidated clays, granular soils and silt, and peat (see
equations 6.11 and 6.12).
Having obtained the depth to the centre of rotation from equation 6.15, the ultimate lateral
resistance of the pile to the horizontal force Hu can be obtained by taking moments about
the point of rotation, when
(6.17)
The final steps in Brinch Hansen’s method are to construct the shearing force and bending
moment diagrams (Figure 6.21b and c). The ultimate bending moment, which occurs at the
point of zero shear, should not exceed the ultimate moment of resistance Mu of the pile shaft.
The appropriate load factors are applied to the horizontal design force to obtain the ultimate
force Hu.
When applying the method to layered soils, assumptions must be made concerning the
depth z to obtain Kq and Kc for the soft clay layer, but z is measured from the top of the stiff
clay stratum to obtain Kc for this layer, as shown in Figure 6.23.
The undrained shearing strength cu is used in equation 6.14 for short-term loadings such
as wave or ship-berthing forces on a jetty, but the drained effective shearing strength values
(c and ) are used for long-term sustained loadings such as those on retaining walls.
A check should be made to ensure that there is an adequate safety factor for undrained
conditions in the early stages of loading. The step-by-step procedure using the Brinch
Hansen method is illustrated in worked Example 6.4.
Hu(e  x)  
x
0 pz L
nB(x  z)  
xL
x pz L
n  B(z  x)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
333
H
e
Stiff clay
z (for soft clay)
z (for stiff clay)
Soft clay
Figure 6.23 Reactions in layered soil on vertical pile under horizontal load.
6.3.2 Calculating the ultimate resistance of long piles
The passive resistance provided by the soil to the yielding of an infinitely long pile is
infinite. Thus the ultimate lateral load which can be carried by the pile is determined solely
from the ultimate moment of resistance Mu of the pile shaft.
A simple method of calculating the ultimate load, which may be sufficiently accurate
for cases of light loading on short or long piles of small to medium width, for which the
cross-sectional area is governed by considerations of the relatively higher compressive
loading, is to assume an arbitrary depth zf to the point of virtual fixity. Then from
Figure 6.24:
ultimate lateral load on free-headed pile Hu  Mu/(ezf)
(6.18)
ultimate lateral load on fixed-headed pile Hu  2Mu/(ezf)
(6.19)
Arbitrary values for zf which are commonly used are given in the reference to the Brinch
Hansen method.
It has already been stated that vertical piles offer poor resistance to lateral loads. However,
in some circumstances it may be justifiable to add the resistance provided by the passive
resistance of the soil at the end of the pile cap and the friction or cohesion on the embedded
sides of the cap. The pile cap resistance can be taken into account when the external loads
are transient in character, such as wind gusts and traffic loads, but the resulting elastic
deformation of the soil must not be so great as to cause excessive deflection and hence
overstressing of the piles. The design of pile caps to resist lateral loading is discussed in
Section 7.9.
6.3.3 The deflection of vertical piles carrying lateral loads
A simple method which can be used to check that the deflections due to small lateral loads
are within tolerable limits and as an approximate check on the more-rigorous methods
described below, is to assume that the pile is fixed at an arbitrary depth below the ground
surface and then to calculate the deflection as for a simple cantilever either free at the head,
or fixed at the head but with freedom to translate.
334
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Fixed head
Point of virtual
fixity
e
Free head
e
Hu
zf
zf
Hu
Figure 6.24 Piles under horizontal load considered as simple cantilever.
Thus from Figure 6.24
(6.20)
and
(6.21)
where E is the elastic modulus of the material forming the pile shaft, and I is the moment of
inertia of the cross-section of the pile shaft. Depths which may be arbitrarily assumed for zf
are noted in Section 6.3.1.
6.3.4
Elastic analysis of laterally loaded vertical piles
The suggested procedure for using this section and Section 6.3.2 is first to calculate the
ultimate load Hu for a pile of given cross-section (or to determine the required cross-sections
for a given ultimate load) and then to divide Hu by an arbitrary safety factor to obtain
trial working load H. The alternative procedure is to calculate the deflection y0 at the ground
surface for a range of progressively increasing loads H up to the value of Hu. The working load
is then taken as the load at which y0 is within the allowable limits. As a first approximation, Hu
can be obtained by the Brinch Hansen method (Section 6.3.1) or from equations 6.18 and 6.19.
A preliminary indication of the likely order of pile head deflection under this load can be
obtained from equations 6.20 or 6.21 depending on the fixity conditions at the head.
It may be necessary to determine the bending moments, shearing forces, and deformed
shape of a pile over its full depth at a selected working load. These can be obtained for
deflection at head of fixed-headed pile y
H(ezf)3
12EI
deflection at head of free-headed pile y 
H(e  zf)3
3EI
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
335
Pile
Deflection
Slope
Bending
moment
Shearing
force
Soil
reaction
H
Y
s
Mp
M
Figure 6.25 Deflections, slopes, bending moments, shearing forces, and soil reactions for elastic
conditions (after Reese and Matlock(6.14)).
working-load conditions on the assumption that the pile behaves as an elastic beam on a soil
behaving as a series of elastic springs. Calculations for the bending moments, shearing
forces, deflections, and slopes of laterally loaded piles are necessary when considering
their behaviour as energy absorbing members resisting the berthing impact of ships (see
Section 8.1.1), or the wave forces in offshore platform structures (see Section 8.2).
Reese and Matlock(6.14) have established a series of curves for normally consolidated and
cohesion-less soils for which the elastic modulus of the soil Es is assumed to increase from zero
at the ground surface in direct proportion to the depth. The deformed shape of the pile and the
corresponding bending moments, shearing forces, and soil reactions are shown in Figure 6.25.
Coefficients for obtaining these values are shown for a lateral load H on a free pile head in
Figure 6.26a to e, and for a moment applied to a pile head in Figure 6.27a to e. The coefficients
for a fixed pile head are shown in Figure 6.28a to c. For combined lateral loads and applied
moments the basic equations for use in conjunction with Figures 6.26 and 6.27 are as follows:
Deflection y
(6.22)
Slope
(6.23)
Bending moment
(6.24)
Shearing force
(6.25)
Soil reaction
(6.26)
For a fixed pile head the basic equations are as follows:
Deflection
(6.27)
Bending moment
(6.28)
Soil reaction
(6.29)
In equations 6.22 to 6.29, H is the horizontal load applied to the ground surface, T (a stiffness
factor) 
(as equation 6.12), Mt is the moment applied to the head of the pile, Ay
and By are deflection coefficients (Figures 6.26a and 6.27a), As and Bs are slope coefficients
(Figures 6.26b and 6.27b), Am and Bm are bending-moment coefficients (Figures 6.26c and
6.27c), Av and Bv are shearing-force coefficients (Figures 6.26d and 6.27d), Ap and Bp are
soil resistance coefficients (Figures 6.26e and 6.27e), Fy is the deflection coefficient for a
fixed pile head (Figure 6.28a), Fm is the moment coefficient for a fixed pile head (Figure
6.28b), and Fp is the soil resistance coefficient for a fixed pile head (Figure 6.28c).
In Figures 6.26 to 6.28 the above coefficients are related to a depth coefficient Z for var-
ious values of Zmax, where Z is equal to the depth x at any point divided by T (i.e. Z  x/T)
and Zmax is equal to L/T. The use of curves in Figure 6.28 is illustrated in Example 6.6.
The case of a load H applied at a distance e above the ground surface can be simulated by
assuming this to produce a bending moment Mt equal to He, this value of Mt being used
 5EI/nh
 PF  FpH
T
 MF  FmHT
 yF 
FyHT3
EI
 PA  PB 
ApH
T

Bp Mt
T 2
 VA  VB  AvH  BvMt
T
 MA  MB  AmHT  BmMt
 sA  sB  AsHT 2
EI
 BsMtT
EI
 yA  yB 
AyHT 3
EI

ByMtT 2
EI
336
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Deflection coefficient Ay
Moment coefficient Am
Soil resistance coefficient Ap
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
–2.0
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
(e)
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
Depth coefficient Z
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
–3.5
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
Slope coefficient  As
Shear coefficient  Av
–1.5
–1.0
5 &10
5 &10
5 &10
3
4
5
5
4
3
2
3
10
10
–0.5
–0.8
–3.0
–2.0
–1.0
+1.0
+2.0
= 4
0
–0.4
+0.4
+0.8
+1.2
0
0
5 & 10
4
3
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
3
4
5
10
Z max2
H
x
YA
H
x
SA
H
x
VA
H
x
PA
–1.0
+1.0
+2.0
+3.0
+4.0
+5.0
0
–0.2
0
+0.2
+0.4
+0.6
+0.8
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5
4
5 & 10
3
10
x
H
MA
5.0
Figure 6.26 Coeffcients for laterally loaded free-headed piles in soil with linearly increasing modulus
(after Reese and Matlock(6.14)) (a) Coefficients for deflection (b) Coefficients for slope
(c) Coefficients for bending moment (d) Coefficients for shearing force (e) Coefficients
for soil resistance.
Deflection coefficient By
Moment coefficient Bm
Shear coefficient Bv
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
Slope coefficient Bs
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
–2.0
0
–1.0
3
3
3
10
10
4
4
5
4
4
10
10
5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
–2.0
–3.0
–2.0
Soil resistance coefficient Bp
–1.0
+1.0
3
3
4
4
+2.0
0
5 & 10
5
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
+0.2
+0.2
+0.4
+0.6
+0.8
+1.0
0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
+1.0
+2.0
+3.0
+4.0
–3.5
–3.0
–2.5
–2.0
4
10
3
5
10
–1.5
–1.0
–0.5
0
0
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
4, 5 & 10
Mt
x
x
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
yB
Mt
VB
MB
Mt
x
M1
PB
x
x
SB
Mt
10
Figure 6.27 Coefficients for piles with moment at free head in soil with linearly increasing modulus
(after Reese and Matlock(6.14)) (a) Coefficients for deflection (b) Coefficients for slope
(c) Coefficients for bending moment (d) Coefficients for shearing force (e) Coefficients
for soil resistance.
Deflection coefficient Fy
Moment coefficient Fm
Soil resistance coefficient Fp
–0.2
(a)
(b)
(c)
1.0
1.0
10
5
4
4, 5 & 10
3
0
2.0
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
3.0
4.0
5.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
3
4
10
5
0
2.0
3.0
3
4
5
10
4.0
Depth coeffiecient Z
5.0
–1.0
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
+0.2
+0.4
+0.6
4
3
2
5 & 10
+0.8
0
–0.8
–0.6
–0.4
–0.2
0
+0.2
+0.4
+0.2
+0.4
+0.6
+0.8
+1.0 +1.1
2
3
4
5 & 10
0
Z max2
Z max2
Z max2
H
H
x
x
MF
PF
H
x
yf
Figure 6.28 Coefficients for fixed headed piles with lateral load in soil with linearly increasing modulus
(after Reese and Matlock(6.14)) (a) Coefficients for deflection (b) Coefficients for bending
moment (c) Coefficients for soil resistance.
in equations 6.22 to 6.29. The moments Ma produced by load H applied at the soil surface
are added arithmetically to the moments Mb produced by moment Mt applied to the pile at
the ground surface. This yields the relationship between the total moment and the depth
below the soil surface over the embedded length of the pile. The deflection of a pile due to
a lateral load H at some distance above the soil surface is calculated in the same manner.
The deflections of the pile and the corresponding slopes due to the load H at the soil surface
are calculated and added to the values calculated for moment Mt applied to the pile at the
surface. To obtain the deflection at the head of the pile, the deflection as for a free-standing
cantilever fixed at the soil surface is calculated and added to the deflection produced at the
soil surface by load H and moment Mt, together with the deflection corresponding to the cal-
culated slope of the pile at the soil surface. This procedure is illustrated in Example 8.2.
Davisson and Gill(6.15) have analysed the case of elastic piles in an elastic soil of constant
modulus. The bending moments and deflections are related to the stiffness coefficient R
(equation 6.11) but in this case the value of K is taken as Terzaghi’s subgrade modulus k1,
using the values shown in Table 6.5. The dimensionless depth coefficient Z in Figure 6.29 is
equal to x/R. From these curves, deflection and bending moment coefficients are obtained
for free-headed piles carrying a moment at the pile head and zero lateral load (Figure 6.29a)
and for free-headed piles with zero moment at the pile head and carrying a horizontal load
(Figure 6.29b). These curves are valid for piles having an embedded length L greater than
2R and different moment and deflection curves are shown for values of Zmax  L/R of 2, 3,
4, and 5. Piles longer than 5R should be analysed for Zmax  5. The equations to be used in
conjunction with the curves in Figure 6.29 are as follows:
Load on pile head
For free-headed pile:
Moment
M;
Bending moment  MMm
(6.30)
Moment
M;
Deflection
(6.31)
 MymR2
EI
340
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Deflection coefficient Ym and moment coefficient Mm
Ym
Deflection coefficient Yh and moment coefficient Mh
Yh
Mh
–2.0
0
(a)
(b)
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Free head
Depth coefficient Z
Depth coefficient Z
Free head
M0
H1
M1
H0
–1.0
–1.0
+1.0
+2.0
0
+1.0
+2.0
0
Mm
=2
=4
=5
=3
=3
Z max5
Z max5
Z max2
Z max2
4
3
2
4&5
=3
=4
Figure 6.29 Coefficients for free headed piles carrying lateral load or moment at pile head in soil of
constant modulus (after Davisson and Gill(6.15)) (a) Coefficients for deflection and bending
moment for piles carrying moment at head and zero lateral (b) Coefficients for deflection
and bending moment for piles carrying horizontal load at head and zero moment.
Horizontal load H;
Bending moment = HMhR
(6.32)
Horizontal load H;
Deflection
= 
(6.33)
The effect of fixity at the pile head can be allowed for by plotting the deflected shape of the
pile from the algebraic sum of the deflections (equations 6.31 and 6.33) and then applying
a moment to the head which results in zero slope for complete fixity, or the required angle
of slope for a given degree of fixity. The deflection for this moment is then deducted from
the calculated value for the free-headed pile. The use of the curves in Figure 6.29 is
illustrated in Example 8.2. Conditions of partial fixity occur in jacket-type offshore
platform structures where the tubular jacket member only offers partial restraint to the pile
that extends through it to below sea-bed level.
Where marine structures are supported by long piles (L4T) , Matlock and Reese(6.16)
have simplified the process of calculating deflections by re-arranging equation 6.27 to
incorporate a deflection coefficient Cy. Then
(6.34)
where
(6.35)
Values of Cy are plotted in terms of the dimensionless depth factor Z( x/T) for 
various values of Mt/HT in Figure 6.30. Included in these curves are the fixed-headed
case (i.e. Mt/HT  0.93) and the free-headed case (i.e. Mt  0).
Cy  Ay 
MtBy
HT
y  CyHT3
EI
HyhR3
EI
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
341
0
0.5
0.5
1.0
Fixed head
slope  0
Z 
Free head
Mt  0
Mt
MT
1.5
2.0
1.0
1.5
–1.00
–0.93
–0.90
–0.70
–0.60
–0.50
–0.40
–0.30
–0.20
–0.10
–0.00
–0.80
Cy
2.0
2.5
x
T
H
x
Mt
Zmax10
Z2
Y
Figure 6.30 Coefficients for calculating deflection of pile carrying both moment and lateral
load (after Matlock and Reese(6.16)).
The elastic deflections of piles in layered soils, each soil layer having its individual
constant modulus, have been analysed by Davisson and Gill(6.15) who have produced design
charts for this condition.
6.3.5
The use of p–y curves
The analytical methods of Reese and Matlock(6.14) and Davisson and Gill(6.15) that are
described in the previous section are applicable only to the deflections of piles which are within
the range of the elastic compression of the soil caused by the lateral loading on the piles.
However, these analytical methods can be extended beyond the elastic range to analyse
movements where the soil yields plastically up to and beyond the stage of shear failure. This
can be done by employing the artifice of ‘p–y’ curves, which represent the deformation of
the soil at any given depth below the soil surface for a range of horizontally applied pres-
sures from zero to the stage of yielding of the soil in ultimate shear, when the deformation
increases without any further increase of load. The p–y curves are independent of the shape
and stiffness of the pile and represent the deformation of a discrete vertical area of soil that
is unaffected by loading above and below it.
The form of a p–y curve is shown in Figure 6.31a. The individual curves may be plotted on a
common pair of axes to give a family of curves for the selected depths below the soil surface,
as shown in Figure 6.31b. Thus for the deformed shape of the pile (and also the induced
bending moments and shearing forces) to be predicted correctly using the elastic analytical
method described above, the deflections resulting from these analyses must be compatible with
those obtained by the p–y curves for the given soil conditions. The deflections obtained by the
initial elastic analysis are based on an assumed modulus of subgrade variation nh and this must
be compared with the modulus obtained from the pressures corresponding to these deflections,
as obtained from the p–y curve for each particular depth analysed. If the soil moduli, expressed
in terms of the stiffness factor T, do not correspond, the stiffness factor must be modified by
making an appropriate adjustment to the soil modulus Es and from this to a new value of nh
and hence to the new stiffness factor T. The deflections are then recalculated from the Reese
and Matlock curves, and the corresponding pressures again obtained from the p–y curves. This
procedure results in a new value of the soil modulus which is again compared with the second
trial value, and the process repeated until reasonable agreement is obtained.
342
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
P
(a)
(b)
x
y
y
y
y
y
x = x4
x = x3
x = x2
x5
x4
x3
x2
x1
Pile deflection Y
Soil resistance P
x = x1
Figure 6.31 p–y curves for laterally loaded piles (a) Shape of curves at various depths x below soil
surface (b) Curves plotted on common axes.
Methods of drawing sets of p–y curves have been established for soils which have a
linearly increasing modulus, that is, soft to firm normally consolidated clays and coarse
soils. Empirical factors were obtained by applying lateral loads to steel tubular piles driven
into soft to firm clays and sands. The piles were instrumented to obtain soil reactions and
deflections over their full embedded depth.
The method of establishing p–y curves for soft to firm clays is described by Matlock(6.17).
The first step is to calculate the ultimate resistance of the clay to lateral loading. Matlock’s
method is similar in concept to those described in Section 6.3.1. but the bearing-capacity
factor Nc is obtained on a somewhat different basis.
Below a critical depth xr the coefficient is taken conventionally as 9 as in Section 6.3.1.
Above this depth it is given by the equation:
(6.36)
where  is the density of the overburden soil, x is the depth below ground level, cu is the
undrained cohesion value of the clay, J is an empirical factor, and B is the width of the pile.
The experimental work of Matlock yielded values of J of from 0.5 for a soft clay to 0.25
for a stiffer clay. The critical depth is given by the equation:
(6.37)
The ultimate resistance above and below the critical depth is expressed in the p–y curves as
a force pu per unit length of pile, where pu is given by the pile width multiplied by the
undrained shear strength cu and a bearing capacity factor Nc, usually taken as 9.
Up to the point a in Figure 6.32 the shape of the p–y curve is derived from that of the
stress/strain curve obtained by testing a soil specimen in undrained triaxial compression, or
from the load/settlement curve in a plate loading test (Figure 5.15). The shape of the curve
is defined by the equation:
(6.38)
p
pu  0.5
3 y
yc
xr 
6B
B
cu  J
Nc  3  x
cu  Jx
B
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
343
Curve defined by : 
Ultimate resistance for static loading
Ultimate resistance for cyclic loading
p5pb ×
y515yc
x50
y58yc
a
b
y53yc
y
p
pb50.72pu
pa5pu
x ≥ xr
x < xr
xr
x
5 0.5 3
p/pu
y/yc
Figure 6.32 Determining shape of p–y curve in soft to firm clay (after Matlock(6.17)).
where yc is the deflection corresponding to the strain ‡c at a stress equal to the maximum
stress resulting from the laboratory stress/strain curve. The strain ‡c can also be obtained
from the established relationship between cu and the deformation modulus Eu (see
Section 5.2.2). Matlock(6.17) quotes values of ‡c of 0.005 for ‘brittle and sensitive clays’ and
0.020 for ‘disturbed or remoulded clays or unconsolidated sediments’. These values of ‡c
have been based on the established range of Eu/cu of 50 to 200 for most clays, and they can
be applied to stiff over-consolidated clays, for example the value of Eu/cu for stiff London
Clay is 400. Matlock(6.17) recommends an average value of 0.010 for normally consolidated
clays for use in the equation:
(6.39)
The effect of cyclic loading at depths equal to or greater than xr can be allowed for by cutting
off the p–y curve by a horizontal line representing the ultimate resistance pb of the clay under
cyclically applied loads. From the experimental work of Matlock(6.17), the point of intersection
of this line with the p–y curve (shown in Figure 6.32 as point b) is given by
(6.40)
The p–y curves for cyclic loading with values of y/yc from 3 to 15 and for depths of less than
xr, at x  0 are shown in Figure 6.32.
There are little published data on values of pb for various types of clay. The application of
a static horizontal load after a period of cyclic loading, say in a deep-sea structure where a
berthing ship strikes a dolphin after a period of wave loading, produces a more complex
shape in the p–y curve and a method of establishing the curve for this loading condition has
been described by Matlock(6.17).
The shape of a p–y curve for a pile in sand as established by Reese et al. is shown in
Figure 6.33. It is in the form of a three-part curve up to the stage of the ultimate failure pu.
pbpu  0.72
yc  2.5εcB
344
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
p
Y
pu5Apc
pm5Bpc
x5x1
k
m
m
3B
Curve defined by
8O
l
yu 5 
u
B 60
ym5
yk5 
n
c
n xh
n–1
p5Cy 1n
Figure 6.33 Determining shape of p–y curve in sand (after Reese et al.(6.10)).
Calculations to determine the ultimate resistance per unit depth of the pile shaft at a given
depth x are obtained by using the angle of shearing resistance and density of the sand as
determined by field or laboratory tests. The procedure for obtaining the shape of the curve,
and the trial and adjustment process using various assumed values of the coefficient of
subgrade modulus variation nh to obtain the stiffness factor T are more complex than those
described above for piles in normally consolidated clays. The reader is referred to the rec-
ommendations of the American Petroleum Institute(4.31) and reference 6.18 for guidance.
It will be evident from the foregoing account of the construction and use of p–y curves for
laterally loaded piles in clays and sands that the procedure using longhand methods is
extremely time-consuming (see Worked Example 8.2). However, computer programs have
been established from which the required data on pile deflections, bending moments and soil
resistances can be readily determined. The programs can deal with cyclic loading and prede-
termined variations in pile width or wall thickness over the depth of the shaft. A widely used
program Lpile plus(6.19) was developed by the work of Reese and others at the University of
Texas at Austin, and the ALP program(6.20) is available from OASYS Limited.
The use of p–y curves as described above is strictly applicable to piles in soils having a
linearly increasing modulus (i.e. coarse soils and normally consolidated clays). In the case
of stiff clays having a constant modulus of subgrade reaction k1 equation 6.36 can be used to
obtain values of Nc above the critical depth. The latter can be calculated from equation 6.37
using a value of 0.25 for coefficient J. Values of nh are obtained by plotting the soil modulus
Es against the depth, but the trial line is a vertical one passing through the plotted points,
again with weight being given to depths of 0.5R or less. Cyclic loading can be a critical
factor in stiff clays. The relationship in equation 6.40 should preferably be established for
the particular site by laboratory and field tests, but the factor of 0.72 may be used if results
of such studies are not available.
Instead of relating the deflection yc to the strain ‡c at a stress corresponding to the maxi-
mum stress obtained in the laboratory stress–strain curve for use in equation 6.38, Reese and
Welch(6.18) adopted the following relationship for stiff clays:
(6.41)
where p and pu are as previously defined, and y50 is the deflection corresponding to the strain
‡50 at one-half of the maximum principal stress difference in the laboratory stress–strain
curve.
If no value of ‡50 is available from laboratory tests a figure of between 0.005 and 0.010
can be used in equation 6.39 but substituting y50 for yc and ‡50 for ‡c. The larger of these two
values is the more conservative. Reese and Welch(6.18) have described a method for
establishing p–y curves for cyclic loading on piles in stiff clay.
6.3.6
Effect of method of pile installation on behaviour under 
lateral loads and moments applied to pile head
The method of installing a pile, whether driven, driven-and-cast-in-situ or bored and cast-
in-situ, has not been considered in Sections 6.3.1 to 6.3.4. The effect of the installation
method on the behaviour under lateral load, can be allowed for by appropriate adjustments
to the soil parameters. For example, when considering the resistance to lateral loads, of piles
p
pu  0.5
4
y
y50
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
345
driven into a soft sensitive clay the remoulded shearing strength could be in conjunction with
the Brinch Hansen method (Section 6.3.1), to obtain the ultimate resistance over a period of a
few days or weeks after driving. If the piles are not to be subjected to loading for a few months
after driving, the full ‘undisturbed’shearing strength can be used. There is unlikely to be much
difference between the ultimate lateral resistance of short rigid piles driven into stiff over-con-
solidated clays and bored piles in the same type of soil. The softening effects for bored piles
mentioned in Section 4.2.3 occur over a very short radial distance from the pile and the prin-
cipal resistance to lateral loads is provided by the undisturbed soil beyond the softened zone.
In the case of piles installed in coarse soils the effect of loosening due to the installation
of bored piles can be allowed for by assuming a low value of  when determining Kq from
Figure 6.22. When considering the deflection of bored piles in coarse soils the value of the
soil modulus nh in Figure 6.20 should be appropriate to the degree of loosening which is
judged to be caused by the method of installing the piles.
p–y curves were developed primarily for their application to the design of long driven piles,
mainly for offshore structures. Because such piles are required to have sufficient strength
to cope with driving stresses, they have a corresponding resistance to bending stresses from
lateral loading. On the other hand, bored and cast-in-place piles are required to have only
nominal reinforcement, unless they are designed to act as columns above ground level, or to
carry uplift or lateral loading. Nip and Ng(6.21) investigated the behaviour of laterally loaded
bored piles. They noted that while allowance can be made, arbitrarily, by assuming that
the stiffness of a cracked reinforced pile section is 50% of that of an uncracked pile, this
assumption can result in over-predicting the deflections and under-predicting the bending
moments. By comparing the deflections measured in lateral load tests with predictions made
by calculations using p–y curves they concluded that the latter can be used to predict
deflections, bending moments, and soil reactions of laterally loaded bored piles with varying
EI values corresponding to uncracked, partially cracked, and fully cracked sections.
6.3.7
The use of the pressuremeter test to establish p–y curves
The pressuremeter test (see Section 11.1.4) made in a borehole (or in a hole drilled by the pres-
suremeter device) is particularly suitable for use in establishing p–y curves for laterally loaded
piles. The test produces a curve of the type shown in Figure 6.34a. The initial portion repre-
sents a linear relationship between pressure and volume change, that is the radial expansion of
the walls of the borehole. At the creep pressure pf the pressure/volume relationship becomes
non-linear indicating plastic yielding of the soil; at the limit pressure pl the volume increases
rapidly without increase of pressure as represented by the horizontal portion of the p–y curve.
Menard used a Poisson’s ratio of 0.33 to derive an expression for determining the
pressuremeter modulus of the soil from the initial portion of the curve in Figure 6.34a. This
equation as given by Baguelin et al.(6.22) is
(6.42)
where 
 slope of the curve between V0 and Vf
Vm  midpoint volume
p
v
Em  2.66Vm
p
v
346
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Baguelin et al.(6.22) give two sets of curves relating the response of the soil to lateral loading
for the two stages in the pressuremeter tests as shown in Figure 6.34b. The upper curve is
for depths below the ground surface equal to or greater than the critical depth, xc, at which
surface heave affects the validity of the calculation method. In fine-grained soils xc is taken
as twice the pile width and in coarse soils it is four times the width. Where there is a pile
cap there is no surface heave, xc is zero and the lower curve in Figure 6.34b applies. The
value of the coefficient of subgrade reaction, km in Figure 6.34b, is given by
for pile widths greater than 600 mm
(6.43a)
for pile widths less than 600 mm
(6.43b)
1
km
 B
Em
4(2.65)  3
18

1
km
 2
9Em
B0
B
B0 · 2.65

 B
6Em
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
347
Pseudo
elastic
(a)
(b)
Pressure
Soil reaction p
Deflection y
Plastic
Limit pressure pl
Creep pressure  pf
Volume change
Vf
VO
pu5pl
pu 5 pl
x > xc
kp50.5km
pf
km
l
l
x50
2
 pl 2
Figure 6.34 Obtaining soil reaction values from pressuremeter test (a) pressure/volume change
curve (b) design reaction curve (after Baguelin et al.(6.22)).
348
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
where
Em  mean value of the pressuremeter modulus over the characteristic length of 
the pile
B0  pile width
  rheological factor varying from 1.0 to 0.5 for clays, 0.67 and 0.33 for silts, and
0.5 to 0.33 for sands
Between the ground surface and the critical depth, Xc, the value of km should be reduced by
the coefficient z, given by
(6.44)
A simplified procedure in a homogeneous soil is to assume that there will be no lateral soil
reaction between the ground surface and a depth equivalent to 0.5 to 0.75B then to use the
full reaction given by the upper curve in Figure 6.34b.
Baguelin et al.(6.22) give the following equations for calculating deflections, bending
moments and shears at any depth z below the ground surface for conditions of a constant
value of the pressuremeter modulus with depth:
Deflection
(6.45a)
Moment
(6.45b)
Shear
(6.45c)
where
R  stiffness coefficient given by equation 6.11 (Baguelin refers to this as the trans-
fer length, l0)
H  horizontal load applied to the pile head
Mt  bending moment at the pile head
z
 dimensionless coefficient equal to 
Values of the coefficients F1 to F4 are given in Figure 6.35.
At the ground surface the deflection becomes
(6.46)
(6.47)
If the head of the pile is fixed so that it does not rotate ( y0  0) equations 6.45 to 6.47
become
(6.48a)
y(z) 
H
RkmBF2
and slope  y 0  2H
R2kmB

4Mt
R1kmB
 radians
y0 
2H
RkmB 
2Mt
R2kmB
X
R
T(z)  HF4  2Mt
R F3
M(z)  H.R. F3
R
 MtF2
y(z) 2H
RkmB· F1  2Mt
R2kmB
· F4
z 
1  X
Xc
2
(6.48b)
(6.48c)
(6.48d)
(6.48e)
To draw the pile load/deflection curve, the deflections corresponding to soil reactions equal
to the creep pressure, pf, and the limit pressure, pl, are calculated from the relationship
p  kmy. The lateral pile loads then follow from equations 6.45a, 6.46, 6.48a or 6.48d. For
soil reactions between the limit pressure and creep pressure the value of km is halved as
shown in Figure 6.34. The procedure is illustrated in Worked Example 6.8 where the pres-
suremeter tests show a linearly increasing soil modulus. The values of nh can be calculated
from equation 6.13 taking K as kmB. Deflections are calculated from the Matlock and Reese
curves (Figures 6.26 to 6.28).
Mt  HR
2
y0 
H
RkmB
T(z)H· F3
M(z)  HR
2
F4
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
349
Values of F
0
0
1.0
2.0
Zx/R
3.0
4.0
5.0
0.5
F3
F4
F1
F2
1.0
Figure 6.35 Values of the coefficients F1 to F4 (after Baguelin et al.(6.22)).
6.3.8
Calculation of lateral deflections and bending 
moments by elastic continuum methods
The method of preparing p–y curves described in Section 6.3.5 was based on the assumption
that the laterally loaded pile could be modelled as a beam supported by discrete springs. The
springs would be considered as possessing linear or non-linear behaviour. In the latter case the
method could be used to model pile behaviour in strain conditions beyond the elastic range.
In many cases where lateral forces are relatively low and piles are stiff the pile head
movements are within the elastic range and it may be convenient to use the elastic
continuum model to calculate deflections and bending moments.
Randolph(6.23) used finite element analyses to establish relationships between pile
deflections and bending moments with depth for lateral force and moment loading as shown
in Figure 6.36. The following notation applies to the parameters in this figure:
y0
 lateral displacement at ground surface
z
 depth below ground level
H0  lateral load applied at ground surface
M
 bending moment in the pile
M0  bending moment at ground surface
r0
 radius of the pile
 effective Young’s modulus of a solid circular pile of radius r0 (i.e. 4EpIp/r0
4)
Gc  characteristic modulus of the soil, that is, the average value of G* over depths
less than lc
G*
where
G  shear modulus of the soil
v  Poisson’s ratio
lc  critical length of the pile
lc
for homogeneous soil
for soil increasing linearly in stiffness with depth
m*
m
where G varies with depth as 
c
is a homogeneity factor 
where 
The use of the Randolph curves is illustrated in worked Example 8.2.
The Randolph method is useful where the shear modulus is obtained directly in the field
using the pressuremeter. If Young’s modulus values only are available the shear modulus for
an isotropic soil can be obtained from the equations:
(6.49)
where vu and v are the undrained and drained Poisson’s ratios respectively.
Eu  2G(1  vu)  and  E  2G(1  v)
c  G*at lc/4
G*at lc/2
G  mz
 G
z
 m1  3v
4
2r0(Ep/m*r0)2/9
2r0(Ep/G*)2/7
 G(1
3
4v)
E
p
350
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
6.3.9
Bending and buckling of partly embedded 
single vertical piles
A partly embedded vertical pile may be required to carry a vertical load in addition to a
lateral load and a bending moment at its head. The stiffness factors R and T as calculated
from equations 6.11 and 6.12 have been used by Davisson and Robinson(6.24) to obtain the
equivalent length of a free-standing pile with a fixed base, from which the factor of safety
against failure due to buckling can be calculated using conventional structural design
methods.
A partly embedded pile carrying a vertical load P, a horizontal load H, and a moment M
at a height e above the ground surface is shown in Figure 6.37a. The equivalent height Le of
the fixed-base pile is shown in Figure 6.37b.
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
351
0
0
0.2
rc =1
0.4
0.75
0.5
rc =1
0.75
0.5
rc 51
0.75
0.5
rc =1
0.75
0.5
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
Z/Ic
Z/Ic
Z/Ic
Z/Ic
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.1
–0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.2
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.8
0
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
M/H0Ic
M/M0
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/7
yroGc
H0
Ep
Gc
3/7
yr2Gc
o
M0
Ep
Gc
Figure 6.36 Generalized curves giving deflected pile shape and bending moment profile for lateral force
and bending moment applied to pile head (after Randolph(6.23)) (a) Deflected pile shape for
lateral force loading (b) Bending moment profile for lateral force loading; (c) Deflected pile
shape for moment loading (d) Bending moment profile for moment loading.
For soils having a constant modulus:
(6.50)
For soils having a linearly increasing modulus:
(6.51)
The relationships 6.50 and 6.51 are only approximate, but Davisson and Robinson state that
they are valid for structural design purposes provided that lmax, which is equal to L/R, is
greater than 4 for soils having a constant modulus and provided that zmax, which is equal to
L/T, is greater than 4 for soils having a linearly-increasing modulus. From the above equa-
tions the equivalent length Le of the fixed-base pile (or column) is equal to ezf and the crit-
ical load for buckling is
(6.52)
and
(6.53)
6.4
Lateral loads on raking piles
The most effective way of arranging piles to resist lateral loads is to have pairs of piles
raking in opposite directions as shown in Figure 6.5. The simple graphical method of
Pcr 
2EI
(e  zf)2 for fixed- (and translating-) headed conditions
Pcr
2EI
4(ezf)2 for free-headed conditions
zf  1.8T
Depth to point of fixity zf  1.4R
352
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
M
M
H
H
P
P
e
L
z f
e
e
L
y
x
(a)
(b)
Fixed base
Figure 6.37 Bending of pile carrying vertical and horizontal loads at head (a) Partly embedded
pile (b) Equivalent fixed base pile or column.
determining the compressive and tensile forces in the piles by a triangle of forces assumes
that the piles are hinged at their point of intersection and that the lateral loads are carried
only in an axial direction by the piles. The tension pile will develop its maximum pull-out
resistance with negligible movement, and the yielding of a properly designed compression
pile of small to medium diameter is unlikely to exceed 10 mm at the working load. Thus the
horizontal deflections of the pile cap will be quite small.
For economy, the raking piles should be installed at the largest possible angle from
the vertical. This depends on the type of pile used (see Section 3.4.11). Where raking piles
are embedded in fill which is settling under its own weight (Figure 6.38a) or in a
compressible clay subjected to a surcharge load or to superimposed fill (Figure 6.38b) the
vertical loading on the upper surface of the rakers may induce high bending moments in the
pile shaft. Because of this, raking piles may not be an appropriate form of construction in
deep fill or compressible layers.
6.5
Lateral loads on groups of piles
Loads on individual piles forming a group of vertical piles that is subject to horizontal
loading or to combined vertical and horizontal loading can be determined quite simply (for
cases where the resultant cuts the underside of the pile cap) by taking moments about the
neutral axis of the pile group. Thus in Figure 6.39 the vertical component V of the load on
any pile produced by an inclined thrust R, where R is the resultant of a horizontal load H and
a vertical load W is given by
(6.54)
where W is the total vertical load on the pile group, n is the number of piles in the group, e
is the distance between the point of intersection of R with the underside of the pile cap and
the neutral axis of the pile group, and x¯ is the distance between the pile and the neutral axis
of the pile group (x¯ is positive when measured in same direction as e and negative when in
the opposite direction).
V  W
n  Wex
x 2
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
353
(a)
Filling setting under its 
own weight
Compressible
soil
(b)
on piles
Vertical pressure
Figure 6.38 Bending of slender raking piles due to loading from soil subsidence (a) Fill settling
under own weight (b) Fill overlying compressible soil.
Determination of the individual loads on groups of raking or combined raking and
vertical piles is a complex matter if there are more than three rows of piles in the group. The
latter case can be analysed by static methods if it is assumed that the piles are hinged at their
upper ends, that horizontal loads are carried only by axial forces in the inclined piles and
that vertical piles do not carry any horizontal loading. The forces in the piles are resolved
graphically as shown in Figure 6.40. The same method can be used if pairs of piles or
individual groups of three closely spaced piles are arranged in not more than three rows, as
shown in Figure 6.41. To produce the parallelogram of forces the line of action of the forces
in the piles is taken as the centre-line of each individual group.
The determination of the individual loads on piles installed in groups comprising multi-
ple rows of raking or combined raking and vertical piles is a highly complex process which
involves the analysis of movements in three dimensions; i.e. movements in vertical and
horizontal translation and in rotational modes. The analysis of loadings on piles subjected to
these movements requires the solution of six simultaneous equations, necessitating the use
of a computer for practical design problems.
The reader is referred to the work of Poulos and Davis(6.25), and Poulos(6.26) for an account
of their research into the behaviour of laterally loaded pile groups in an elastic medium.
Randolph(6.23) gives expressions to determine the interaction factor between adjacent piles
in groups carrying compression and lateral loading and compares them with values derived
354
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Point of application of
horizontal thrust
H
R
W
X
+x
e
Point of application of
resultant load on 
underside of pile cap
Neutral axis of
pile group
–x
Figure 6.39 Calculating load distribution on group of piles carrying vertical and horizontal loading.
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
355
R
R
D
Y
X
A
Z
B
RA
RC
RB
C
Resultant
Resultant
d
c
a
b
Figure 6.40 Graphical method for determining forces on groups of vertical and raking piles
under inclined loading.
R
Y
D
R
C
X
B
A
Z
a
b
c
d
Resultant
Figure 6.41 Graphical method for determining forces on groups of closely spaced vertical and
raking piles under inclined loading.
by Poulos and with results of model tests. Computer programs have been developed to aid
the design of pile groups for these loading conditions. They include the ALP program
previously referred to(6.20). Also DEFPIG developed by Poulos at the University of Sydney
Engineering Laboratory, and PGROUP, available from various bureaux.
The case of closely spaced groups of piles acting as a single unit when subject to lateral
loads must also be considered. Prakash(6.27) showed that piles behave as individual units if
they are spaced at more than three pile widths in a direction normal to the direction of
loading and at more than 6 to 8 diameters parallel to this direction. Piles at a closer spacing
can be considered to act as a single unit in order to calculate the ultimate resistance and
deflections under lateral loads (Figure 6.42). In soft clays and sands the effect of driving
piles in groups at close spacing is to stiffen the soil enclosed by the group thus increasing
its capability as a single unit to resist movement when carrying horizontal loading.
Calculations to determine the ultimate bearing capacity of pile groups carrying vertical
and horizontal or inclined loading can be performed using the Brinch Hansen general
equation (Section 5.2). The calculations assume that the pile group takes the form of an
equivalent block foundation. EC7 in Clause 7.6.2.1(4) states that the resistance of the group
to compression loading can be calculated by assuming that the group acts as a single large-
diameter pile. However, Clause 7.6.3.1 requires the resistance of a group subjected to ten-
sion loading to be provided by the frictional resistance of the soil enclosing a block
foundation. No guidance is given in respect of pile groups carrying transverse loading.
Clause 7.7.1(4)P merely requires group action ‘to be considered’.
6.6
References
6.1
RADHARKRISHNA, H. S. and ADAMS, J. I. Long-term uplift capacity of augered footings in fissured
clay. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 10, No. 4, November 1973, pp. 647–52.
6.2
MEYERHOF, G. G. and ADAMS, J. I. The ultimate uplift capacity of foundations, Canadian
Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 5, No. 4, November 1968, pp. 225–44.
6.3
UK DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY. Offshore installations: Guidance on design and construction,
HMSO, London, 1984.
6.4
(a) The strength of grouted pile-sleeve connections for offshore structures: Static tests relating to
sleeve buckling. Wimpey Offshore Engineers and Constructors Ltd. HMSO Offshore Technology
Series, OTH.85.223, 1986.
(b) The strength of grouted pile-sleeve connections. A composite report for DoE. HMSO
Offshore Technology Services, OTH.86.210, 1986.
(c) A study of length, longitudinal stiffening and size effects on grouted pile-sleeve connections.
Wimpey Offshore Engineers and Constructors Ltd. HMSO Offshore Technology Series,
OTH.86.230, 1987.
6.5
LITTLEJOHN, G. S. Soil Anchors, Proceedings of the Conference on Ground Engineering,
Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1970, pp. 41–4.
6.6
HUTCHINSON, J. N. Discussion on ref. 6.5, Conference proceedings, p. 85.
6.7
WIMPEY LABORATORIES LTD. unpublished report.
356
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Spacing less than 3B
Direction of
loading
Width of
equivalent
single pile
B9
B
Figure 6.42 Piles at close spacing considered as single unit (after Prakash(6.27)).
6.8
FREEMAN, C. F., KLAJNERMAN, D., and PRASAD, G.D. Design of deep socketted caissons into shale
bedrock, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 9, No. 1, February 1972, pp. 105–14.
6.9
TERZAGHI, K. Evaluation of coefficients of subgrade reaction, Geotechnique, Vol. 5, No. 4, 1955,
pp. 297–326.
6.10 REESE, L. C., COX, W. R., and KOOP, F. B. Analysis of laterally loaded piles in sand, Proceedings of
the Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, 1974, Paper No. OTC 2080.
6.11 GARASSINO, A., JAMIOLKOWSKI, M., and PASQUALINI, E. Soil modulus for laterally-loaded piles in
sands and NC clays. Proceedings of the 6th European Conference, ISSMFE, Vienna, 1976, Vol. I,
No. 2, pp. 429–34.
6.12 HANSEN, J. B. The ultimate resistance of rigid piles against transversal forces, Danish
Geotechnical Institute, Bulletin No. 12, Copenhagen 1961, pp. 5–9.
6.13 Recommendations for the Design, Manufacture and Installation of Concrete Piles, American
Concrete Institute, Report ACI 543R-74 (re-affirmed 1960).
6.14 REESE, L. C. and MATLOCK, H. Non-dimensional solutions for laterally-loaded piles with soil
modulus assumed proportional to depth, Proceedings of the 8th Texas Conference on Soil
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Austin, Texas, 1956, pp. 1–41.
6.15 DAVISSON, M. T. and GILL, H. L. Laterally-loaded piles in a layered soil system, Journal of the
Soil Mechanics Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 89, No. SM3, May 1963,
pp. 63–94.
6.16 MATLOCK, H. and REESE, L. C. Foundation analysis of offshore pile-supported structures,
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference, ISSMFE, Paris, Vol. 2, 1961, pp. 91–7.
6.17 MATLOCK, H. Correlations for design of laterally loaded piles in soft clay, Proceedings of the
Offshore Technology Conference, Houston, Texas, 1970, Paper OTC 1204.
6.18 REESE, L. C. and WELCH, R. C. Lateral loading of deep foundations in stiff clay, Journal of the
Geotechnical Engineering Division, American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 101, No. GT7,
July 1975, pp. 633–49.
6.19 Ensoft Inc, Lpile Plus4, A Program for the Analysis of Piles and Drilled Shafts Under Lateral
Loads, Ensoft Inc, Austin, Texas, 2000.
6.20 Oasys ALP Laterally-Loaded Pile Analysis Manual, Ove Arup and Partners, London, 1997.
6.21 NIP, D. C. N. and NG, C. W. W. Back-analysis of laterally-loaded bored piles, Geotechnical
Engineering, Vol. 158, No. GE2, 2005, pp. 63–73.
6.22 BAGUELIN, F., JEZEQUEL, J. F., and SHIELDS, D. G. The Pressuremeter and Foundation Engineering,
Trans Tech Publications, Clausthal, 1978.
6.23 RANDOLPH, M. F. The response of flexible piles to lateral loading, Geotechnique, Vol. 31, No. 2,
June 1981, pp. 247–59.
6.24 DAVISSON, M. T. and ROBINSON, K. E. Bending and buckling of partially embedded piles,
Proceedings of the 6th International Conference, ISSMFE, Montreal, Vol. 2, 1965, pp. 243–6.
6.25 POULOS, H. G. and DAVIS, E. H. Pile Foundation Analysis and Design, John Wiley, New York, 1980.
6.26 POULOS, H. G. Behavior of laterally loaded piles: I – Single piles, Proceedings of the American
Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. SM5, May 1971, pp. 711–31.
6.27 PRAKASH, S. Behaviour of pile groups subjected to lateral loads, Thesis University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois, 1962.
6.7
Worked examples
Example 6.1
A bored and cast in-situ pile having a shaft diameter of 0.6 m and a 2 m diameter enlarged
base is installed to a depth of 11 m in a clay with an undrained shear strength of 40 kN/m2
and an angle of shearing resistance of 25	. The groundwater level is below 11 m. Calculate
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
357
the ultimate resistance in uplift of the pile for sustained loading conditions. In Figure 6.9 the
failure surface does not extend up to the ground surface.
For   25	, H/B  3, giving H  3B  3  2  6 m. Also from Figure 6.9, with
  25	, Ku  0.88 and the value of the shape factor is the maximum of 1.3.
The weight W can be taken conservatively as the weight of a cylinder of soil 2 m in
diameter extending up to ground level (i.e. the weight of the soil displaced by the pile is
assumed to be equal to the weight of the concrete). Then from equation 6.5
This value of the uplift resistance must not be greater than that given by the uplift resistance
Qub of the projecting part of the enlarged base plus the skin friction Qus on the pile shaft.
The latter value is calculated on the overall depth minus the depth of the enlarged base
(i.e. 1.5 m) and a zone 1.5 m deep at the ground surface where the soil can shrink away from
the shaft. From the Brinch Hansen factors from Figure 5.6 for   25	 are
Nc  21, Nq  10.5, sc  1.2, dc  1.6, dq  1.6  (1.6  1)/10.5  approximate 1.6,
sq  1.2  (1.2  1)/10.5  approximate 1.2, and ic  iq  1.0.
The third term in equation 5.1 is small and can be neglected.
Qub 
(22  0.62) [40  21  1.2  1.6  1.0  (2.1  9.81  11 
 10.5  1.2  1.6  1.0)]  17 671 kN
From equation 4.7 the shaft friction within the stiff clay from the undrained shear strength
component only is
Qus  0.3  40    0.6 [11(21.5)]  181 kN
Total uplift resistance  Qub  Qus17671  181  17832 kN
Although the length/diameter ratio is 5.5 it is advisable to take only one-half of this value as
the ultimate resistance; i.e. a value of 8926. Therefore the ultimate resistance is governed by
equation 6.5, i.e. has a value of 5534 kN.
Example 6.2
The floor of a shipbuilding dock covers an area of 210  60 m. The 0.8 mm floor is restrained
against uplift by precast concrete shell piles having an overall diameter of 450 mm which are
driven through 8 m of soft clay (
) on to a strong shale (  2.3 Mg/m3). The
piles are spaced on a 3 m square grid and each pile carries an uplift load of 1100 kN. Design
a suitable anchorage system for the dock floor using stressed cable anchors.
From Figure 4.6, for cu/
 16/9.81  0.8  8  0.25,   1.0 and length factor F, for
L/B  8/0.45  18, of 1.0, Equation 4.8 gives:
For a safety factor of 2.5:
allowable uplift resistance of the pile in soft clay  181 / 2.5  72 kN
Qs1  16    0.45  8 181 kN
vo

cu  16 kN/m2

4
6 0.88tan 25	} (
1
4222.1119.81)5534 kN
Qu(40 2 6){1.3 
1
22.1 9.81 2[(2 11)6]
358
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Thus the load to be carried by anchorage in shale  1100 – 72  1028 kN. This load can be
resisted by an anchor cable made up from seven 15.2 mm 7-wire Dyform strands. The
breaking load of each strand is 300 kN. Therefore
which is satisfactory. The approximate overall diameter of the 7-strand cable is 45 mm.
Therefore for an allowable bond stress between steel and grout of 1.0 N/mm2:
Drill the cable hole to 9 m and provide an unwrapped and cleaned bond length of 7 m with
compression fittings swaged on to the lower end. The cable can be fed down a 150 mm
borehole for which,
which is satisfactory for a strong shale (Table 6.3). The stress is not excessive if the anchors
are stressed to 1.5 times the working load during installation.
From Figure 6.17a, the volume of a rock cone with a 30	 half angle lifted by single anchor
cable is 0.35  93  255 m3. The submerged weight of the rock cone  1.3  9.81
 255/1000  3.25 MN.
The anchorage of the whole dock floor requires 70 lines of anchors (at right-angles to the
centre-line of the dock) and 20 ranks of anchors (parallel to the centre-line of the dock) to
form the 3 m square grid. Therefore in Figure 6.17b, N  70, M  20, and P  S  3 m.
From Figure 6.17a, m/L  n/L  0.57, and therefore, m  n  0.57  9  5.1 m. Then
P/n  s/m  0.59 so that, from Figure 6.17b, 
. Because
(P/n)2  (S/m)2  2  0.592  0.7 is less than 4, there is composite overlapping of the rock
cones, and the charts are not valid. The intersecting cones represent a rock volume roughly
estimated to be 69  3  19  3  6  70794 m3.
The sum giving the total force resisting uplift is thus as follows:
Weight of dock floor 
 237.3 MN
Submerged weight of soft clay 
 791.1 MN
Submerged weight of anchored rock 
 902.8 MN
Total  1931.2 MN
 70 794  1.3  9.81
1000
 210  60  8.0  0.8  9.81
1000
 210  60  0.8  2.4  9.81
1000
VnVc  VmVc  0.45
Factor of safety against uplift 3.25
1.03 3.1 (which is satisfactory)
working bond stress between rock and grout 
10281000
150 7.0 10000.31 N/mm2
required bond length of cable 
10281000
451.01000 7.3 m
working load  1028
7300 0.49breaking load of strand
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
359
Total uplift on underside of floor
Therefore
factor of safety against uplift  
 1.25 (which is satisfactory and a closer
estimate of the rock volume is not needed).
Therefore the anchorage should consist of a 3 m square grid of 450 mm shell piles driven
on to rockhead, each pile being anchored 9 m below rockhead with a seven 15.2 mm/7-wire
Dyform strand cable having the bottom 7 m bonded to the rock.
Example 6.3
A piled dolphin carrying a horizontal pull of 1800 kN consists of a pair of compression piles
and a pair of tension piles, raked at angles of 1 horizontal to 3 vertical. Design ‘dead’
anchors for the tension piles, which are driven through 3 m of weak weathered chalk to
near-refusal on strong rock chalk (having an average submerged density of 0.5 mg/m3).
From the triangle of forces (Figure 6.43) the uplift load on a pair of tension piles is 2800 kN.
The load to be carried by a single pile is thus 0.5  2800  1400kN 
From Table 4.15, the ultimate shaft friction in weathered chalk is 30 kN/m2. For a safety
factor of 2.5 in uplift, in weathered chalk on a 600 mm steel tubular pile:
allowable load 
The load to be carried by the dead anchor is thus 1400  71  1329 kN . Use a steel tube
having an overall diameter of 
in (168.3 mm). A wall thickness of in (16 mm) provides
a cross-sectional area of 7600 mm2. Thus
Working tensile stress in anchor  1329  1000
7600
175 N/mm2
5
8
6
5
8
   0.6  (32 12)  30
2.5
71 kN
 1931.2
1540
 70  20  1100
1000
1540 MN.
360
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
1800 kN
B
A
C
0.60 steel
tubular piles
Toe of piles
‘Dead’ anchor
Hard chalk
Weathered chalk
Sea bed
3.00
2800 kN
2800 kN
c
a
b
1
3
Figure 6.43
If high-tensile steel (which has a yield stress of 347 N/mm2) is used
factor of safety at yield 
(which is satisfactory).
The anchor will be installed in a 215 mm diameter drill-hole. Thus for an ultimate bond stress
between grout and strong rock of 0.8 N/mm2 (Table 6.5), allowable bond stress  0.8/2.5 
0.3 MN/m2.
required bond length 
Drill the hole to say 7 m below the toe of the pile and grout the annulus fully. Then
working stress between steel and grout 
(which is satisfactory) 
The bond length should be increased by approximately L/2 to comply with Figure 6.12b to
give a bond length over the cone of 10 m below the surface of the weathered chalk and space
the piles at 4 m centres. Then in Figure 6.17a, Vc  0.35  103  350 m3. Since m/L  0.61,
m  10  0.61  6.1 m . In Figure 6.17b, S  4 m, so that S/m  4/7  0.66, and thus
. M  2, N  1, and P  0, and therefore 
Rock volume anchored by pair of anchors 
m3.
Weight of rock resisting uplift  560  0.5  9.81  2747 kN.
Factor of safety against uplift  2747/2800  0.98.
This is insufficient for compliance with the EC7 recommendations (see below) but the
frictional resistance on the sloping surfaces of the overlapping cones can be taken into
account. As a rough approximation, assume that the two cones act as a rectangular block
having a volume of 560 m3, say 10  8  7 m deep, and take the angle of shearing
resistance of the chalk as 30˚ and take Ko as 1.5.
Average unit frictional resistance on the vertical surfaces of the block
 1.5  tan 30	  9.81  0.5  3.5  14.9 kN/m2
Frictional resistance to uplift  2 (10  8)  7  14.9  3755 kN
Total resistance  2747  3755  6502 kN
Factor of safety against uplift  6502/2800  2.3
Checking the design of the anchorage for compliance with the EC7 requirements, the
axial uplift load on a single anchor pile is a variable unfavourable action. From Table 4.1
take G  1.5.
Therefore design value of uplift  Fdt  1.5  1400  2100 kN.
The value of 71.5 kN as the uplift resistance of the 600 mm pile within the weathered
chalk was based on a number of tests in compression and uplift (ref. 4.43). Take the results
of three tests as applicable to the selected unit resistance of 30 kN/m2 to give a correlation
factor of 1.2 (Table 4.7).
Design resistance in weak chalk  71.5  2.5/1.2  148 kN.
The grout to strong chalk ultimate bond stress of 0.8 N/mm2 (Table 6.3) was based on pull-out
tests, for which the standard practice of cycling the load would have been adopted. Table 6.2
gives an anchorage resistance partial factor of 1.4, therefore for a 10 m bond length:
 350[(2  1)(1  0.40)]  560
VnVc0.
VmVc  0

1329  1000
  168.3  7  1000 0.36 N/mm2

1320  1000
  215  0.3  1000 6.6 m.
 347
175  2.0
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
361
Design resistance of deadman anchor in strong chalk 0.810000.215
10/1.43860 kN.
Total design resistance of pile and anchor  148  3860  4008 kN, which is greater
than the design uplift of 2100 kN.
Checking the uplift resistance of the overlapping cones using the UPL limit-state factors,
Table 6.2 gives a partial factor of 1.25 on the angle of shearing resistance. Therefore the
characteristic resistance due to the submerged weight of the cones and the frictional resist-
ance surrounding them is equal to 2747  3755/1.25  5751 kN. From Table 6.1 the partial
factor to obtain the design value of the favourable stabilizing action is 0.9.
Design value  0.9  5751  5175 kN.
Vertical component of variable destabilizing action  2800  sin 71.5	  2655 kN.
Table 6.1 gives a partial factor of 1.5 for variable unfavourable actions. From equation 6.4:
Vdstd  1.5  2655 kN  3983 which is less than the design resistance of 5175 kN.
If shear connectors are to be provided equation 6.6 can be used to calculate the required
bond length. It is not strictly valid for the geometry of the connection but this example will
illustrate the use of the equations. Assume a characteristic grout compression strength of
25 N/mm2 at 3 days and a modular ratio of 18. For a shear key upstand height of 10 mm and
a spacing of 150 mm, the ratio h/s of 0.067 gives Cs  1.0. Assume a bond length to anchor
tube diameter greater than 12 to give CL  0.7.
From equation 6.7, stiffness factor:
 0.04
From equation 6.6, characteristic bond strength:
 11.5 N/mm2
For work of this kind special grout monitoring would not be used. Hence a safety factor of
6 should be used giving,
Allowable bond strength 
N/mm2
Required bond length over anchor 
mm
Therefore provide 1323/150  8.8, say 9 shear keys spaced at 150 mm centre over a
distance of 1.3 m over anchor tube and pile.
Example 6.4
A vertical bored and cast in-situ pile 900 mm in diameter is installed to a depth of 6 m in a
stiff over-consolidated clay (
). Find the ultimate
cu 120 kN/m2, c10 kN/m2, 25	

1329  1000
  168.3  1.9 1323
 11.5
6
 1.9
0.040.7 91 1100 10
15025
K  1
18
568
200
1

168
16  600
16
1
362
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
sustained horizontal load which can be applied at a point 4 m above ground level. Also find
the maximum working load if the lateral deflection of the pile at ground level is limited to
not more than 25 mm.
Consider first the ultimate horizontal load. For conditions of immediate application, that
is, using the undrained shearing strength, from Table 6.5 for 
, the soil mod-
ulus k is 7.5 mN/m2. If the elastic modulus of concrete is 26  103 MN/m2 and the moment
of inertia of the pile is 0.0491  (900)4 mm4, from equation 6.11:
L is 6 m which is less than 2R, therefore the pile will behave as a short rigid unit, and Brinch
Hansen’s method can be used. Brinch Hansen’s coefficients, as shown in Figure 6.22 with
c  cu  120 kN/m2 and   0 are as tabulated below: 
R 
4 26  103  0.0490  0.94
7.5  0.9
 3.3 m
cu  120 kN/m2
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
363
z (m)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1.1
2.2
3.3
4.4
5.5
6.6
Kc
2.2
5.5
6.2
6.7
7.0
7.2
7.3
cuKc
264
660
744
804
840
864
876
z
B
The soil resistance of each element 1 m wide by 1 m deep is plotted in Figure 6.44a. As a
trial assume the point of rotation X is at 4.0 m below ground level. Then taking moments
about point of application of Hu:
[(85218.5)(87019.5)]16291 Nm per metre width of pile
M  (462  1  4.5)(702 1  5.5)(774 1 6.5)(822 1  7.5)
Hu
Hu
(a)
(b)
0.900 pile
0.900 pile
4.00
4.00
Depth in m
Depth in m
0
1
2
X
X
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
264
462
660
702
744
774
804
822
840
852
864
870
876
1094
1011
928
842
755
666
577
496
416
324
244
151
58
Ground
level
Figure 6.44
If the point of rotation is raised to 3.9 m below ground level, 
kNm, which is
sufficiently close to zero for the purpose of this example.
Taking moments about the centre of rotation,
,
and thus Hu  828 kN per metre width. For a pile 0.9 m wide, Hu  0.9  828  745 kN
Now consider the long-term stability under sustained loading, when the drained shearing
strength parameters c  10 kN/m2 and   25	 apply. From Figure 6.22, Brinch Hansen’s
coefficients for Kc and Kq are tabulated below:
(838.20.10.05)(8520.6)(8701.6)
Hu7.9 (4623.4)(7022.4)(7741.4)(820.20.90.45)
M  297
364
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
z (m)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
1.1
2.2
3.3
4.4
5.5
6.6
Kc
5.8
16
20
23
26
27
28
cKc
58
160
200
230
260
270
280
Kq
3.3
5.0
5.5
5.9
6.3
6.7
6.9
p0(kN/m2)
0
18.6
39.3
58.8
78.5
98.2
118
p0Kq(kN/m2)
0
93
216
347
495
658
814
cKc p0Kq(kN/m2)
58
253
416
577
755
928
1094
z
B
The soil resistance of each element 1 m deep for a pile 1 m wide is plotted in Figure 6.44b.
As a trial, consider the point of rotation X to be 4.0 m below ground level. Taking moments
about the point of application of Hu:
If the centre of rotation is lowered to 4.5 m, then
which is sufficiently close to zero for the purpose of this example. Then taking moments
about the centre of rotation:
Hu  8.5  (155  4.0)  (335  3.0)  (496  2.0) (660  1.0) 
 (798  0.5  0.25)  (885  0.3  0.25)  (1011  1  1).
Thus Hu  530 kN per metre width. Therefore the lowest value of the ultimate load results
from drained shearing strength conditions. For a 900 mm pile, the ultimate horizontal
load  0.9  530  477 kN. 
 14 051 – 13 476  575 kN,
M  10 759  (798 0.5 8.25)  [(885 0.5 8.75)  9604)]
 [(8421 8.5)  (1011 1 9.5)]  6002  kNm. 
M  (155 1 4.5)  (335 1 5.5)  (496 1 6.5)(666 1 7.5)
Calculating the allowable horizontal load which limits the lateral deflection at ground
level to 25 mm, from equation 6.50:
Depth to point of fixity  1.4R  1.4  3.3  4.62 m
From equation 6.20 with e  0, H  3  0.025  837.38  103 / 4.623  637 kN
Therefore the allowable load is governed by the resistance of the pile to overturning. A factor
of safety of 1.5 on the ultimate load of 477 kN will be appropriate giving an allowable load
of 318 kN.
Example 6.5
A group of 36 steel box piles are spaced at 1.25 m centres in both directions to form six rows
of six piles surmounted at ground level by a rigid cap. The piles are driven to a depth of
9 m into a medium-dense water-bearing sand and carry a working load of 240 kN on each
pile. Calculate the bending moments, deflections and soil-resistance values at various
points below the ground surface at the working load. Calculate the horizontal deflection of
the pile cap if the horizontal load is applied in the direction resisted by the maximum resist-
ance moment of the piles. Moment of inertia of the pile in direction of maximum resistance
moment  58064 cm4 and elastic modulus of steel  20 MN/cm2.
From Figure 6.20, Terzaghi’s value of nh for a medium dense sand is 5 MN/m3. Then from
equation 6.12:
Because the embedded length of 9 m is more than 4T the pile behaves as a long elastic
fixed-headed element. The ultimate moment of resistance of pile (modulus of section 
2950 cm3)  2950  0.0247  72.86 MNcm for a working stress on BS 4360 Grade 40A
steel of 247 MN/m2.
From equation 6.51, depth to point of fixity  1.8  188  338.4 cm.
From equation 6.19, ultimate horizontal load  Hu  2  72.86  103/338.4  431 kN.
Factor of safety on applied load  431/240  1.8, which is satisfactory if the pile head
deflections and the pile group behaviour are within acceptable limits.
The deflections, bending moments and soil-resistance values for the single pile at the
working load can be calculated from the curves in Figure 6.28. From equation 6.27:
From equation 6.28:
bending moment MF  240  188 Fm  45120Fm kNcm  451.2Fm kNm.
From equation 6.29:
soil reaction PF  240 Fp/188  1.28 Fp kN per cm depth  128 Fp kN per m depth.
Zmax  L/T  9.0/1.88  4.8. Tabulated values of yF, MF, and PF are as follows:
deflection yF 
240  1883
20  103  58 064
 Fy  1.373Fy cm  13.73 Fy mm.
T 
5 20  58064
5  106
 188 cm.
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
365
From the above table the pile head deflection is satisfactory and the moment of resistance
of the pile is not exceeded. Because the piles are spaced at 125/46.7  2.67 diameters
the group will act as a single unit equivalent to a block foundation having a width of
5  1.25 m  6.25 m and a depth below the ground surface of 9 m. The ultimate passive
resistance to the horizontal thrust from a block foundation is
For a safety factor of 1.5 on the passive resistance, the total horizontal load on the pile group
must be limited to 11912/1.5  7941 kN. Thus the load on each pile must be limited to
7941/36  220 kN, which provides a safety factor of 2 on the value estimated for the single pile.
It is also necessary to calculate the horizontal deflection of the pile group under the
working load of 220 kN per pile. The values of PF above show that the horizontal load is
effectively distributed over a depth of 4 m below the ground surface. Thus the load on the
group can be simulated by a block foundation having a ‘width’B of 4 m, a ‘length’of 6.25 m
and a depth of 6.25 m. The elastic modulus of a medium-dense sand can be taken as
20 MN/m2. From equation 5.22, with H/B  1000, L/B  6.25/4  1.55, D/B  6.25/4  1.55,
1  0.85, and 0  0.91 as Figure 5.20:
elastic settlement 
This is within safe limits and, as would be expected, it is more than 10 times greater than the
deflection of the single pile.
Example 6.6
In the previous example the horizontal wind load of 36  220  7920 kN is applied at
the level of the centroid of a 7.25 m square by 2.0 m deep pile cap. If a centrally applied
vertical load of 8000 kN also acts at the centroid, find the resultant vertical component of
the load on each pile of the group due to the combined horizontal and vertical loading.
Weight of pile cap  7.252  2.0  9.81  2.4  2475 kN. Thus the total vertical
load  8000  2475  10475 kN. From Figure 6.45 the resultant of the horizontal and
vertical loads cuts the underside of the pile cap at a point 0.76 m from the centroid. From
equation 6.51.
i
0.85  0.91  220  36
4  6.25   4  1000
20  1000
49 mm
Pu 
1
2BD2Kp
1
2  6.25  1.3  9.81  92  3.6911 912 kN.
366
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
x(m)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
0
0.27
0.53
0.80
1.06
1.33
1.60
2.13
2.66
Fy
0.92
0.90
0.82
0.71
0.61
0.50
0.37
0.18
0.04
yF (mm)
12.6
12.4
11.3
9.7
8.4
6.9
5.1
2.5
—
Fm
0.91
0.65
0.40
0.18
0.03
0.10
0.19
0.25
0.21
MF (kN/m)
411
293
180
81
14
4.5
86
113
95
Fp
0
0.25
0.45
0.57
0.62
0.62
0.57
0.38
0.13
PF (kN/m)
0
32.0
57.6
73.0
79.4
79.4
73.0
48.6
16.6
z  x
T
Vertical component on each pile in Row A
 291.0  151.6  442.6 kN
Vertical component on each pile in Row B
 382.0 kN
Vertical component on each pile in Row C
 291.0  30.3  321.3 kN
Vertical component on each pile in Row D  291.0  30.3 260.7 kN
Vertical component on each pile in Row E  291.0  91.0 200.0 kN
Vertical component on each pile in Row F  291.0  151.7 139.3 kN
Checking: 6(442.6  382.0  321.3 260.7  200.0  139.3)  10475 kN, and the
calculation is thus correct.
Example 6.7
A tower is to be constructed on a site where 6 m of very soft clay overlie a very stiff glacial
clay (undrained shearing strength  190 kN/m2). The tower and its base slab weigh 30000 kN,
 291.0  10 475   0.76  0.625
164.1
 291.0 91.0
 291.0  10 475   0.76   1.875
164.1
 291.0  24 878
164.1
10 475
36

10 475  0.76   3.125
12(3.12521.8752 0.6252)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
367
F
E
D
C
B
A
1.250
1.250
1.250
1.250
1.250
1.875
3.125
Pile cap
(Weight2475 kN)
8000kN
7.250
2.000
H7920
e0.76
RESULTANT
V10 475 kN
0.625
Figure 6.45
and the tower is subject to a maximum horizontal wind force of 1500 kN with a centre of
pressure 35 m above ground level. The base of the tower is 12 m in diameter. Design the
foundations and estimate the settlements under the dead load and wind loading.
Because of the presence of the soft clay layer, piled foundations are required and the
heavy vertical load favours the use of large bored and cast in-situ piles. A suitable arrange-
ment of piles to withstand the eccentric loading caused by the wind force is 22 piles in the
staggered pattern shown in Figure 6.46.
368
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Base of equivalent
block foundation for
N–S wind direction
W
S
Base of equivalent
block foundation
for E–W wind direction
Very soft
clay
35.00
1500 kN
30000kN
Base of tower
6.00
7.70
Base of tower
E
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
3.00
N
Resultant
Very stiff clay
(Cu5190kN/m2
Ed=80MN/m2
mv=0.05m2/kN)
e52.43
e51.75
Figure 6.46
The resultant of the vertical and horizontal forces has an eccentricity of 1500  35/30000 
1.75 m at ground level. From equation 6.54, the load on each of the outer four piles due to
wind loading from an east–west direction is given by
Therefore uplift does not occur on the windward side and the maximum pile load is 2364 kN.
Checking the maximum pile load for wind in a north–south direction:
Therefore, maximum pile load  2326 kN.
For piles with a shaft diameter of 1 m:
working stress on concrete 
which is within safe limits.
Adopting an under-reamed base to a diameter of 1.8 m, from equation 4.4,
ultimate base resistance 
For a safety factor of two on the combined base resistance and skin friction, the required
ultimate skin friction  (2  2364)  4351  377 kN.
If the required depth of penetration into the glacial clay to mobilize the required ultimate
resistance is Lm, ignoring the small skin friction in the very soft clay and adopting an
adhesion factor of 0.3 (to allow for delays in under-reaming), then from equation 4.7,
Qs  0.3  190    1  L
and if Qs  377, L  2.10 m. Thus the allowable pile load for a factor of safety of 3 in base
resistance and unity in skin friction is 
, which
is insufficient. Taking L as 4.9 m,
Qs  0.3  190    1  4.9  877 kN
and the allowable pile load is 
which is satisfactory.
It is necessary to add two shaft diameters and the depth of the under-ream to arrive at the
total penetration of the piles below ground level. Thus
D  6 m (soft clay)  4.9  2.0  0.8  13.7 m
An adhesion factor of 0.5 is used for straight-shafted piles in a glacial clay (Figure 4.8).
Therefore the allowable load on a straight-shafted pile drilled to the same depth as the
1
3   4 351  877  2 328 kN,
1
3Qb  Qs  (
1
3   4 351)  377  1 827 kN
Qb 9  190  
1
4  1.824 351 kN
2 364  1 000
1
4  1 0002 3 N/mm2
V1364  
30 000  1.75  5.20
(8  5.202)(10  2.602)
1364  962 kN
1 364  1 000  kN
V  30 000
22

30 000   1.75   6
(4   62)  (6   4.52)  (4  32)  (6 1.52)
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
369
under-reamed piles and adopting a safety factor of 2 on combined end bearing and shaft
friction is given by
Therefore straight-shafted piles can be used for the eight inner piles as shown in Figure 6.46.
The maximum working load on these is one-half or less than one-half of the outer piles.
The overall depth to the base of the pile group of 13.7 m is only a little greater than the
overall width of the group, i.e 13 m to the outsides of the pile shafts. Therefore it is
necessary to check that block failure will not occur due to eccentric loading.
Eccentricity of loading with respect to base of pile group 
From equation 5.3a, the width of an equivalent block foundation for winds in a north-south
direction  10.40  (2  2.43)  5.54 m. The overall dimensions of this block foundation
are thus 13  5.54 m. Tangent of the angle of inclination of the resultant force  tan  
1500/30000  0.05, and thus   2.87	.
From Figure 5.6, for   0	, Nc  5.2; from Figure 5.7 for B'/L'  5.54/13.0  0.43,
sc  1.1; from Figure 5.9 for D/B  7.7/5.54  1.4, dc  1.2. The horizontal force of 1500 kN
in Figure 6.46 is less than cu B'L'  190  5.54  13.0  13684 kN. Therefore equation 5.11
can be used to obtain the inclination factor ic  1  1500/2  190  5.54  13.0  0.95.
From Figure 5.6, N  1.0. From Figure 5.7, s  0.95; d  1.0. From equation 5.12, 
iq  1  1500/30000  0.92, therefore from equation 5.13, i  0.922  0.85.
The second term in equation 5.1 is zero, therefore
qub  190  5.2  1.1  1.2  0.95  1.0  0.5  9.81  1.8  5.54  1.0  1.0
 0.95  0.85
 1238  39  1277 kN/m2
Qab  1277  5.54  13.0  92005 kN
Factor of safety against base failure  92005/30000  3.1 which is satisfactory.
Checking for compliance with the EC7 recommendations, for the ultimate limit-state
GEO and using the three design approaches (Section 4.1.4), for Design Approach DA1
combination (sets A1M1R1), the vertical load on the pile group in respect of overturn-
ing is a permanent stabilising action. Table 4.1 gives G  1.0, V'd is 1.0  30000 
30000 kN. The horizontal wind load is a variable unfavourable action, thus H'd  1.5 
1500  2 250 kN
Eccentricity of loading in respect of base of pile group  2250(35  13.7)/30000  3.65
For winds in a north–south direction, width of equivalent block foundation  10.4 
(2  3.65)  3.10 m.
The overall dimensions of the transformed block foundation are 13.0  10.4  7.7 m deep.
The material factor, cu, for set M1 in Table 4.1 is 1.0, giving characteristic cu  190 kN/m2.
2.43 m
1500  (3513.7)
30 000
Qa
(9  190  
1
4  12)(0.5  190    1  7.7)
2
1820 kN
370
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
The Brinch Hansen bearing capacity factors for   0	 are obtained in the same way as
shown above, giving Nc  5.2, sc  1.05, dc  1.3 and ic  0.96.
It is evident from the preceding calculation to obtain qub that the third term in equation 5.1
is small and can be neglected.
Characteristic unit base resistance  190  5.2  1.05  1.3  0.96  1294.7 kN/m2.
Applying the R1 resistance factor of 1.0, design resistance  Rcd  1294.7  13.0 
3.1  52176 kN which is greater than the design action V'd of 30 000 kN.
For Design Approach DA1, combination 2 (sets A2M2R1)
Design actions, V'd  1.0  30000  30000 kN
and H'd  1.3  1500  1950 kN
Eccentricity of loading  1950(35.0  13.7)/30000  3.2 m
Width of equivalent block foundation  10.4  2  3.2  4.0 m
Dimensions of equivalent block foundation are 13.0  4.0  7.7 m deep
The material factor, cu, for set M2 is 1.4 and R1 is 1.0
Design unit resistance to bearing failure 136  5.2  0.9  1.3  0.86  711.6 kN/m2
Design resistance of foundation  Rcd  711.6  13.0  4.0  37000 kN which is
greater than V'd of 30000 kN
DA1 is used to check compliance with EC7 with respect to sliding. In the following
calculations the passive resistance of the soil to horizontal movement of the piles has been
ignored.
For DA1, combination 1, the base area of the equivalent block using the factored values
of V' and H' is 13.0  3.1  40.3 m2. From Table 4.2, M1 is 1.0 and R1 for spread
foundations in respect of sliding is 1.0. Therefore design resistance to sliding  190  1.0 
1.0  40.3  7657 kN which is greater than H'd  1.5  1500  2250 kN.
For DA1, combination 2, base area  13.0  4.0  52.0 m2, Rcd  1.0  136  52.0 
7072 kN which is greater than Hd  1950 kN.
It is also necessary to confirm that the total settlements and tilting of the structure are
within safe limits. The following calculations are carried out using unfactored loadings to
verify the serviceability limit-state.
Calculating first the immediate and consolidation settlements under dead and imposed
load, but excluding the wind load. Because the piles have under-reamed bases which carry
the major proportion of the load, the base of the equivalent raft will be close to pile base
level. The approximate overall dimensions of the equivalent raft outside the toes of the pile
bases are 13.8  11.2 m. Therefore
overall base pressure beneath raft 
Assume a value of Eu for the glacial clay of 80 mN/m2 and a value of mv of 0.05 m2/kN.
From Figure 5.20 for L/B  13.8/11.2  1.2, H/B   and D/B  7.7/11.2  0.69 (ignoring
30 000
13.8  11.2 194 kN/m2
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
371
the soft clay), 1  0.75 and 0  0.92. Therefore
immediate settlement 
From Figure 5.13 the average vertical stress at the centre of a layer of thickness 2B is
0.3  194  58 kN/m2.
The depth factor d for 
is 0.81 and the geological factor g is 0.5.
Therefore, from equations 5.23 and 5.24
Part of the imposed loading will not be sustained and will not contribute to the long-term
settlement. Thus the total settlement under the vertical load of 30 000 kN will probably
not exceed 30 mm. It is necessary to estimate the amount of tilting which would occur
under sustained wind pressure, i.e. the immediate settlement induced by the horizontal wind
force of 1500 kN producing a pressure under the combined vertical and horizontal
loading of 
on the equivalent raft caused by the eccentric
loading. For L/B  13/5.54  2.3, H/B   and D/B  7.7/5.54  1.4, 1  1.0 and 0  0.9
giving
immediate settlement 
Of this amount 16 mm is due to vertical loading only, giving a tilt of 10 mm due to wind
loading. A movement of this order would have a negligible effect on the stability of the tower.
The horizontal force on each pile if no wind load is carried by the pile cap is
1500/22  68 kN. A pile 1 metre in diameter can carry this load without excessive deflection
(see Example 6.4).
Example 6.8
Pressuremeter tests made at intervals of depth in a highly weathered weak broken siltstone
gave the following parameters:
Pressuremeter modulus  Em  30 MN/m2
Limit pressure  pl  1.8 MN/m2
Creep pressure  pf  0.8 MN/m2
The above values were reasonably constant with depth. Draw the deflection curve for a
horizontal load applied to the head of a 750 mm pile at the ground surface up to the ultimate
load, and obtain the deflection for a horizontal load of half the ultimate.
Moment of inertia of uncracked pile    0.754
64
 0.0155 m4
1.0  0.9  416  5.54  1000
80  1000
26 mm
30000/(13 5.54)416 kN/m2
c 0.5  0.81  0.05  58  2  11.2  1 000
1000
26 mm
D/LB0.62
0.75  0.92  194  11.2  1000
80  1000
19 mm
372
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
Modulus of elasticity of pile  26  103 MN/m2
Take a rheological factor of 0.8, then from equation 6.43a:
km  67 MN/m2
Over elastic range from p  0 to p  pf, then from equation 6.11:
Stiffness factor  R 
To allow for surface heave assume no soil reaction from ground surface to assumed surface
at 0.5  0.75  0.375 m
At creep pressure of 0.8 MN/m2, corresponding deflection 
From equation 6.46 corresponding lateral load applied at assumed ground surface:
From equation 6.47, slope at assumed ground surface
Deflection at real ground surface
 0.0110 m
 11 mm
Between p  pf and p  pl the upper curve in Figure 6.34b gives 
and
From upper curve in Figure 6.34b
At limit pressure of 1.8 MN/m2 corresponding deflection  1.8  0.75
33.5
 0.0403 m
R
4 26  103  0.0155
33.5  0.75
2.00 m
km  67
2  33.5 MN/m2
 0.009 
0.380  0.3752
6  26  103  0.0155
(0.0054  0.375)
 
2  0.380
1.682  67  0.75
 0.0054 radians
H 0.0090  1.68  67  0.75
2
0.380 MN
 0.8  0.75
67
 0.0090 m

4 261030.0155
670.75
 1.68 m
1
km
 2  0.6
9  30
0.75
0.6   2.65
0.8
 0.8  0.75
6  30
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
373
Corresponding lateral load at assumed ground surface 
= 1.012 MN
Slope at assumed ground surface 
Total deflection at real ground surface
 0.0588
 59 mm
The load/deflection curve is shown in Figure 6.47. The deflection corresponding to an
applied load of half the ultimate load of 1012 kN is 20 mm.
 0.0110 0.0403 
1.012  0.3752
6  26  103  0.0155
(0.0201  0.375)

2  1.012
22  33.5  0.75
 0.0201 radians
 0.0403  2.00  33.5  0.75
2
374
Piles to resist uplift and lateral loading
0
50
100
150
Deflection of pile head (mm)
Deflection for Hu/2520mm
p–y Curve
Hu51012 kN
0
500
1000
1500
380 kN
Horizontal load at pile head (KN)
Figure 6.47
7.1
General design requirements
Piles must be designed to withstand stresses caused during their installation, and subsequently
when they function as supporting members in a foundation structure. Stresses due to
installation occur only in the case of piles driven as preformed elements. Such piles must be
capable of withstanding bending stresses when they are lifted from their fabrication bed and
pitched in the piling rig. They are then subjected to compressive, and sometimes to tensile,
stresses as they are being driven into the ground, and may also suffer bending stresses if they
deviate from their true alignment. Piles of all types may be subjected to bending stresses
caused by eccentric loading, either as a designed loading condition or as a result of the pile
heads deviating from their intended positions. Differential settlement between adjacent piles
or pile groups can induce bending moments near the pile heads as a result of distortion of
the pile caps or connecting beams.
The working stresses adopted for piles should take into account the effects of unseen
breakage caused during driving, possible imperfections in concrete cast in-situ, and the
long-term effects of corrosion or biological decay.
Pile caps, capping beams, and ground beams are designed to transfer loading from the
superstructure to the heads of the piles, and to withstand pressures from the soil beneath and
on the sides of the capping members. These soil pressures can be caused by settlement of
the piles, by swelling of the soil, and by the passive resistances resulting from lateral loads
transmitted to the pile caps from the superstructure.
In addition to guidance on structural design and detailing, matters of relevance to the
design of piled foundations in EC2 (BS EN 1992-1-1: 2004) include the following:
(1) Dimensional tolerances of cast-in-place piles (see Table 4.9)
(2) Partial factors for the ultimate limit state of materials
(3) The influence of soil–structure interaction caused by differential settlement
(4) Strength classes of concrete and reinforcement cover for various exposure conditions
(5) Slenderness and effective lengths of isolated members
(6) Punching shear and reinforcement in pile caps
(7) Limits for crack widths and
(8) Minimum reinforcement for bored piles.
Many of the above items have been dealt with in the previous chapters. Structural analysis,
design and detailing of reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete members will not,
Chapter 7
Some aspects of the structural 
design of piles and pile groups
in general, be covered in this chapter, but a particular point to be noted is that whereas
BS 8004 allows an increase in working stresses for temporary works, such increases are not
permitted by EC2. BS EN 12699 allows for an increase in compressive stress generated
during driving (see Sections 2.2 and 2.3).
7.2
Designing reinforced concrete piles for 
lifting after fabrication
The reinforcement of piles to withstand bending stresses caused by lifting has to be considered
only in the case of precast reinforced (including prestressed) concrete piles. Bending takes place
when the piles are lifted from their horizontal position on the casting bed for transportation to
the stacking area. The most severe stresses thus occur at the time when the concrete is immature.
Timber piles in commercially available lengths which have a cross-sectional area sufficiently
large to withstand driving stresses will not be overstressed if they are lifted at the normal
picking-up points. Splitting could occur if attempts were to be made to lift very long piles
fabricated by splicing together lengths of timber, but there is no difficulty in designing spliced
joints so that the units can be assembled and bolted together while the pile is standing vertically
in the leaders of the piling frame. Again, steel piles with a cross-sectional area capable of
withstanding driving stresses and of sufficient thickness to allow for corrosion losses will not
fracture when lifted in long lengths from the horizontal position in the fabrication yard.
Reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete piles have a comparatively low resistance to
bending, and the stresses caused during lifting may govern the amount of longitudinal
reinforcing steel needed. The static bending moments induced by lifting and pitching piles
at various points on their length are shown in Table 7.1. These considerations are principally
concerned with piles cast on the project site using the techniques described in Section 2.2.2.
In the UK, driven precast concrete piles usually consist of the proprietary jointed types
described in Section 2.2.3. These are factory-made with specially designed facilities for
handling and transport.
The design charts in Figure 7.2a to d show the bending moments due to self-weight which
are induced when square piles of various cross-sectional dimensions are lifted from the
head or centre (pick-up point A as in Figure 7.1g and h), from a point one-third of the length
from the head (pick-up point B as in Figure 7.1d), and from points one-fifth of the length from
the head and toe (pick-up point C as Figure 7.1a).
Also shown on the charts are horizontal lines representing the ultimate moment of resist-
ance of each pile section using four main reinforcing bars of various sizes. Concrete with a
376
Structural design of piles and pile groups
Table 7.1 Bending moments induced by lifting and pitching piles
Condition
Maximum static bending moment
Lifting by two points at L/5 from each end
WL/40 (Figure 7.1a)
Lifting by two points at L/4 from each end
WL/32 (Figure 7.1b)
Pitching by one point 3L/10 from head
WL/22 (Figure 7.1c)
Pitching by one point L/3 from head
WL/18 (Figure 7.1d)
Pitching by one point L/4 from head
WL/18 (Figure 7.1e)
Pitching by one point L/5 from head
WL/14 (Figure 7.1f)
Pitching from head
WL/8 (Figure 7.1g)
Lifting from centre
WL/8 (Figure 7.1h)
characteristic strength of 40 N/mm2 has been used with a characteristic strength for the
reinforcement of 250 N/mm2, and 40 mm cover to the link steel.
It is desirable to limit the steel stresses to 250 N/mm2 when determining ultimate
resistance moments. This will ensure that a 4 bar reinforcement arrangement complies
with Table 3.30 of BS 8110: Part 1 regarding maximum spacing requirements, that is,
300 mm assuming no redistribution. If a characteristic strength of 460 N/mm2 were to be
used, the maximum allowable bar spacing becomes 160 mm, thus requiring an 8 bar
arrangement.
However, the situation can arise in which a moment is induced in a pile due to the pile being
driven just within the permitted tolerance of 1 in 75 to the vertical. In such a case the pile
can be checked as a column with an axial load and moment, by use of the design charts in
BS 8110: Part 3. These charts relate only to high-yield steel with a characteristic strength of
460 N/mm2. It is therefore advisable to use high-yield steel for pile reinforcement, but to limit
the characteristic strength to 250 N/mm2 when designing for lifting from the casting bed.
The charts can be used for a concrete having a higher characteristic strength but the lifting
lengths will be somewhat conservative. The concrete strength is usually governed by the
strength required to resist driving stresses (see Section 2.2.2), or to give durability in an
aggressive environment (see Section 10.3 and Clauses 4 and 7 of EC2).
The length and cross-sectional dimensions of the pile are obtained from considerations of
the resistance of the soil or rock to axial or lateral loading (Chapters 4 and 6). Then for the
given length and cross-section the pick-up point is selected, having regard to the type of
piling plant and craneage to be employed, and the economies which may be achieved by
lifting the piles from points other than at the ends or the centre. The bending moment due to
Structural design of piles and pile groups
377
Lifting rope
Lifting points
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
L
2
L
2
L
5
L
4
L
4
3L
10
L
3
L
4
L
5
L
5
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.1 Methods of lifting reinforced concrete piles.
the ultimate dead load corresponding to the selected pick-up point is then read off from the
appropriate curve. Next the ultimate dead load bending moment is compared with the
ultimate moments of resistance for various sizes of reinforcement as shown on the charts
and the appropriate reinforcement is selected. A partial safety factor of 1.4 on the bending
moment due to dead load is suitable for normal designs, and this value has been used in the
derivation of Figure 7.2 and Table 7.2.
It is evident that there is a maximum lifting length for a pile of given cross-sectional
dimensions and size of main reinforcement. The design curves shown in Figure 7.2 have
been used to obtain the maximum lifting lengths for the three pick-up conditions for square
piles in Table 7.2. Also shown in these tables are the requirements for the link steel over a
length equal to three times the pile width at the head and toe, and in the body of the pile, in
accordance with BS 8004.
The reinforcement stress and bar spacing previously referred to ensure that, from
considerations of exposure and durability, a surface crack width of 0.3 mm is not exceeded.
This is permitted by EC2 (Clause 7.3.1) for concrete in foundations in non-aggressive soil,
in wet or rarely dry conditions, and for concrete exposed to sea water including splash zone.
Requirements for cover to reinforcement in aggressive environmental conditions, as
recommended by EC2, are discussed in Chapter 10.
378
Structural design of piles and pile groups
0
10
20
30
40
Length of pile (m)
0
10
20
30
40
Length of pile (m)
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
B
C
Arrangement of
reinforcement
Design bending moment, kNm
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
Ultimate resistance moment with
Design bending moment, kNm
Ultimate resistance moment with
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
pick up at A
300  300 mm
350  350 mm
4  25 mm f
4  25 mm f
4  32 mm f
4  20 mm f
4  20 mm f
Pick up at A
Main
bars
40 mm
cover
to links
0.2L
0.5L
0.5L
0.33L
0.6L 0.2L
Pick up C
Pick up B
Pick up A
0
5
10
15
20
25
5
10
15
20
25
30
Length of pile (m)
Length of pile (m)
0
B
C
B
C
35
80
60
40
20
0
Design bending moment, kNm
4  32 mm f
Ultimate resistance moment with
Ultimate resistance moment with
Design bending moment, kNm
80
60
40
20
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Pick up at A
400  400 mm
Pick up at A
400  40 mm f
4  32 mm f
4  25mm f
450  450 mm
4  40 mm f
4  25 mm f
L
Figure 7.2 Diagrams showing required lifting points for reinforced concrete piles of various cross-sections
(see also page 337).
7.3
Designing piles to resist driving stresses
It is necessary to check the adequacy of the designed strength of a pile to resist the stresses
caused by the impact of the piling hammer. Much useful data to aid the estimation of driv-
ing stresses came from the research of Glanville et al.(7.1) They embedded stress recorders
in piles to measure the magnitude and velocity of the stress wave induced in the pile by
blows from the hammer. The tests showed that the stress wave travels from the head to the
toe of the pile and is partly reflected from there to return to the head. If the pile is driven
onto a hard rock, the sharp reflection of the wave at the toe can cause a compressive stress
at the point which is twice that at the head, but when long piles are driven into soil of low
resistance, the tensile stress wave is reflected, causing tension to develop in the pile. It can
be shown from simple impact theory that the magnitude of the stress wave depends mainly
on the height of the drop. This is true for a perfectly elastic pile rebounding from an elastic
material at the toe. In practice there is plastic yielding of the soil beneath the toe, and the
pile penetrates the soil by the amount described as the ‘permanent set’. The weight of the
hammer is then important in governing the length of the stress wave and hence the efficiency
of the blow in maintaining the downward movement of the pile.
The simplest approach to ensuring that driving stresses are within safe limits is to adopt
working stresses under static loading such that heavy driving is not required to achieve the
depth of penetration required for the calculated ultimate bearing capacity. The usual practice
is to assume that the dynamic resistance of a pile to its penetration into the soil is equal to its
ultimate static load-bearing capacity, and then to calculate the ‘permanent set’ in terms of
Structural design of piles and pile groups
379
Table 7.2 Maximum lengths of square section precast concrete piles for given reinforcement
Pile
Main
Maximum length in metres for pick up at
Transverse reinforcement
size (mm)
reinforcement
Head 
0.33  length 
0.2  length from 
Head 
Body 
(mm)
and toe from head
head and toe
and toe
of pile
300  300 4  20
9.0
13.5
20.5
6 mm at
6 mm at
4  25
11.0
16.5
25.0
40 mm crs
130 mm crs
350  350 4  20
8.5
13.0
19.5
8 mm at
8 mm at
4  25
10.5
16.0
24.0
70 mm crs
175 mm crs
4  32
13.0
20.0
30.0
400  400 4  25
10.0
15.0
22.5
8 mm at
8 mm at
4  32
12.5
19.0
28.0
60 mm crs
200 mm crs
4  40
15.5
23.0
34.5
or
10 mm at
100 mm crs
450  450 4  25a
9.5
14.5
22.0
8 mm at
8 mm at
4  32a
12.0
18.0
27.0
60 mm crs
180 mm crs
4  40a
15.0
22.5
33.5
or
or
10 mm at
10 mm at
90 mm crs
225 mm crs
Notes
Piles designed in accordance with BS 8110 and BS 8004.
Characteristic strength of reinforcement limited to 250 N/mm2.
Cover to link steel  40 mm.
Characteristic strength of concrete  40 N/mm2.
a Alternatively, use a larger number of smaller diameter bars.
blows per unit penetration distance to develop this resistance, using a hammer of given rated
energy or weight and height of drop. The driving stress is assumed to be the ultimate driving
resistance divided by the cross-sectional area of the pile, and this must not exceed the safe
working stress on the pile material. As already stated in Section 1.4, the dynamic resistance
is not necessarily equal to the static load-bearing capacity. However, if soil mechanics
calculations as described in Chapter 4 have been made to determine the required size and
penetration depth necessary to develop the ultimate bearing capacity, then either a simple
dynamic pile driving formula or, preferably, stress-wave theories can be used to check that
a hammer of a given weight and drop (or rated energy) will not overstress the pile in driving
it to the required penetration depth. If at any stage of penetration the stresses are excessive
a heavier hammer must be used, but if greater hammer weights and lesser drops still cause
overstressing then other measures, such as drilling below the pile toe or using an insert
pile having a smaller diameter, must be adopted.
It is important to note that in many instances the soil resistance to driving will be higher
than the value of ultimate bearing capacity as calculated for the purpose of determining the
allowable pile load. This is because calculations for ultimate bearing capacity are normally
based on average soil parameters. Where soil strength data are scanty it is necessary to
assume conservative parameters. However, when considering resistance to driving, the
possible presence of soil layers stronger than the assumed average must be taken into
account. Hence, when assessing driving stresses it is advisable to make a separate calcula-
tion of ultimate bearing capacity based on soil strength values higher than the average. Also,
in cases where negative skin friction is added to the working load, the soil strata within
which the drag-down is developed will provide resistance to driving at the installation stage.
Methods of recording hammer blows and measurements of temporary compression and set
as described in Section 11.3.1 are useful as a means of site control of driving operations, but
they are not helpful for determining stresses caused in the pile body by hammer impact.
A widely used method of calculating driving stresses is based on the stress-wave theory
developed by Smith(7.2). The pile is divided into a number of elements in the form of rigid
masses. Each mass is represented by a weight joined to the adjacent element by a spring as
shown in the case of modelling a pile carrying an axial compression load in Figure 4.29. The
hammer, helmet, and packing are also represented by separate masses joined to each other and to
the pile by springs. Shaft friction is represented by springs and dashpots attached to the sides of
the masses (Figure 4.29) which can exert upward or downward forces on them. The end-bearing
spring can act only in compression. The resistance of the ground at toe is assumed to act as a
resisting force to the downward motion of the pile when struck by the hammer. Friction on the
pile shaft acts as a damping force to the stress wave as determined from the side springs and
dashpots. For each blow of the hammer and each element in the hammer–pile system,
calculations are made to determine the displacement of the element, the spring compression of
the element, the force exerted by the spring, the accelerating force and the velocity of the ele-
ment in a given interval of time. This time interval is selected in relation to the velocity of the
stress wave and a computer is used to calculate the successive action of the weights and springs
as the stress wave progresses from the head to the toe of the pile. The output of the computer
is the compressive or tensile force in the pile at any required point between the head and toe.
The input to the computer comprises the following data:
(1) Length of pile
(2) Material of pile
380
Structural design of piles and pile groups
(3) Weight per unit length of pile
(4) Weight and fall of hammer (or rated energy per hammer blow)
(5) Efficiency of hammer
(6) Weight of helmet, packing, and any dolly or follower used
(7) Elastic modulus of packing and of any dolly used
(8) Elastic modulus of pile
(9) Coefficient of restitution of packing (and dolly if used)
(10) Elastic compression (quake) of soil
(11) Damping properties of soil
(12) Required ultimate driving resistance.
Of the above input data, items 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 11 are factual. The efficiency of the
hammer is obtained from the manufacturer’s rating, but this can decrease as the working
parts become worn. The elastic modulus and coefficient of restitution of the packing may
also change from the commencement to the end of driving. The elastic compression of the
ground is usually taken as the elastic modulus under static loading, and this again will
change as the soil is compacted or is displaced by the pile. Thus the wave equation can never
give exact values throughout all stages of driving, and its continuing usefulness depends on
amassing data on correlations between calculated stress values and observations of driving
stresses in instrumented piles. Further refinements of the calculation procedure may also be
made to allow for the changing dynamic characteristics of the hammer–pile–soil system
during driving. Smith(7.2) states that the commonly accepted values for the soil compression
(quake), and the damping constants for the toe and sides of the pile are not particularly
‘sensitive’ in the calculations, i.e. small changes in these values produce a smaller change in
the final calculated results.
The basic Smith idealization represents a pile being driven by a drop hammer or a single-
acting hammer. Diesel hammers have to be considered in a different manner because the
energy transmitted to the pile varies with the resistance of the pile as it is being driven down.
At low resistances, there are low energies per blow at a high rate of striking. As the pile
resistance increases the energy per blow increases and the striking rate decreases.
Manufacturers of diesel hammers provide charts of energy versus rate of striking. When
predictions are being made of the ability of a particular diesel hammer to drive a pile to a
given resistance consideration should be given to the range of energy over which the
hammer may operate. Goble et al.(7.3) have published details of the GRLWEAP computer
program which models diesel and other hammer behaviour realistically. The program
proceeds by iterations until compatibility is obtained between the pile–soil system and the
energy/blows per minute performance of the hammer. Because of the problems of interpret-
ing data from the pile driving analyser when operated with diesel hammers, the present
tendency is to use hydraulic hammers which give a reasonably constant energy of blow.
However, the resilience of the cushioning material can change with use causing variations
in the energy transmitted to the pile head.
Pile driving resistance can be computed from field measurements of acceleration and
strain at the time of driving by using the dynamic pile driving analyser in conjunction with
the CAPWAP program(7.4). Pairs of accelerometers and strain transducers are mounted near
the pile head and the output of these instruments is processed to give plots of force and
velocity versus time for selected hammer blows as shown in Figure 7.3. The second stage of
the method is to run a wave equation analysis with the pile only modelled from the
Structural design of piles and pile groups
381
instrument location downwards. Values of soil resistance, quake, and damping are assigned
and the measured time varying velocity is applied as the boundary condition at the top of
the pile model. The analysis generates a force versus time plot for the instrument location
and this is compared with the measured force versus time plot. Adjustments are made to the
values of resistance, quake and damping until an acceptable agreement is reached between
computed and measured values. At this stage the total soil resistance assigned in the analysis
is taken as the resistance at the time of driving. The latter is a reliable assessment of the static
resistance in soils and rocks where time effects are negligible.
The instrumentation described above including the field processing equipment which
produces the force/time plot is a useful method of field control of pile driving in difficult
ground conditions. The shape of the plot (Figure 7.3) can give an indication of a broken pile
and a check can be made of the stresses in the pile induced by driving.
When assessing the results of wave equation analyses made at the project planning stage
for the purpose of predicting the capability of a particular hammer to achieve the required
penetration depth, due account should be taken of the effects of time on pile resistance as
discussed in Section 4.3.8. Sufficient reserve of hammer energy should be provided to over-
come the effects of set-up (increase of driving resistance) when redriving a partly driven pile
after a delay period of a few hours or days. If pile driving tests are made at the planning stage
it is helpful to make re-strike tests in conjunction with wave equation analyses at various
time intervals after the initial drive.
Too much reliance should not be placed on immediate readings of the output from the
field processing unit. Rigorous analysis of the data by experienced engineers is required in
conjunction with the appropriate computer programs. Wheeler(7.5) described experiences of
a field trial competition in the Netherlands when a number of firms specializing in dynamic
pile testing were invited to predict the ultimate bearing capacity of four instrumented pre-
cast concrete piles driven through sands and silts to penetrations between 11.5 and 19 m. A
wide range of predicted capacities was obtained. In the case of one pile the range was 90 to
510 kN compared with a failure load of 340 kN obtained by static testing. Reliable estimates
of ultimate bearing capacity may not be possible if the available hammer has insufficient
energy to overcome the resistance mobilized by the soil against penetration of the pile.
A downward movement of the toe of piles up to about 1 m in diameter of 2.5 mm or
preferably more is required to mobilize sufficient soil resistance to obtain reliable results.
382
Structural design of piles and pile groups
Time
Force
Velocity
Force/velocity
Figure 7.3 Force and velocity versus time for hammer blow on pile.
A heavier hammer can be used to achieve the necessary penetration but this may involve a
risk of overstressing the pile.
7.4
The effects on bending of piles below ground level
Slender steel tubular piles and H-piles may deviate appreciably off line during driving.
These effects were described in Section 2.2.4 where it was noted that, whereas the ill-effects
of bending or buckling of tubular piles below ground level could be overcome by inserting
a reinforcing cage and filling the pile with concrete, such a procedure could not be adopted
with H-piles. Therefore, where long H-piles are to be driven in ground conditions giving rise
to bending or buckling, a limiting value must be placed on their curvature.
It is not usual to take any special precautions against the deviation of reinforced concrete
piles other than to ensure that the joints between elements of jointed pile systems (see
Section 2.2.3) are capable of developing the same bending strength as the adjacent un-
jointed sections. Reinforced concrete piles without joints cannot in any case be driven to
very long lengths in soil conditions which give rise to excessive curvature. It is, of course,
possible to inspect hollow prestressed concrete piles internally and to adopt the necessary
strengthening by placing in-situ concrete if they are buckled.
It is impossible to drive a pile with a sufficient control of the alignment such that the pile
is truly vertical (or at the intended rake) and that the head finishes exactly at the designed
position. Tolerances specified in various codes of practice are given in Section 3.4.12. If the
specified deviations are exceeded, to an extent detrimental to the performance of the piles
under working conditions, the misaligned piles must be pulled out for redriving or additional
piles driven. Calculations may show that minor excesses from the specified tolerances do
not cause excessive bending stresses as a result of the eccentric loading. In the case of driven
and cast-in-place or bored and cast-in-place piles it may be possible to provide extra rein-
forcement in the upper part of the pile to withstand these bending stresses. For this reason
Fleming and Lane(7.6) recommend that checks on the positional accuracy of in-situ forms of
piling should be made before the concrete is placed. The methods described in Section 6.3.9
can be used to calculate the bending stresses caused by eccentric loading. The effect of the
deviation is expressed as a bending moment Pe, where the load P deviates by a distance e
from the vertical axis of the pile.
7.5
The design of axially loaded piles as columns
Buckling of axially loaded piles terminating at ground level in a pile cap or ground beam
cannot occur if the piles are loaded to within the permissible working stresses on the pile
material. Thus such piles need not be considered as long columns for the purpose of
structural design. However, it is necessary to consider the column strength of piles projecting
above the soil line, as in jetties or piled trestles.
BS 8004 recommends that the depth below ground surface to the point of contraflexure
should be taken as 1 m in firm ground and as much as one-half of the penetration depth but
not necessarily more than 3 m in a weak ground such as soft clay or silt. A stratum of liquid
mud should be treated as if it were water. The column strength of the pile is then calculated
as for a short column and a reduction factor is applied to the calculated ultimate load to
allow for the slenderness of the column, where the slenderness is defined as the ratio of the
effective length to the breadth or radius of gyration.
Structural design of piles and pile groups
383
Effective lengths for reinforced concrete piles when regarded as columns are defined by
EC2 (Clause 5.8.3.2):
Restrained at both ends in position and direction:
0.5 L
Restrained at both ends in position and one end in direction:
0.7 L
Restrained at both ends in position but not in direction:
1.0 L
Restrained at one end in position and direction and at the other end in 
direction but not in position:
1.0 L
Restrained at one end in position and direction and free at the other end:
2.0 L
EC3 (BS EN 1993-1-1: 2005) is currently silent on effective lengths for steel piles
when regarded as columns, requiring the application of the guidance given in BS 5950
part 1, which is slightly different from the above factors.
A pile embedded in the soil can be regarded as properly restrained in position and
direction at the point of virtual fixity in the soil. The restraint at the upper end depends
on the design of the pile cap and the extent to which the pile cap is restrained against
movement by its connection with adjacent pile caps or structures. Some typical cases of
the restraint of piles are shown in Figure 7.4a to e. The condition shown in Figure 7.4e
384
Structural design of piles and pile groups
Raking piles in
four
directions
Tie beams holding
pile cap in position
Tie beams
holding pile cap
in position
Hard rock
Cable
anchors
Soft
clay
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7.4 Conditions of restraint for vertical piles (a) Restrained at top and bottom in position and
direction (b) Restrained at bottom in position and direction; restrained at top in position
but not in direction (c) Restrained at top and bottom in position but not in direction
(d) Restrained at bottom in position and direction; restrained at top in direction but not
in position (e) Restrained at bottom in position and direction; unrestrained at top in
position or direction.
should not arise if the piles are driven a short distance below rockhead to achieve a
degree of fixity.
The appropriate codes of practice should be consulted to obtain the reduction factors on
the working stresses to allow for the slenderness of the piles.
7.6
Lengthening piles
Precast (including prestressed) concrete piles can be lengthened by cutting away the concrete
to expose the main reinforcement or by splicing bars for a distance of 40 bar diameters. The
reinforcement of the new length is then spliced to the projecting steel, formwork is set up,
and the extension is concreted. It is usual to lengthen a prestressed concrete pile by this tech-
nique in ordinary reinforced concrete. The disadvantage of using the method is the time
required for the new length to gain sufficient strength to allow further driving.
A rapid method of lengthening which can be used where the piles carry compressive loads
or only small bending moments is to place a mild steel sleeve with a length of four times the
pile width over the head of the pile to be extended. The sleeve is made from 10 mm plates
and incorporates a central diaphragm which is bedded down on a 10 to 15 mm layer of earth
dry sand–cement mortar trowelled onto the pile head. After setting the sleeve a similar layer
of mortar is placed on the upper surface of the diaphragm and rammed down by a square
timber. The extension pile with a square end is then dropped down into the sleeve and
driving commences without waiting for the mortar to set. An epoxy-resin–sand mortar can
be used instead of sand–cement mortar. An epoxy-resin joint can take considerable tensile
or bending forces, but the length of time over which the adhesion of the resin to the concrete
is effective is indeterminate. The bond may be of rather short duration in warm damp
conditions.
Another method of lengthening piles is to drill holes into the pile head. Then bars
projecting from the extension piece are grouted into these holes using a cement grout or an
epoxy-resin mortar.
Timber piles are lengthened by splicing as shown in Figures 2.3 and 2.4, and steel piles
are butt-welded to lengthen them (Figure 7.5a and b). Backing plates or rings are provided
Structural design of piles and pile groups
385
Butt weld
Positioning plates
Tack weld
Butt weld
Backing
ring
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.5 Splicing steel piles (a) Positioning plates for H-pile (b) Backing ring for tubular piles.
to position the two parts of the pile while the butt weld is made but the backing plates for
the H-piles (Figure 7.5a) may not be needed if both sides of the pile are accessible to the
welder. The backing ring for the tubular pile shown in Figure 7.5b is deliberately made thin
so that it can be ‘sprung’ against the inside face of the pile. When lengthening piles in
marine structures, the position of the weld should be predetermined so that, if possible, it
will be situated below sea-bed level, and thus be less suceptible to corrosion than it would
if located at a higher elevation.
The specification adopted for making welded splices in steel piles should take into account
the conditions of loading and driving. For example, piles carrying only compressive loading
and driven in easy to moderate conditions would not require a stringent specification with
non-destructive testing for welding below the soil line. However, piles carrying substantial
bending moments in marine structures would require a specification similar to that used for
welding boilers or pressure vessels. Advice on specifications suitable for given conditions of
loading and driving should be sought from the manufacturers of the piles.
7.7
Bonding piles with caps and ground beams
Where simple compressive loads without bending or without alternate compressive and
uplift loading are carried by precast or cast in-situ concrete piles it is satisfactory to trim off
the pile square so that the head without any projecting reinforcement is set some 75 to
100 mm into the cap (Figure 7.6a). Some uplift (but not bending) can be carried if the sides
of the pile are roughened over a distance of about 300 mm and cast into the cap
(Figure 7.6b). Where bending moments are to be transferred from the cap to the piles (or
vice versa) the concrete must be cut away to expose the reinforcing steel or prestressing
tendons, which are then bonded into the cap (Figure 7.6c). It is sometimes the practice to
provide special mild steel splicing bars in the heads of prestressed concrete piles, which are
exposed by cutting away the concrete after driving is complete (Figure 2.6). Alternatively,
couplers can be set flush with the pile head to which further tendons or bars are attached for
bonding into the cap. Splicing bars or couplers are satisfactory if the depth of penetration of
386
Structural design of piles and pile groups
75–100 mm
Roughening
300 mm
Concrete in
pile cut away
Reinforcement
in pile cap
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.6 Bonding reinforced concrete piles into pile caps (a) Compressive loading only on piles
(b) Compressive loading alternating with light to moderate uplift loading on piles
(c) Bending moments or heavy uplift loads on piles.
the pile can be predicted accurately. If the upper part of the pile has to be cut away, they no
longer have any useful function, but they can serve as a means of lengthening a pile should
this be necessary.
Proprietary hydraulic pile croppers, suspended from the dipper arm of an excavator, can
either break off the excess length of a concrete pile at the required level or nibble the con-
crete leaving the reinforcement exposed.
Steel box, tubular, or H-section piles carrying only compressive loads can be terminated
at about 100 to 150 mm into the pile cap without requiring any special modifications to
the pile to provide for bonding (Figure 7.7a). There must, however, be a sufficient thick-
ness of concrete in the pile cap over the head of the pile to prevent failure in punching
shear. Research by the Ohio Department of Highways(7.7) has shown that if the concrete
forming the pile cap is of adequate thickness and if the reinforcement is correctly
disposed to withstand shearing and bending forces there is no need to provide a bearing
plate or other device for transferring load at the head of an H-pile. However, where steel
piles are carrying the maximum working load permitted by the material in cross-section,
the thickness of concrete in the pile cap to resist punching shear may be uneconomically
large. In such cases the head of the pile should be enlarged by welding on a capping plate
(Figure 7.7b) or by threading steel bars through close-fitting holes drilled in the pile
(Figure 7.7c). The capping arrangements shown in the latter two figures can be used to
bond the pile to the cap when uplift loads or bending moments are carried by the pile, or
alternatively bonding bars can be welded to the pile. Load transfer from large diameter
tubular piles to pile caps can be achieved by welding rectangular plates around the
periphery of the pile at its head.
Structural design of piles and pile groups
387
M.S.capping plate
M.S.plate
cover
M.S.plate
stiffeners
M.S.bars
Closely
fitting
drilled
holes
(a)
(b)
(c)
75 to 100 mm
Figure 7.7 Bonding steel piles into pile caps (a) Compressive loads only on steel tubular piles
(b) Hexagonal box pile carrying heavy compressive loads or uplift loads (c) H-pile carrying
uplift loading or bending moments.
7.8
The design of pile caps
A pile cap has the function of spreading the load from a compression or tension member
onto a group of piles so that, as far as possible, the load is shared equally between the piles.
The pile cap also accommodates deviations from the intended positions of piles, and by
rigidly connecting all the piles in one group by a massive block of concrete, the ill-effects
of one or more defective piles are overcome by redistributing the loads. The minimum
number of small diameter piles which is permitted in an isolated pile cap is three. Caps for
single piles must be interconnected by ground beams in two directions, and for twin piles by
ground beams in a line transverse to the common axis of the pair.
A single large-diameter pile carrying a column does not necessarily require a cap. Any
weak concrete or laitance at the pile head can be cut away and the projecting reinforcing bars
bonded to the starter bars of the column reinforcement. Where a steel column is carried by
a single large-diameter pile, the concrete is cut down and roughened to key to the pedestal
beneath the column base. The heads of large-diameter piles are cast into the ground floor or
basement floor concrete in order to distribute the horizontal wind forces on the superstructure
to all the supporting piles.
To facilitate construction, ground beams should be arranged, where possible, to pass
across the tops of the pile caps and not to frame into the sides of the caps, the connection
between the cap and the ground beam being provided by column starter bars and by the
friction and bond between cap and beam. The concrete forming the caps may then be placed
in one operation and without the inconvenience and potential weakness that result from the
formation of pockets to receive the ground beams. If the beams must frame into the cap
sides, an alternative to providing pockets is to place the concrete in the caps in two
operations, a horizontal construction joint being formed in each cap at the level of the
underside of the ground beams.
Site setting out is also simplified by locating the ground beams on top of the pile caps.
The caps (and column starter bars, if required) can be constructed with reference to the min-
imum number of drawings, and fixed points on the site are then available for setting out the
formwork for the ground beams. Provision often has to be made for services to pass through
a foundation. If the ground beams are all situated on top of the pile caps, the routes of the
services are not obstructed by any pile caps, since the services may pass over the cap
through holes or sleeves left in the ground beams. The apparent economy in materials and
excavation gained by framing ground beams into the sides of pile caps can easily be lost by
the inconvenience it causes to other operations.
A deep cap is suitable for four piles, as shown in Figure 7.8. By adopting this arrange-
ment the column load is transferred directly into the pile heads in compression. The bend-
ing and shearing forces are negligible, requiring only the minimum proportion of steel in
two directions at the bottom of the cap. EC2 (Clause 9.8.1) requires the distance from the
outer edge of the pile to the edge of the pile cap to be sufficient to allow the tie forces in the
cap to be properly anchored. The form of the distribution of compressive force from the top
of the pile to the body of the cap is shown in Figure 7.9. The extent of the compressive zone
can be allowed for when determining the anchorage length of the main reinforcement. This
is most efficiently concentrated in the stressed zone between the tops of the piles (Figure
7.10). The minimum diameter of this reinforcement is required to be 8 mm. If the area of
main reinforcement distributed over the pile heads is equal to the area required by consid-
erations of control of cracking (Clause 7.3 of EC2) then evenly distributed bars along the
388
Structural design of piles and pile groups
Structural design of piles and pile groups
389
Minimum reinforcement
required by Code of 
Practice
Load transferred
to piles over this
area
45˚
Figure 7.8 Load transfer from column to deep four-pile cap.
bottom surface of the cap can be omitted. Also the sides and top surfaces of the cap may be
unreinforced if there is no risk of tension developing in these zones (see Figure 7.9). BS 8110
requires minimum percentages of reinforcing steel of 0.24 and 0.13 for mild and high tensile
steel respectively.
Pile caps constructed over large groups of piles as in Figures 7.10 and 7.11 can be
designed as solid slabs. The design requirements for these members are set out in Clause 9.3
of EC2.
45°
≥50 mm
Compressed zone
Figure 7.9 Distribution of compressive stress from pile head to pile cap.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Main reinforcement
Figure 7.10 Arrangement of reinforcement in pile caps.
Column
H-section piles
Column base
Figure 7.11 Solid slab cap for 16-pile group.
The bending moments on the pile cap are assumed to act from the centre of the pile to the
face of the nearest column or column stem (Figure 7.12). When calculating bending
moments an allowance should be made for deviations in the positions of the pile heads, up
to the specified maximum tolerance (see Section 3.4.12).
In all cases the aim should be to preassemble reinforcement cages for pile caps and
ground beams in order to avoid difficulties for steel fixers working in confined conditions
in pits and trenches.
The cover to all reinforcement depends on the exposure condition, and the grade of
concrete being used in the pile cap, and reference should be made to Clause 4 of EC2 and
Clause 3.3 of BS 8110: Part 1. In particular, where concrete is cast directly against the earth,
the cover should not be less than 75 mm.
Where columns carry a compressive load combined with a unidirectional bending
moment, the line of action of the column load should be made to coincide with the centroid
of the pile group in order to obtain a uniform distribution of load on the piles.
The dimensions of a number of standardized types of cap for use in design using
computer programs are shown in Figure 7.13.
Deep pile caps are desirable for providing the stiffness necessary to distribute heavy
concentrated column loads on to a large pile cluster. However, this can sometimes cause
construction difficulties in unstable soils where the groundwater level is at a shallow depth
below the ground surface. It is desirable, on the grounds of cost, to avoid construction
expedients such as a wellpoint groundwater lowering system to enable the pile cap to be
constructed in dry conditions. Consideration should therefore be given to raising the level
of the pile cap to bring it above groundwater level or to such a level that sump pumping from
an open excavation will not cause instability by upward seepage.
The design and construction of pile caps at over-water locations is discussed in Section 9.6.3.
Structural design of piles and pile groups
391
Column
0.2  pile width or diameter
Y
Y9
X
X
X9
X9
Y9 Y
Critical section for shear check
Critical section for flexure check
Figure 7.12 Calculation of bending moments and shearing forces on rectangular pile cap.
2k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
(
(2k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
(2k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
2 3 k 3 pile dia.
(
k 3 pile dia.
(k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
k 3 pile dia.
(k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
(k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
(k 3 1)pile dia. 1 300 mm
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
Pile dia. 1 300* mm
3
(
(
6
1
2
k 3     3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
3
(
( 2
1
k3
3
2 k 3
(
(
1
3k
3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
1
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
(2k 1 1) 3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
3
(
(
1
k 1
1pile dia. 1       mm
3 pile
    dia.
3
600
1      mm
3
300
2
3
(
(
1
k 1
pile
dia.
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
k 3 pile dia.
3(k 1 1) 3 pile dia 1 300mm
3 k 3 pile dia.
3 pile dia. 1 300 mm
pile dia. 1 250* mm
Pile dia. 1 300 mm
Figure 7.13 Standard pile caps (after Whittle and Beattie(7.8)).
7.9
The design of pile capping beams and 
connecting ground beams
Pile capping beams have the function of distributing the load from walls or closely spaced
columns onto rows of piles. For heavy wall loading in conjunction with transverse bending
moments the piles are placed in transverse rows surmounted by a wide capping beam
(Figure 7.14a). The piles may be placed in a staggered row for walls carrying a compressive
loading with little or no transverse bending moments (Figure 7.14b). A lightly loaded wall
can be supported by a single row of piles beneath the centre-line provided that the beam
capping the piles is restrained by tying it to transverse capping beams carrying cross walls
in the structure. Attention should be given to providing adequate restraint to transverse
movement and bending where ground beams are supported by minipiles.
A design method was proposed by the Building Research Establishment(7.9) which allows
the bending moments and shearing forces in a beam to be reduced if the beam can be shown
to be acting compositely with the brick wall built upon it. The method may be applied to the
design of pile capping beams for house foundations, and is applicable to walls having a
height of not less than 0.6 of the span of the beam. The walls must not have door or window
openings near to the supports, as this would interfere with the arching action of the
brickwork. The bending moment produced by a uniformly distributed load on a freely
supported beam is WL/8. With full composite action between beam and wall, this moment
may be reduced to a minimum of WL/100 for light loading, where W is the total distributed
load on the brickwork (including self weight) and L is the span of the beam. A property of
composite action is that the compression in the arch within the brickwork is directed radi-
ally towards the nearest firm supports; therefore, shearing reinforcement of the beam is the-
oretically unnecessary if the loaded lengths at the supports can be shown to be not greater
than the depth of the beam. However, the BRE recommended that all beams designed for
bending moments of greater than WL/60 should be designed to resist the shearing forces
produced by the full dead and imposed loading.
Structural design of piles and pile groups
393
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.14 Arrangement of piles in capping beams (a) Heavy wall loading with transverse
bending moments (b) Light wall loading with little or no transverse bending.
It is recommended that the depth of the beam should be between L/15 and L/20. However,
with a heavily loaded wall only a small degree of composite action is allowed and it may be
necessary to use a beam deeper than L/15. When considerable composite action is present,
i.e. when the bending moment is less than WL/40, the reinforcement should be calculated
for a beam having a depth equal to L/15 even if a deeper beam is to be provided for other
reasons. This is to ensure that there is sufficient steel in the beam to act as a tie across the
springing of the arch within the brickwork.
When designing pile capping beams by limit-state principles it is seldom necessary to
consider the serviceability limit-state. However, an examination of the limit-state of
cracking is necessary if the beam is to be exposed to soil or groundwater which can be
expected to be corrosive. The limit-state of deflection should be checked if the beam is to
support a wall faced with a material such as mosaic tiles, which are particularly susceptible
to cracking due to small movements.
The BRE design method assumed that the ground floor slab is carried by the soil and is not
connected to the capping beam. If a suspended floor slab is provided the capping beam must
be designed by conventional methods. A disadvantage of the BRE design is that it can inhibit
house owners from removing large areas of load-bearing walls in the course of making
improvements such as the addition of rear conservatories. There is a danger that the house
owner may not be aware of the basis of the design of the ground beams when proceeding
with these and similar structural alterations.
It is a good practice to provide a suspended ground floor slab in cases where piles are
provided to restrain a structure from lifting due to a swelling soil. A ground floor slab cast
directly onto a swelling soil will lift and will, in turn, cause the lifting of internal partitions,
with the consequent distortion of any floors carried by them, and the cracking of plaster
finishes. Uplift pressures due to soil swelling against the underside of a pile capping
beam must be considered. In clay soils where mature trees or hedges have been removed
the clay may swell up to 100 mm over a long period of years. Swelling of pyritic mudstones
and shales can occur due to the growth of gypsum crystals within the laminations of
these rocks. Gypsum growth can be caused by chemical and microbiological changes
consequent on changed environmental conditions(7.10). Swelling pressures, if the upward
movement of the soils is resisted by a reinforced concrete capping beam, can be of a
magnitude which will cause the piles to fail as tension members, or which will lift the piles
out of the soil.
It is essential to insert a layer of compressible material such as Clayboard or special low
density polystyrene or to provide a void between the soil and underside of the capping beam
to reduce the uplift forces transferred to the piles (Figure 7.15). Load/deflection tests should
be made on specimens of the compressible material to ensure that the amount of compres-
sion required by the predicted degree of soil swelling does not generate a pressure on the
ground beam that is sufficient to cause structural failure of the beams or piles, or lifting of
the building. There have been a number of cases of failure and cracking of piles, ground
beams, and superstructures to low-rise buildings constructed on swelling clays in recent
years. These have been caused mainly by deficiencies in design such as inadequate tension
reinforcement and lack of proper provision for uplift on ground beams. The latter should be
of generous depth to provide for differential uplift forces caused by local tension failure in
piles in unpredictable conditions of soil swelling.
Horizontal swelling forces can also impose loads on pile capping beams due to the
restraint provided by the beam to the expansion of the mass of the soil. To avoid excessive
394
Structural design of piles and pile groups
swelling forces on the inner sides of beams they should not be left in contact with the clay.
After casting the concrete has been completed, the clay should be cut back as shown in
Figure 7.15. The space between the side of the beam and the cut-back of the excavation is
left empty, or is only loosely backfilled.
Ground beams are provided to act as ties or compression members between adjacent pile
caps, so providing the required restraint against sidesway or buckling of the piles under lat-
eral or eccentric loading (see Section 7.5). Ground beams and pile capping beams may have
to withstand horizontal loading from the soil due to the tendency to movement of vertical
piles under lateral loading. They may also be subjected to bending in a vertical direction due
to differential settlement between adjacent groups of piles.
It may be permissible to allow the passive resistance of the soil against the sides of pile
caps and ground beams to supplement the resistance of the piles to lateral loading. However,
in clay soils the ground will shrink away from the sides of shallow members in dry weather
conditions. Trenching for building services alongside pile caps must also be considered a
possibility. In any case quite appreciable yielding of the soil must take place before its
passive resistance is fully mobilized. This movement may be sufficient to cause the failure
in bending of vertical piles.
The superimposed loading on the ground beams or pile capping beams is transferred to
the piles by bonding the longitudinal reinforcing steel to the beams into the pile caps.
However, it is not good practice to carry the longitudinal steel through holes burned in the
projecting parts of steel piles. It is quite likely that the pile head will have deviated from the
correct position and it may be impossible to bend the beam reinforcing bars over a sufficient
horizontal distance to pass through the holes in the steel pile without causing complications
Structural design of piles and pile groups
395
Reinforcement lapped with capping beam
steel and extended downwards to anchor
into zone of non-swelling clay
Layer of special low-density
foamed plastic or 'Clayboard'
Beam under
cross wall
150 mm void
Precast r.c suspended floor
Dry bed joint
280 mm
Damp-proof course
Cranked vent
Ground level
R.c capping beam
Face of excavation cut back
and space loosely filled or
left void
Bored and cast
in place pile
Figure 7.15 Design of pile capping beam for swelling clay soils.
to the stirrups in the beams. If the main steel in ground beams or ground floor slabs
must extend across the piles it should be carried above the pile heads as shown in
Figure 7.16a, or at the sides of the projecting piles with ample spaces to allow for
misalignment (Figure 7.16b).
7.10
References
7.1
GLANVILLE,W. G., GRIME, G., and DAVIES, W. W. The behaviour of reinforced concrete piles during
driving, Journal of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 1, 1935, p. 150.
7.2
SMITH, E. A. L. Pile driving analysis by the wave equation, Journal of the Soil Mechanics Division,
American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 86, No. SM4, 1960, pp. 35–61.
7.3
GOBLE, G. G., RAUSCHE, F., and LIKINS, G. E. Jr, The analysis of pile driving – A state of art,
Proceedings of the International Seminar on the Appplication of Stress Wave Theory on Piles,
Stockhoem, 1980, A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 1981.
7.4
GOBLE, G. G. and RAUSCHE, F. Pile driveability calculations by CAPWAP, Proceedings of the
Conference on Numerical Methods in Offshore Piling. Institution of Civil Engineers, London,
1979. pp. 29–36.
396
Structural design of piles and pile groups
Construction joint
Bonding
bars
Ground beam
Pile cap
Ground floor slab
Distance between these pairs
of bars to allow for deviation
in position of pile head
(Top steel only shown)
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.16 Arrangement of reinforcing steel in ground beams and ground floor slabs.
7.5
WHEELER, P. Stress wave competition, and making waves, Ground Engineering, Vol. 25, No. 9,
1992, pp. 25–8.
7.6
FLEMING, W. G. K. and LANE, P. F. Tolerance requirements and construction problems in piling,
Proceedings of the Conference on the Behaviour of Piles, Institution of Civil Engineers, London,
1971, pp. 115–18.
7.7
Investigation of the strength of the connexion between a concrete cap and the embedded end of
a steel H-pile, Research Report No. 1, State of Ohio, Department of Highways, December 1947.
7.8
WHITTLE, R. T. and BEATTIE, D. Standard pile caps, Concrete, Vol. 6, No. 1, 1972, pp. 34–6, and
Vol. 6, No. 2, 1972, pp. 29–31.
7.9
WOOD, R. H. and SIMMS, L. G. A tentative design method for the composite action of heavily-loaded
brick panel walls supported on reinforced concrete beams, Building Research Establishment
Current Paper, 26/69 July 1969.
7.10 HAWKINS, A. B. and PINCHES, G. M. Cause and significance of heave at Llandough Hospital, Cardiff –
a case history of ground floor heave due to gypsum growth, Quarterly Journal of Engineering
Geology, Vol. 20, 1987, pp. 41–57.
Structural design of piles and pile groups
397
8.1
Berthing structures and jetties
Cargo jetties consist of a berthing head at which the ships are moored to receive or
discharge their cargo and an approach structure connecting the berthing head to the shore
and carrying the road or rail vehicles used to transport the cargo. Where minerals are
handled in bulk the approach structure may carry a belt conveyor or an aerial ropeway. In
addition to its function in providing a secure mooring for ships, the berthing head carries
cargo-handling cranes or special equipment for loading and unloading dry bulk cargo
and containers.
Berthing structures or jetties used exclusively for handling crude petroleum and its
products are different in layout and equipment from cargo jetties. The tankers using the
berths can be very much larger than the cargo vessels. However, the hose-handling equip-
ment and its associated pipework are likely to be much lighter than the craneage or dry bulk-
loading equipment installed on cargo jetties serving large vessels. The approach from the
shore to a petroleum loading jetty consists only of a trestle for pipework and an access road-
way. Where the deep water required by large tankers commences at a considerable distance
from the shore-line, it is the usual practice to provide an island berthing structure connected
to the shore by pipelines laid on the sea bed.
In spite of the considerable differences between the two types of structure, piling is an
economical form of construction for cargo jetties as well as for berthing structures and pipe
trestles for oil tankers. The berthing head of a cargo jetty is likely to consist of a heavy deck
slab designed to carry fixed or travelling cranes and the imposed loading from vehicles
and stored cargo. The berthing forces from the ships using the berths can be absorbed by
fenders sited in front of and unconnected to the deck structure (Figure 8.1a), but it is more
usual for the fenders to transfer the berthing impact force to the deck and in turn to the rows
of supporting piles. The impact forces may be large and because the resistance of a vertical
pile to lateral loading is small the deck is supported by a combination of vertical and raking
piles (Figure 8.1b). These combinations can also be used in structures of the open trestle
type such as a jetty head carrying a coal conveyor (Figure 8.2).
The piles in the berthing head of a cargo jetty are required to carry the following
loadings:
(1) Lateral loads from berthing forces transmitted through fendering
(2) Lateral loads from the pull of mooring ropes
(3) Lateral loads from wave forces on the piles
(4) Current drag on the piles and moored ships
Chapter 8
Piling for marine structures
(5) Lateral loads from wind forces on the berthing head, moored ships, stacked cargo, and
cargo handling facilities
(6) Compressive loads from the dead weight of the structure, cargo handling equipment,
and from imposed loading on the deck slab
Piling for marine structures
399
Figure 8.1 Fender piles for cargo jetties (a) In independent breasting dolphin (b) Attached to main
deck structure.
Fender
pile
Rubber
cushion
Deck of wharf
Fender
Rubber
cushion
Breasting
dolphin
Deck of wharf
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.2 Raking and vertical piles used to restrain berthing forces in bulk handling jetty.
(7) Compressive and uplift forces induced by overturning movements due to loads 1 to 5 above
(8) In some parts of the world piles may also have to carry vertical and lateral loads from
floating ice, and loading from earthquakes.
The above forces are not necessarily cumulative. Whereas wind, wave, and current forces
can occur simultaneously and in the same direction, the forces due to berthing impact and
mooring rope pull occur in opposite directions. Berthing would not take place at times of
maximum wave height, nor would the thrust from ice sheets coincide with the most severe
wave action. Where containers are stored on the deck slab the possibility of stacking them
in tiers above a nominal permitted height must be considered.
8.1.1
Loading on piles from berthing impact forces
The basic equation used in calculating the force on a jetty or independent berthing structure
due to the impact of a ship as it is brought to rest by the structure is
(8.1)
where ms is the displacement of the ship and the mass of water moving with the ship, and
V is the velocity of approach to the structure.
The whole of the energy as represented by equation 8.1 is not imparted directly to the jetty
piles. Kinetic energy is also absorbed by the deformation of the hull of the ship and by the
compression of the fenders and of the cushioning between the fenders and their supporting
structure. Ships normally approach the jetty at a narrow angle to the berthing line and the
kinetic energy in the direction parallel to this line is generally retained in kinetic form but
a part may be lost in overcoming the resistance of the water ahead of the ship’s bows, in fric-
tion against the fenders, and in the pull on the mooring ropes if these are used to restrain
longitudinal movement. A full consideration of the complexities involved in calculating the
magnitude and direction of berthing forces cannot be dealt with adequately in this book, and
the reader is referred to Part 4 of the British Standards Code of Practice (BS 6349-1: 2000)
for maritime structures(8.1) for guidance on these problems.
On the assumption that the kinetic energy of the ship transverse and parallel to the
berthing line has been correctly calculated the problem is then to assess the manner in which
the energy is absorbed by the fenders and their supporting piles. Taking the case of a verti-
cal pile acting as a simple cantilever from the point of virtual fixity below the sea bed, and
receiving a blow from the ship with a force H applied at a point A (Figure 8.3a), the distance
moved by the point A can then be calculated by the simple method shown in equation 6.20
and repeated here for convenience, namely:
(8.2)
If the ship is brought to rest by the vertical pile as it moves the pile head over the distance
y, then the work done by the force H over this distance is given by
(8.3)
work done 1
2 Hy
H 2(ezf)3
6EI
distance moved y 
H(e  z f)3
3EI
kinetic energy Ek msV2
2g
400
Piling for marine structures
The bending moment M on the pile is equal to H(e  zf) therefore
(8.4)
If required the more-rigorous methods described in Sections 6.3.3 and 6.3.4 can be used to
calculate the deflection of the pile head and hence the work done in bringing the ship to rest.
The bending moment which can be applied to a pile is limited by the allowable working
stress on the extreme fibres of the material forming the pile for normal berthing impacts, or
by the yield stress with abnormal berthing velocities. Thus if the allowable resistance
moment Ma is used in equation 8.4 the capacity of the pile to absorb kinetic energy can be
calculated and compared to the kinetic energy of the moving ship which must be brought to
rest. If the capacity of the pile is inadequate the blow from the ship must be absorbed by
more than a single pile. In practice, vertical piles are grouped together and linked at the head
and at some intermediate point (Figure 8.1a) to form a single berthing dolphin, or are spaced
in rows or ‘bents’in the berthing head of a jetty structure. In the latter case the kinetic energy
of the ship may be absorbed by a large number of piles. In the case of a pile fixed against
rotation by the deck slab of a structure (Figure 8.3b) it was shown in equation 6.21 that
(8.5)
The bending moment caused by a load at the fixed head of a pile is equal to 
, and
thus the work done is the same as shown in equation 8.4.
BS 6349 points out that in the case of a piled wharf erected parallel to a sloping shore line,
the piles supporting the rear of the deck, being more deeply embedded than those at the front
will resist a much higher proportion of the horizontal forces imposed on the fendering. It
may be necessary to consider sleeving the rearward piles to equalize the flexural resistance.
1
2H(e  zf)
distance y moved point A 
H(e  zf)3
12EI
work done
M2(ezf)
6EI
Piling for marine structures
401
Figure 8.3 Lateral movement of fender piles due to impact force from berthing ship (a) Single
free-headed pile (b) Group of fixed-headed piles.
A
A
H
H
e
e
y
y
zf
zf
Point of fixity
(a)
(b)
If the rear of the deck is abutting a retaining wall such as a sheet pile wall, virtually the
whole of the horizontal forces on the deck will be transmitted to the wall.
Where medium to large vessels are accommodated the berthing impact is not absorbed
directly by a pile or by a deck structure supported by piles. Means are provided to cushion
the blow, thus reducing the risk of damaging the ship, and limiting the horizontal movement
of the jetty. It is also more economical during design to provide cushioning devices than to
absorb forces directly on the structure. It must be noted that whereas independent berthing
dolphins can be allowed to deflect over a considerable distance (and large deflections are the
most efficient means of absorbing kinetic energy), the deck slab of a cargo jetty cannot be
permitted to move to an extent which would cause instability in travelling cranes, stacked
containers or mechanical elevators. This limitation restricts the allowable movement of such
cargo jetties to a very small distance.
Where energy absorbing fenders are provided, the work equation 8.4 is modified. Taking the
simplified case shown in Figure 8.4 of a fender pile backed by a cushion block transmitting
the impact to a bent of piles transverse to the berthing line, the work equation becomes
kinetic energy of moving ship absorbed by system in Figure 8.4
(8.6)
where H is the impact force of the first blow on the fender,  is the distance moved in
bringing the ship to rest after the first impact, 1 is the distance moved by the compression
of the cushion block, and 2 is the distance moved by the pile bent.
In a practical design case a limit is placed on 2 by the operating conditions on the jetty.
Then if the cushion block is to be fully compressed by the ship moving at the maximum
design approach velocity, 1 is known and  is the sum of 1 and 2. Hence, knowing
the kinetic energy of the moving ship, the impact force H can be calculated. This force
is the sum of the force in the cushion block and the shearing force at the head of the pile.
The bending moment induced in the fender pile by the action of force H over distance  is
compared with the moment of resistance of the selected pile, and the energy absorbing
capacity of the cushion block is checked to ensure that the force required for full compression
is not exceeded by the force H. The condition shown in Figure 8.4, of a single fender pile
transmitting the full force of a moving ship to a single pile bent, does not occur in practice.
In a cargo jetty the fender piles are spaced at equal distances along the berthing face and the
impact is absorbed by a number of piles, depending on the closeness of their spacing, and

1
2  H   
1
2  H(1  2)
402
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.4 Energy absorption of fender pile cushioned at head.
Cushion block
fully compressed
Cushion block
uncompressed
Point of
first impact
Fender pile
∆2
∆1
∆=∆1 + ∆2
H
the extent to which they are tied together by intercostal beams or by a longitudinal berthing
beam. An approximate rule is to assume that the blow is absorbed over a length of berthing
face equal to twice the width of the jetty. BS 6349 recommends a minimum distance between
ships moored along a jetty of 15 m.
The design process is one of trial and adjustment to determine the most economical
combination of vertical fender piles with rubber or spring cushion blocks that will limit the
movement of the protected jetty structure to the desired value. If the impact is delivered at
a point below the head (Figure 8.5) some of the energy is absorbed by the soil, some by
the deflection of the pile considered as a beam fixed at the lower end and with a yielding
prop at the upper end, and some by the yielding at the prop position (i.e. the yielding of the
cushion block).
As alternatives to the system of fender piles, each backed by a cushion block as shown in
Figure 8.4, a group of piles can carry a rubber fender (Figure 8.6a) or a link-suspended
clump fender (Figure 8.6b). For these designs the energy transmitted to the supporting piles
is equal to the kinetic energy of the moving ship, less than the energy expended in
compressing, displacing, and raising the fender from its neutral position.
Forces act in a direction parallel to as well as normal to the berthing line. Assuming
that there are no objects projecting beyond the side of the ship, the force acting parallel to
the berthing line is equal to the coefficient of friction between ship and fender times the
reaction normal to the berthing line. The longitudinal force tends to cause the twisting of
fender piles and of pile bents set transversely to the berthing line. The rotational force on
the pile bents is a maximum when the ship makes contact near the end of the jetty, and it is
desirable to provide piles raking in a longitudinal direction at the two ends of the structure.
The end piles in a jetty head are vulnerable to impact below the water-line from the bulbous
bows of vessels provided with bow-thrust propellers.
Damage to fender piles or their connections to the main structure by longitudinal forces
can be avoided by spiking timber rubbing strips onto the faces of the fenders. These will be
torn off by a severe impact but the pile will remain relatively undamaged.
Rubber fenders are designed to deflect in a longitudinal as well as a transverse direction
and are thus capable of absorbing impact energy from both directions. Suspended fenders
are given a degree of freedom to swing in a longitudinal direction and they fall clear as the
ship sheers off after the first impact. Fenders can also be provided with rollers mounted on
vertical axles to reduce the longitudinal frictional force on the structure.
Piling for marine structures
403
Figure 8.5 Impact force below head of raking fender pile.
Cushion block
Point of impact
Fender pile
As already noted, the facilities provided at the berthing head of an oil jetty or island
berthing structure are limited to hose-handling gear and pipework. A relatively small deck
area is required and the berthing structure can take the form of two main fenders spaced at
a distance equal to about 0.3 times the length of the largest tanker using the berth, with two
or more secondary fenders having a lower energy-absorbing capacity sited between them to
accommodate smaller vessels (Figure 8.7). Frequently, the main and secondary fenders are
sited in front of the hose-handling platform and pile trestles to allow them to take the full
impact of the tanker without transmitting any thrust to these structures. The independent
breasting dolphins, as shown in Figure 8.7, are designed so that their collapse load is not
exceeded by the thrust due to the maximum berthing velocity expected.
The type of piling required for independent breasting dolphins depends on the soil
conditions. Where rock, stiff clay or granular soils offering a good resistance to lateral loads
are present at or at a short distance below the sea bed, the dolphin can consist of a group
of large-diameter circular or box-section vertical steel piles, linked together by horizontal
diaphragms (Figure 8.8) and carrying a timber fender with rubber cushion blocks on
the front face of the group. The face area of the fender should be large enough to prevent
concentrated loading from damaging the hull of the ship. The horizontal bracing members
are not rigidly connected to the pile group. This is to allow the piles to deflect freely to the
maximum possible extent while performing their function of bringing the ship to rest.
The layout shown in Figure 8.7 can sometimes restrict the size and numbers of vessels
using the berth. It can be more economical to adopt a berthing structure of the type used for
cargo handling (Figure 8.1b). The berthing forces are transmitted directly to the deck so
404
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.6 Pile-supported fendering systems (a) Rubber cushion fender (b) Link-suspended clump
fender.
Rubber blocks
Main bearing frame
Fender
Fender
R. C. clump
Hardwood
guide
Suspension links
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.7 Layout at berthing head of oil jetty.
Pipe trunkways
Approach trestle
Walkway
Main breasting dolphins
Mooring dolphins
Secondary
breasting dolphins
Hose handling
platform
Figure 8.8 Steel tubular breasting dolphin.
406
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.9 Load/deflection curve for 1300 mm O.D. steel tubular pile due to horizontal load at head
of pile (after Broadhead(8.2)).
100
200
0
200
300
400
500
600
700
Horizontal pull at top of pile (kN)
Theoretical curve for
fixity at R.C. template
on sea bed
Observed deflection
Theoretical curve for support
by uncemented shell sand
(Reese and Matlock)
Limestone
Stiff clay
Sea bed
Template
1300 mm O.D.
steel tubular pile
Sea level
10.4 m
24 m
Variably cemented shell sand
ARRANGEMENT OF TEST PILE
Pull
400
600
800
1000
1400
1200
1600
Horizontal movement at top of pile (mm)
permitting vessels to berth in any position along the face. Pairs of rakers resisting the ship
impact are spaced at intervals along the deck or are grouped to form ‘strong points’ with the
deck slab acting as a horizontal beam.
Breasting dolphins for the oil loading terminal of Abu Dhabi Marine Areas Ltd., at Das
Island, were designed by the British Petroleum Company to consist of groups of vertical steel
tubular piles. The main outer dolphins were formed from a group of seven piles, and the inner
secondary dolphins were in three-pile groups. The conditions at sea-bed level, which consisted
of a layer of shelly limestone cap-rock underlain by a stiff calcareous marl and then a dense
detrital limestone, favoured the adoption of vertical piles to absorb the berthing forces. The
36.6 m piles varied in outside diameter from 800 mm at the top to 1300 mm at the bottom,
the latter being closed by a full plate on which 15 roller cutters were mounted. The piles were
pitched through a reinforced concrete template placed on the sea bed and then drilled down
by rotating them by means of a hydraulically powered rotary table operated from a jack-up
platform. The cuttings were washed up the annular space between the outside of the pile and
the rock and this space was afterwards grouted with a sand–cement mix.
Broadhead(8.2) described a pulling test made on a mooring dolphin pile to confirm that the
lateral resistance of the weak rocks below the sea bed would not be exceeded at the work-
ing load. The test pile had a bottom diameter of 1300 mm and the pull was applied at a point
24 m above the sea bed. The load/deflection curve obtained at a measuring point 22.86 m
above the sea bed is shown in Figure 8.9 and is compared with the theoretical deflection
curve assuming fixity at sea-bed level or support from an uncemented shell sand below sea
bed, using the elastic analysis of Reese and Matlock (see Section 6.3.4).
8.1.2
Mooring forces on piles
Mooring structures are not required to carry any pull from ropes during the operation of
berthing ships other than a restraining longitudinal movement at the final stages of the
berthing operation.
When the ship is fully moored four ropes are attached to bollards or bitts fixed to the jetty
structure or mounted on independent mooring dolphins in positions such as those shown in
Figure 8.7. Using this type of layout the ship is restrained from excessive ranging against the
fenders and also from moving away from the berth under the influence of offshore waves or
currents. The load on any individual rope due to winds or currents acting on the ship or to
checking the way of a ship during berthing cannot be calculated with any accuracy.
It depends on the tensioning of the rope and its angle to the berthing line.
The wind and current forces on the ship can be calculated using the equations given
below for calculating the current force on a pile (equation 8.10) or the wind force on a pile
(equation 8.14).
Mooring dolphins should be designed to be as rigid as possible. This is to restrict the
ranging of ships which is exaggerated by the lifting and sagging of the mooring ropes.
Independent mooring dolphins can take the form of pile groups set back from the berthing
line as shown in Figure 8.7, or placed beyond the ends of the berthing head. Piles in mooring
dolphins can be raked in two directions to resist longitudinal, transverse and torsional pulls
(Figure 8.10). Where rock is present at or at a short distance below the sea bed, anchorages
are required to withstand the uplift on tension piles as described in Section 6.2.4.
Guidance on the design of mooring structures is given in Part 4 of BS 6349.
8.1.3
Wave forces on piles
Jetties are normally sited in sheltered waters or in locations selected as not being subject to
severe storm waves. Consequently, the forces on piles due to wave action are considerably
less severe than those caused by the impact from berthing or the pull from mooring ropes.
Also, berthing operations are not expected to take place when heavy wave action is occur-
ring. Therefore, it is the usual practice to disregard wave forces on piles forming the berthing
head of a jetty and any associated independent dolphin structures where these are sited in
Piling for marine structures
407
Figure 8.10 Mooring dolphin with piles raked in two directions.
Bollard
Figure 8.11 Shape of breaking wave.
Wave length
Motion of water
particle waveheight 5 H
c
h
Sea bed
z
u
x
Figure 8.12 Design curves for calculating velocity and acceleration of water particles in breaking wave.
0.1
0.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Elevation z/h
Elevation z/h
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
0.1
Values of (u/c)2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Values of 1g
du
dt
x
h 50.2
x
h 50.4
x
h 50.8
x
h 51.6
x
h 50.2
x
h 50.4
x
h 51
x
h 50
sheltered waters. However, in the case of island berthing structures for large vessels, which
are sited in deep and relatively unsheltered waters, the wave forces may represent a signifi-
cant proportion of the total force required to be calculated. Also, piles supporting the
approach trestle to a jetty are not required to withstand berthing impact forces. Thus wave
forces, even in fairly sheltered waters, when combined with wind pressures on the super-
structure and current drag on the piles, may produce substantial loading transverse to the
axis of the trestle.
A simple approach to the calculation of wave forces on fixed structures is to assume that
the maximum wave force can be expressed as the equivalent static force caused by a solitary
wave of the shape shown in Figure 8.11. This shape is representative of a breaking wave. An
oscillatory wave has a different shape but the factors given in Figure 8.12 and Table 8.1 for use
with equations 8.8 and 8.9 are applicable only to breaking wave conditions. Drag and inertial
forces are exerted on the structure by the water particles which move in an elliptical path as
shown. From the work of Wiegel et al.(8.3), Reid and Bretschneider(8.4), Dailey and Stephen(8.5),
and Bretschneider(8.6), it is possible to calculate the water particle velocity u at any point
having co-ordinates x horizontally from the wave crest and z vertically above the sea bed.
The water particle velocity can be related to the velocity of advance of the wave crest (the
wave celerity c) and expressed in terms of (u/c)2 and 1/g  du/dt for various ratios of x and z to
the height h of the trough of the wave above the sea bed.
The solitary-wave theory is limited in its application to a range of conditions defined
by the ratio of the wave period to the water depth. Because the equations given below are
applicable only to breaking wave conditions they represent the maximum force which can
be applied to a structure. Breaking wave conditions are unlikely to occur in deep water
berths for large tankers, and these conditions are likely to be found only in fairly shallow
water on exposed jetty sites, for example along the line of the approach structure from the
Piling for marine structures
409
Table 8.1 Surface elevations, velocities, and accelerations for solitary breaking wave 
Distance
Surface
Values of 
Values of 
from crest elevation
At 
At 
At
Average Height to At
At
At 
Average Height to
x/h
zs/h
surface z  h bottom value
centroid
surface z  h bottom value
centroid
0
1.78
1.000
0.176 0.109
0.226
1.19
0
0
0
0
0.2
1.67
0.430
0.170 0.106
0.181
1.03
0.242
0.073 0.031
0.081
1.14
0.4
1.57
0.276
0.156 0.099
0.150
0.92
0.347
0.137 0.060
0.133
1.02
0.6
1.48
0.201
0.133 0.092
0.123
0.83
0.380
0.184 0.087
0.164
0.93
0.8
1.41
0.138
0.106 0.078
0.097
0.80
0.357
0.214 0.110
0.180
0.88
1.0
1.35
0.092
0.082 0.070
0.077
0.70
0.321
0.225 0.127
0.186
0.78
1.2
1.29
0.062
0.063 0.058
0.061
0.65
0.280
0.225 0.140
0.187
0.73
1.4
1.25
0.041
0.046 0.048
0.047
0.61
0.243
0.209 0.146
0.182
0.68
1.6
1.21
0.029
0.032 0.038
0.035
0.59
0.209
0.192 0.148
0.173
0.65
1.8
1.18
0.020
0.023 0.029
0.027
0.56
0.174
0.171 0.145
0.159
0.62
2.2
1.13
0.009
0.011 0.018
0.014
0.50
0.122
0.128 0.130
0.130
0.57
2.6
1.08
0.004
0.005 0.009
0.007
0.50
0.088
0.091 0.109
0.102
0.53
3.0
1.05
0.002
0.002 0.004
0.003
0.50
0.065
0.067 0.084
0.078
0.51
3.4
1.03
0.001
0.001 0.002
0.002
0.50
0.049
0.049 0.062
0.058
0.50
5.0
1.01
0.000
0.000 0.000
0.000
0.50
0.012
0.012 0.017
0.016
0.50
1/g · (du/dt)
(u/c)
2
shore to a deep-water berth. However, as noted by Newmark(8.7) the solitary-wave theory is
often applied to situations beyond its strict range of validity for want of a better theory. For
deep-water structures the solitary-wave theory gives over-conservative values of wave force.
However, equations 8.7 to 8.9 based on this theory together with the dimensionless graphs
are simple and easy to use. It is suggested that the equations are used for all parts of a deep-
water berthing-head structure and for the shallow-water approach whenever it is necessary
to calculate wave forces. If these forces together with current drag, wind forces, and berthing
impact forces do not produce excessive bending stresses on the piles then the calculations
need not be further refined. It must be kept in mind that the cross-sectional area of a pile
may be governed by considerations of corrosion and driving stress rather than the stress
resulting from environmental forces. Where the wave forces calculated by the solitary-wave
theory are a significant factor in the design of the piles more detailed calculations should
be made taking into account the relationship between wave height, water depth, and wave
period. Methods of general application can be found in the publications of the US Army
Coastal Engineering Research Centre(8.8).
In general wave theories, the wave force on a fixed structure is taken as the sum of the
drag and inertial forces exerted by the wave. These are expressed by the commonly used
Morison equation(8.9):
(8.7)
where f, fD, and fI are the wave force, drag force, and inertial force, respectively, per unit area
of object in the path of the wave, CD is a drag coefficient, w is the density of water, g is the
gravitational acceleration, u is the horizontal particle velocity of water, CM is a coefficient
of inertia force, D is the diameter of the cylindrical object, and du/dt is the horizontal
acceleration of a water particle.
BS 6349-1, Clause 39.44, expresses the Morison equation in a somewhat different form
and includes guidance on its limitations, together with equations for calculating the velocity
of the water particles. The values for CD shown in Table 8.2, Section 8.1.4 below, can be used
in the version of the Morison equation given in equations 8.7 to 8.9. The values of C1 in
Table 8.2 can also be used for CM in equations 8.7 to 8.9.
Newmark(8.7) reduced equation 8.7 to a simple expression given in lb-ft-sec units. By
taking the weight of sea water as 64 lb/ft3 and the gravitational acceleration as 32.2 ft/sec
the equation becomes
(8.8)
ffD fI	50CDh
u
c
2
50CMD· 1
g · du
dt
 lb/ft2
ffD fICDwu2
2g CMw
g
D
4 · du
dt
410
Piling for marine structures
Table 8.2 Drag force and inertia coefficients for square section piles
Flow direction
Figure no.
CD
CL
Perpendicular to face
8.13a
2.0
2.5
Against corner, in direction of diagonal
8.13b
1.6
2.2
Perpendicular to face, rounded corner, r/ys  0.17
8.13c
0.6
2.5
Perpendicular to face, rounded corner, r/ys  0.33
8.13c
0.5
2.5
In SI units, equation 8.8 becomes
(8.9)
Values of 
and 
for different positions relative to the location of the wave
crest are shown in Figure 8.12 and Table 8.1. This table also lists the average values of 
and 
together with the heights to the centroid of the two components. The wave
forces and moments applied to each increment of height of pile projecting above the scoured
sea bed up to wave crest level, and on any underwater bracing or jacket members, are
integrated to obtain the total horizontal force on the pile or group of piles and also the
overturning moment about the point of fixity below the sea bed.
For use with equations 8.8 and 8.9 Newmark(8.7) recommends a value for CD of 0.5 to 0.6
for cylindrical members and 1.5 to 2.0 for the inertia coefficient CM. For rectangular, H and
I sections CD can be taken as up to 2.0. Theoretically CD is related to the Reynolds number
Re as discussed in the following section. Newmark also recommends that shielding effects
produced by closely spaced piles or bracing members should be disregarded when calculat-
ing wave forces.
BS 6349 (Part 1) draws attention to the effect of impact forces (wave slam) on horizontal
members exposed to the crests of advancing waves.
Barnacle growth on piles and bracings should be taken into account by allowing an appro-
priate increase in diameter. It has been reported(8.10) that marine growths more than 200 mm
in thickness have occurred around steel piles of the North Sea gas production platforms after
about eight years of exposure. The growths extend down to sea bed where the water depths
were about 25 m. If drag forces due to marine growths are excessive, provision can be made
for the members to be cleaned periodically by divers.
8.1.4
Current forces on piles
The velocities and directions of currents (or tidal streams) affecting the structure are
obtained by on-site measurements which should include the determination of the variation
in current velocity between the water surface and the sea bed. A curve is plotted relating the
velocity to the depth and the current drag force is calculated for each increment of height of
the pile above the sea bed. Any scour below the sea bed should be provided for.
Current forces are calculated from the equation:
FD  0.5CDV 2An
(8.10)
The components of the above equation are defined in BS 6349 as
FD  steady drag force (kN)
CD  dimensionless time-averaged drag force coefficients
  water density (tonne/m3)
V  incident current velocity (m/sec)
An  Area normal to flow (m2)
1/g · (du/dt)
(u/c)2
1/g · (du/dt)
(u/c)2
f 	7.8CDh
u
c
2
 8CMD · 1
g · du
dt
 kN/m2
Piling for marine structures
411
CD is related to the Reynolds number, which for cylindrical members and normal water
temperatures is given by the equation:
Re  9.3VD  105 in sec/m2 units
(8.11)
Section 5 of BS 6349 includes graphs relating CD for cylindrical members to their surface
roughness and Reynolds number. They show that CD for rough members is in the range of
0.4 to 0.6 for Reynolds numbers between 105 and 106. The code gives values for CD and C1
(CM in equation 8.7) for square section piles as shown in Figure 8.13 and Table 8.2.
If piles or other submerged members are placed in closely spaced groups, shielding of current
forces in the lee of the leading member will occur. Shielding can be allowed for by modifying
the drag coefficient. Values of the shielding coefficient have been established by Chappelaar(8.11).
Where currents are associated with waves it may be necessary to add the current velocity
vectorially to the water-particle velocity u to arrive at the total force on a member. Also, the
possibility of an increase in the effective diameter and roughness of a submerged member
due to barnacle growth must be considered.
Having calculated the current force on a pile it is necessary to check that oscillation will
not take place as a result of vortex shedding induced by the current flow. This oscillation
occurs transversely to the direction of current flow when the frequency of shedding pairs of
vortices coincides with the natural frequency of the pile.
Determination of the critical velocity for the various forms of flow-induced oscillation of
cylindrical members is given in BS 6349-1, Clause 38.3, by the equation:
Vcrit  KfN Ws
(8.12)
where K is a constant equal to
1.2
for onset of in-line motion
2.0
for maximum amplitude of in-line motion
3.5
for onset of cross-flow motion
5.5
for maximum amplitude of cross-flow motion
fN  natural frequency of the cylinder
Ws  diameter of the cylinder.
412
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.13 Flow conditions for determining drag conditions.
R
Flow direction
(a) 
(c) 
ys
(b) 
The natural frequency of the member is given by the equation:
(8.13)
where K is a constant, L is the pile length, E is the elastic modulus, I is the moment of
inertia, and M is the effective mass per unit length of pile. Ws should take into account
the possibility of barnacle growth. K is equal to 0.56, 2.45 and 3.56 respectively for can-
tilevered, propped, and fully fixed piles. The elastic modulus is expressed in units of
force. In the case of a cylindrical pile the effective mass M is equal to the mass of
the pile material plus the mass of water displaced by the pile. Where hollow tubular
piles are filled with water the mass of the enclosed water must be added to the mass of
the material. In the case of a tubular steel pile with a relatively thin wall the effective
mass is approximately equal to the mass of the steel plus twice the mass of the displaced
water.
BS 6349 provides graphs relating Vcrit in equation 8.12 to L/Ws where L is the overall pile
length from deck level, where the pile is assumed to be pin-jointed, to the level of apparent
fixity below sea bed.
Very severe oscillations were experienced during the construction of the Immingham Oil
Terminal. At this site in the Humber Estuary, piles were driven through water with a mean
depth of 23 m and where ebb currents reach a mean velocity of 2.6 m/s (5 knots). The piles
were helically welded steel tubes with outside diameters of 610 mm and 762 mm and a wall
thickness of 12.7 mm. Before the piles could be braced together they developed a cross-flow
motion which at times had an amplitude of 1.2 m. Many of the piles broke off at or above
the sea bed. A completed dolphin consisting of a cap block with a mass of 700 tonnes
supported by 17 piles swayed with a frequency of 90 cycles per minute and an amplitude
of 6 mm.
Moored ships can transmit forces due to current drag onto the piles supporting the mooring
bollards. The current drag on the ship is calculated from equation 8.10.
8.1.5
Wind forces on piles
Wind forces exerted directly on piles in a jetty structure are likely to be small in rela-
tion to the quite substantial wind forces transmitted to the piles from deck beams,
cranes, conveyors, stacked, containers, sheds and pipe trunkways. In a jetty approach
the combined wind and wave forces which usually act perpendicularly to the axis of the
approach can cause large overturning moments on the pile bents, particularly when the
wind forces are acting on pipe trunkways or conveyor structures placed at a high eleva-
tion, say at a location with a high tidal range. Wind forces on moored ships also require
consideration, and allowance should be made where necessary for the accretion of ice
on structures.
Wind forces can be calculated from equation 8.10 by taking the mass of air as 1.29 g/l or
this equation can be conveniently expressed in Imperial units as
(8.14)
F  0.00256V2CDA
fN K
L2
EI
M
Piling for marine structures
413
where F is the wind force in pounds, V is the sustained wind velocity in m.p.h. at the elevation
of the portion of the structure under consideration, CD is a drag coefficient, and A is the
projected area of the object in square feet (including an allowance for ice accretion).
The values of the drag coefficient for use with equations 8.10 and 8.14 are as listed in
Section 8.1.3 and shielding coefficients(8.14) can be applied for closely spaced members.
Wind velocities can be corrected for height by means of the equation:
(8.15)
where H2 and H1 are the two elevations concerned. It should be noted that wind velocities
based on short-duration gusts may be overconservative when considering wind forces on
large ships.
8.1.6
Forces on piles from floating ice
Forces on piles caused by floating ice have characteristics somewhat similar to those from
berthing ships, the principal difference being the length of time over which the ice forces are
sustained. Ice floes are driven by currents and wind drag on the surface of the floe. Typically
a floe consists of a consolidated layer, which may be up to 3 m thick in sub-arctic waters,
underlain by a mass of ‘rubble’ in the form of loose blocks, and wholly or partly covered
by loose debris and snow. When designing a structure to resist ice forces it is necessary to
determine the dominant action, i.e. whether it is the pressure of the wind and current driven
floe against the structure, or the resistance offered by the structure in splitting the advanc-
ing consolidated layer. In an extensive review of the subject Croasdale(8.14) stated that only
on relatively small bodies of water will the wind-induced forces govern the design load.
Wind forces can be calculated from equation 8.10. Croasdale advises omitting the factor
0.5 when using this equation and gives values for CD as 0.0022 for rough ice cover,
0.00335 
 CD 
 0.00439 for unridged ice, and 0.005 for ridged Arctic sea ice. In equation 8.10
the values for CD are appropriate to m/sec units of the wind velocity at the 10 m level.
Croasdale gives a typical force on a 4 m diameter cylindrical pier as 10 MN caused by an
ice sheet 4.15  4.15 km in area, driven by a wind velocity of 15 m/sec.
On striking a vertical pile which is restrained from significant yielding, the consolidated
ice layer is crushed at the point of impact. With further movement of the floe radial cracks
are propagated in the ice sheet followed by buckling. The buckling dissipates the energy of
the moving mass which is brought to rest locally against the pile. The surrounding cracked ice
sheet and the underlying loose rubble are diverted to flow past the pile and in doing so they
generate frictional forces on the contact surfaces. The force is likely to be at a maximum at
the time of initial cracking of the ice sheet followed by lesser peaks due to jamming of the
packed ice and adfreezing of the ice on to the structure (Section 9.4).
Croasdale gives the basic equation for the ice force on a narrow rigid structure as
F  p/tb
(8.16)
where
p  effective ice stress
t  ice thickness
b  width of pier
V2 V1
H2
H1
1
7
414
Piling for marine structures
The empirical equation of Korzhavin(8.12) for calculating p is
p  Imk
c
(8.17)
where
I  indentation factor
m  shape factor
k  contact factor
c  uniaxial compression strength of the ice
I is stated to be equal to unity for a wide pier and 2.5 for a narrow pier (t/b  1). The shape
factor is approximately unity for a circular pier, k is also unity for perfect contact between
the ice and the structure. The compression strength is difficult to determine by laboratory
testing. It depends on the crystal structure, strain rate, temperature and sample size.
Croasdale gives an alternative calculation method based on plasticity theory. The pene-
tration of the pier into the ice is analogous to the failure of a soil surface under the imposed
loading of a strip foundation, when the ice sheet is displaced around the pier in the form of
wedges, similar in shape to the soil heave around the foundation.
For wedges splitting at an angle of 45	 to the edge of the ice sheet the equation for
calculating the effective ice stress is
p  
c (1  0.304t/b)
(8.18)
It appears from Croasdale’s paper that the contact factor k should be applied to the value
of p calculated from equation 8.18. A factor of 0.5 is given for continuously moving ice, and
1.0 or more for ice frozen around a structure.
The equation of Tryde(8.13) based on wedge theory is
(8.19)
The forces on the pile from the rubble have been mentioned above. Frictional forces from
loose blocks can be assumed to act as a granular material. Where the blocks are frozen
together the stresses on the pile will be lower than that of the consolidated ice sheet because
the bonds between the blocks will fracture at low strain levels.
It is evident that a single large pile or cylinder will be more effective in resisting ice forces
than a cluster of smaller piles. A more efficient structure has a conical shape as shown in
Figure 8.14. The impact force from the ice sheet is distributed in directions normal and
tangential to the sloping face. Energy is dissipated as the ice sheet is levered up and cracked
circumferentially. Further energy is dissipated as the broken blocks are pushed up the slope.
Methods of calculating ice forces on conical structures are discussed by Croasdale(8.14) and
more recently by Brown(8.15).
The structure shown in Figure 8.14 is designed for weak ground conditions needing support
by a piled raft to resist horizontal and vertical forces. The shape is unsuitable for berthing large
ships, but it is suitable as a single point mooring, or as a foundation for a wind generator.
8.1.7
Materials for piles in jetties and dolphins
For jetties serving vessels of light to moderate displacement tonnage and of shallow draught,
timber is the ideal material for fender piles. It is light and resilient and easy to replace.
p  0.8
c1 
2.1
(0.4  b/t)
Piling for marine structures
415
As already noted the face of a timber fender pile can be protected by a renewable timber rubbing
strip. The type of timber used for fender piles is governed by considerations of the attack by
organisms present in the sea water. Suitable types of timber are described in Chapter 10.
For jetties and berthing structures in deep water serving large vessels, either steel or
prestressed concrete tubular piles can be used. Steel piles have the advantage that they can
withstand rough handling while being loaded onto barges and lifted into the leaders of the
floating piling frame or jack-up platform (Figure 3.7). They can withstand hard driving to
attain the penetration depths necessary to achieve the required uplift and lateral resistance.
However, they require expensive cleaning and coating treatment above the soil line, supple-
mented by cathodic protection to enable them to resist corrosion in sea water. Losses in
thickness of the pile section over the design life of the structure caused by corrosion need to
be considered in relation to the working stresses under operating conditions. The types of
steel suitable for piling in marine structure are discussed in Section 2.2.6.
Prestressed concrete piles also possess considerable resilience, but repair is a difficult prob-
lem if they are subjected to accidental heavy impact damage. Prestressed concrete piles are suit-
able for approach structures and for jetty heads protected by independent berthing structures.
Problems of sea-water attack on steel and concrete structures are discussed in Chapter 10.
8.2
Fixed offshore platforms
Because of their location, frequently in deep water exposed to severe wave action, the forces
acting on fixed platform structures are different in character from those on jetties in
416
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.14 Conical structure for resisting ice forces.
Ballast
Water
filling
Ice rubble
Ice floe
Current direction
RC caisson
Rock rubble
mattress
Dredgect
seabed
Support piles
relatively shallow and sheltered waters. Whereas in berthing structures the dominant forces
are those caused by the berthing of ships, the offshore platform is served only by small
vessels and the environmental forces resulting from waves, winds, and currents have a
dominating influence on design. In very deep water, the environmental forces can account
for three-quarters of the total load on a main supporting member.
The economics in the design and construction of offshore platforms for petroleum and gas
production and wind farms are viewed from a standpoint very different from that applied to
jetty design. In the case of jetties and wind turbine installations the main requirements are
low capital cost, ease of maintenance, and a long life. The time required for construction is
not usually a critical factor in the design of shear-shore structures. However, only a limited life
is required from oil and gas production platforms but assurance of stability in the most severe
exposure conditions is of vital importance, and rapidity of installation at sea is essential.
This is because of the limited periods during which the state of the sea will permit the
operation of large floating cranes and other constructional plant.
The principal activity for the offshore construction industry in the 1970s and the 1980s
was in the fabrication and installation of platforms for oil and gas production and laying
sea-bed pipelines. The platforms constructed in the UK and Western Europe were mainly in
the relatively shallow waters of the North Sea where multi-pile foundations of the type
shown in Figure 8.15 were an economical form of construction. Gravity base platforms
where the foundation consisted of a large caisson floated into place and sunk on to the
prepared sea bed were also constructed.
Piling for marine structures
417
Figure 8.15 Fabrication of platform for Forties Field (North Sea) of British Petroleum Co., showing
guides for clusters of piles around each leg.
In recent years many of the offshore oil and gas fields were becoming or have become
exhausted requiring the platforms and base structures to be dismantled and removed to
restrict future pollution of the marine environment. The search for sources of oil and gas has
been extended to deep-water areas where the piled jacket-type structure are not economi-
cally feasible because of the limitations of available construction equipment to operate in
deep water and the associated sea conditions.
In the 1990s and continuing the present day a new outlet for the offshore industry has
arisen in the installation of wind turbines. Offshore wind farms are required, from consid-
eration of visual intrusion to be located at least 5 km from the shore line, but it has been
possible to find sea areas having water depths sufficiently shallow to permit the construction
of piled foundations for the turbines. The design and construction of wind farms present severe
problems for the engineer which have been reviewed by Bonnett(8.16) and by Ffrench et al.(8.17)
They give examples of wind turbines with rotor diameters up to 90 m, weighing with the
associated machinery some 250 tonne mounted at a height of 70 m above sea level. At
peak wind force conditions the dynamic forces generated by the turbines can act concur-
rently with peak wave action on the supporting structure to cause cyclic overturning
moments on the foundations. A dominant design problem is in providing sufficient stiffness
in the combined machinery and foundation system so that its natural frequency exceeds that
of the excitation forces.
It has been possible, with the present generation of wind turbines, to erect them on a
single large diameter pile (monopile) foundation. Tubular steel piles 5.4 m in diameter have
been driven in water depths up to 20 m using equipment of the type shown in Figure 3.7.
Penetration depths of piles are determined from considerations of resistance of the soil to
dynamically applied horizontal and vertical forces taking into account the possibility of
sea-bed scour increasing the overturning moments. The risks of degradation of the soil
around the shaft and beneath the base of the piles need to be assessed. The present limitations
on the size of piles which can be handled and driven by available equipment may require
the use of three piles driven through a sea-bed template carrying a tripod substructure for
the foundations of the next generation of heavier turbines. Ffrench et al.(8.17) describe rotor
diameters of 126 m for turbines of 4.5 to 5 MW capacity. Bonnett(8.16) refers to the unsuit-
ability of codes of practice for the design of building structures to deal with the problems
involved with wind turbines. He refers to a code used for structures erected in France(8.18).
Certifying authorities for oil and gas production usually demand a specific safety factor for
a 100-year wave combined with the corresponding wind force and maximum current velocity,
referred to as the design environmental conditions. The maximum forces due to operations on
the platform such as drilling are combined with specified wind and sea conditions, and are
known as the operating environmental conditions. The American Petroleum Institute(8.19)
requires the safety factors on the ultimate bearing capacity of piled foundations not to be
less than the minima given in Table 8.3.
The reader is referred to design and construction recommendations in the current
publications of the American Petroleum Institute(8.19,8.20) and the UK Department of Energy(6.3).
Construction methods have been described in detail by Gerwick(8.21).
8.3
Pile installations for marine structures
Where marine structures are connected to the shore, as in the case of a jetty head with a
trestle approach, the piles may be driven either as an ‘end-on’ operation with the piling
418
Piling for marine structures
equipment mounted on girders cantilevering from the completed pile bents, or as an operation
from a floating or jack-up barge. In tidal waters there is usually sufficient water depth
to float a barge with a draft of 1 to 
to a location close inshore. However, this can be
inconvenient where tidal flats or saltings cover a long depth of the approach or where it is
unsafe to ground the barge on the sea bed at low water.
Where the ‘end-on’ method is used the spacing between pile bents is limited by the ability
of the girders to cantilever when carrying the weight of the piling frame, hammer, and
suspended pile. Loading can be minimized by utilizing the buoyancy of tubular piles with
permanently or temporarily closed ends, or by using trestle guides of the types shown in
Figures 3.6 and 3.8 in conjunction with a pile-mounted hammer and a crane barge for lifting
and pitching the piles.
Piling barges for deep-water locations range in length from about 60 to 120 m with a width
of one-third to one-half of the length and an overall depth of 
to 
of the length. Adequate
depth is necessary to provide sufficient strength for towing the barge to the site from a distant
location, and to give sufficient freeboard for safe operation when moored at the work site.
These barges are normally self-contained with accommodation for the barge and rig crew.
Jack-up barges operate most efficiently when provided with mechanically adjustable pile
guides installed either by cantilevering from the side of the barge or spanning a ‘moon-pool’
inset in the barge hull.
If possible, piles should be driven to their full design penetration without the need to
weld-on additional pile lengths, to drive insert piles, or to clean out the soil plug or drill
below the initial refusal level of an open-ended tubular pile. Gerwick(8.21) gave an example
of times required for welding add-on lengths of 1.37 m OD tubular piles; they varied from
hours for 25 mm wall thickness to 
hours for 64 mm thickness. Such delays cause
increased driving resistance due to ‘take-up’ (i.e. the increase of shaft friction). However,
there are many situations where piles cannot be driven to their full penetration without the
need for lengthening or for ‘drilling-and-driving’ techniques.
Cleaning out the soil plug is an effective way of reducing the driving resistance, thus
obtaining deep penetration, because of the elimination of base resistance. It is particularly
advantageous for obtaining deep penetration into coarse soils, say to develop uplift resist-
ance, to avoid excessive settlement due to vibration effects, or to reach rockhead. This is
because the base resistance in a coarse soil represents the major proportion of the total
resistance to the driving of the pile. Removal of the soil plug is not particularly effective for
piles penetrating deeply into clays where the base resistance is only a very small proportion
of the total resistance. Drilling out the soil within the pile does not reduce the external shaft
friction of the surrounding clay.
10
1
2
3
1
4
1
15
1
12
1
1
2 m
Piling for marine structures
419
Table 8.3 Minimum safety factors for various loading conditions 
Loading condition
Minimum safety factor
1. Design environmental conditions with appropriate drilling loads
1.5
2. Operating environmental conditions during drilling operations
2.0
3. Design environmental conditions with appropriate producing loads
1.5
4. Operating environmental conditions during producing operations
2.0
5. Design environmental conditions with minimum loads
1.5
Equipment of the type described in Section 3.3 is used to drill-out the soil from within a
tubular pile. Where rotary methods are used centralizers are required to keep the drilling
pipes in line with the pile axis. A Calweld drill was used to clean out the soil from within
the 2000 and 2200 mm outside diameter steel tubular piles used for the breasting and
mooring dolphins of The British Petroleum Company’s tanker terminal in the Firth of Forth.
To install the vertical piles, a rotary table and guide frame were mounted on top of the pile
as shown in Figure 8.16. A full-face drilling bit was used and the cuttings were removed by
air–water reverse circulation up the 200 mm drilling pipe. The drill bit was maintained in
correct alignment by centralizers and a heavy collar was provided to maintain pressure on
420
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.16 Drilling soil from within 2200 mm OD piles using reverse-circulation drill (Forth
Tanker Terminal,The British Petroleum Co.).
Guide frame
Water and air swivel
Rotary table
200 kN-m at 12 r.p.m.
Centralizer
200 drill pipe
2200 O.D. steel
tubular pile
Guides
Deck of jack-up
barge
Barge leg
Weight collar
1 829 dia. × 6 706
Drilling bit
Sea bed
Sea level
Water delivery
to pile
the bit. Drilling was continued into rockhead, and followed by the separate operation of
drilling-in a 560 mm steel tubular dead anchor to a depth of 15 m into the rock to provide
an uplift resistance of 7.4 MN. It is evident from Figure 8.16 that the numbers of heavy
components required to be assembled for drilling out the soil from within and below large
diameter piles are considerably greater than those required for the simple operation of
driving the pile by hammer. Space is limited on the deck of a construction barge, and where
floating vessels are used the heavy equipment may need to be secured to the deck by bolting
or chain tackle. Hence, the successive operations of driving the pile to refusal, removing the
hammer, assembling the drilling gear, then drilling, and removing the equipment can be very
protracted. Therefore, if ‘drill and drive’ operations are required the aim should be to restrict
the drilling phase to only one operation.
Insert piles can be used where piles driven to their full design penetration fail to attain a
satisfactory resistance, or where ‘drilling and driving’ techniques are unable to achieve the
required penetration.
Where insert piles are used, or where single piles are driven within the tubular guides of
a jacket, the transfer of load from the insert pile to the main pile, and from the main pile to
the leg, is made by welded joints at the pile heads or by grouting the annular space between
the members. Both methods can be used together. The grout is prevented from flowing out
from between the bottom of the jacket leg and the pile by means of inflatable packers or
wiper sleeves built into the bottom of the jacket legs. The design of the grout bond from
the pile to the jacket or between piles is described in Section 6.2.5. The need for terminat-
ing an insert pile at the head of the exterior pile or jacket guide can be avoided, in the case
of large-diameter sections by driving the insert pile with a ‘slim-line’ underwater hydraulic
hammer.
Instead of relying on the bond stress between pile and grout, mechanical keying devices
of the type described in Section 6.2.5 can be used. They may be essential to transfer the load
from the legs of deep-water platforms to large-diameter piles where the large thickness of
the annulus is of some significance concerning the development of sufficient bond strength
between grout and steel. The shrinkage of a grout rich in cement can be quite significant
within an annulus that is, say, 75 to 100 mm thick, and it has a weakening effect on the grout
bond. In these conditions the development of an allowable bond stress even in the lower
range recommended by the American Petroleum Institute may be impossible to achieve, and
shear keys on both pile and sleeve are necessary to provide the means of transferring
the load through a grouted annulus. Shear keys on the inner surface of a raking sleeve
may prevent the pile from being lowered through the sleeve but they are unlikely to cause
an obstruction when used in a vertical sleeve and pile.
The alternative to adopting insert piles or ‘drilling and driving’ techniques to mobilize
compressive or uplift resistance in stiff to hard clays, is to provide an enlarged base to the
piles. This can be achieved by using a rotary under-reaming tool operating below the toe of
an open-ended steel tubular pile. The enlarged base provides both increased resistance to
compressive loads and a positive anchorage against uplift. The uncertainty concerning the
ability of available hammers to drive straight-sided piles to a deep penetration is avoided.
However, there can be difficult problems when the arms of the expanding cutter fail to retract.
When open-end piles are driven into deep granular soil deposits the driving resistance
may be very low for the reasons described in Section 4.3.3. As a result, calculations of
resistance to axial compression loads based on dynamic testing are correspondingly low,
indicating very deep penetration of the pile to achieve the required resistance. These
Piling for marine structures
421
penetrations are often much greater than those required for fixity against lateral loading.
Although base resistance to axial loading can be achieved by grouting beneath the pile toe
as described in Section 3.3.9, the operations of cleaning-out the pile and grouting are slow
and relatively costly. An alternative method of developing base resistance of open-end piles
which has been used on a number of marine projects is to weld a steel plate diaphragm
across the interior of the pile. The minimum depth above the pile toe for locating the
diaphragm is the penetration below sea bed required for fixity against lateral loading.
However a further penetration is necessary to compact the soil within the plug and to
develop the necessary base resistance. It is not possible to achieve a resistance equivalent
to a solid-end pile but the penetration depths are much shorter than those required for an
open-end pile.
The diaphragm method was used for the piling at the Hadera coal unloading terminal near
Haifa(8.22). Open-end piles 1424 and 1524 mm OD were proposed but initial trial driving
showed that very deep penetrations, as much as 70 m below sea bed in calcareous sands, would
be needed to develop the required axial resistance. The blow count diagram in Figure 8.17
422
Piling for marine structures
Figure 8.17 The effects of different methods of plugging steel tubular piles driven with open
ends, Hadera coal unloading terminal.
0
100
200
300
400
500
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Diaphragm reaches sea bed for 1422 mm
pile and is driven down 21.5 m
Diaphragm reaches sea bed for 1524 mm
pile and is driven down 19 m
PILES DRIVEN BY MENCK
2500 HAMMER
1524 mm OD pile (concrete plug placed at
32 m penetration)
Diaphragm with 300 mm hole
(95% closure) in 1422 mm OD pile
Diaphragm with 600 mm
OD pile
No diaphragm
in 1422 mm OD pile
Driving resistance (blows/m)
Penetration below sea bed (m)
Driving with concrete
plug
Redrive
hole (83% closure) in 1524 mm
showed quite low resistance at 36 m below sea bed. Another trial pile was driven to 32 m,
cleaned-out, and plugged at the toe with concrete. An acceptable driving resistance of about
300 blows per metre was obtained by driving the plugged pile but it was appreciated that the
plugging operations would be costly and would seriously delay completion of the project.
Trials were then made of the diaphragm method. A diaphragm with a 600 mm hole giving
83% closure of the cross-section was inserted 20 mm above the toe. This increased the
driving resistance at 39 m below sea bed and another trial with a 300 mm hole (95% closure)
gave a higher resistance at 37 m (Figure 8.17).
The diaphragm method is ineffective if a very deep penetration is required because
the long plug cannot compress sufficiently to mobilize the end-bearing resistance of the
Piling for marine structures
423
Figure 8.18 Internal diaphragm for tubular steel pile.
Radial stiffening
plates
Opening to
release water
and silt
Soil plug
forms in this
space
Stiffening plates
Depth required below sea bed
for fixity against lateral loading
plus depth to develop base
resistance of soil plug
diaphragm and settlements at the working load would be excessive. It is also ineffective in
clays or where clays are overlying the coarse soil bearing stratum. A hole is necessary in the
diaphragm for release of water pressure in the soil plug and to allow expulsion of silt.
Stresses on the underside of the diaphragm are high during driving and radial stiffeners are
needed (Figure 8.18). The pile wall below the diaphragm must be sufficiently thick to
prevent bursting by circumferential stresses induced by compression of the soil in the plug.
8.4
References
8.1
BRITISH STANDARDS INSTITUTION. BS 6349-1: 2000 Maritime structures. Code of practice for
general criteria, BSI, London, 2000 (in revision 2007).
8.2
BROADHEAD, A. A marine foundation problem in the Arabian Gulf, Quarterly Journal of
Engineering Geology, Vol. 3, No. 2, December 1970, pp. 73–84.
8.3
WIEGEL, L., BEEBE, K. E., and MOON, J. Ocean wave forces on circular cylindrical piles,
Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 83, No. HY2, 1957, pp. 1199/1–36.
8.4
REID, G. O. and BRETSCHNEIDER, C. L. Surface waves and offshore structures. The design
wave in deep or shallow water. Storm tide and force on vertical piling and large submerged
objects. The A and M College of Texas Department of Oceanography, October 1953
(unpublished).
8.5
DAILEY, J. W. and STEPHEN, S. C. Characteristics of the solitary wave, Transactions of the American
Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 118, 1953, pp. 575–81.
8.6
BRETSCHNEIDER, C. L. A theory for waves of finite height, Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
Coastal Engineering, Vol. 9, 1961, pp. 146–83.
8.7
NEWMARK, N. The effect of dynamic loads on offshore structures, Proceedings of the 8th Texas
Conference on Offshore Technology, Houston, Texas, September 1956, Paper No. 6.
8.8
Shore Protection Planning and Design, Technical Report No. 4, 1966, US Army Coastal
Engineering Research Centre, Part 2, Chapter 4, pp. 278–96.
8.9
MORISON, J. R., O’BRIEN, M. P., JOHNSON, J. W., and SCHAAF, S. A. The force exerted by surface waves
on piles, Petroleum Transactions, American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers,
Vol. 189, TP 2846, 1950, pp. 149–54.
8.10 Steady pounding of North Sea gas platforms, Ocean Industry, Vol. 10, No. 8, 1975, 
pp. 64–71.
8.11 CHAPPELAAR, J. G. Wave forces on groups of vertical piles, Journal of Geophysical Research,
American Geophysical Union, Vol. 64, 1959.
8.12 KORZHAVIN, K. N. Action of ice on engineering structures, USSR Academy of Science, Siberian
Branch, 1962. (Translated by US Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory,
1971).
8.13 TRYDE, P. Ice forces, Journal of Glaciology, Vol. 19, No. 2, 1977.
8.14 CROASDALE, K. R. Ice forces on fixed rigid structures, US Army Cold Regions Research and
Engineering Laboratory, Special Report No. 80–26, 1980.
8.15 BROWN, T. G. Ice loads on the piers of the Confederation Bridge, Canada, The Structural
Engineer, Vol. 78, No. 5, 2000, pp. 18–23.
8.16 BONNETT, D. Wind turbine foundations – loading, dynamics and design, The Structural Engineer,
Vol. 83, No. 3, 2005, pp. 41–45.
8.17 FFRENCH, R., BONNETT, D., and SANDON, J. Wind power – a major opportunity for the UK,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 158 (Special Issue 2), 2005, pp. 20–27.
8.18 Regles BAEL 91 (Béton Armé aux Etats Limites), Modifée 99, publ Eyrolles, May 2000.
8.19 Recommended practice for planning, designing and constructing fixed offshore platforms,
American Petroleum Institute, Publication RP2A, Washington DC, 1987.
8.20 Recommended practice for planning, designing and constructing tension leg platforms,
American Petroleum Institute, Publication RP2T, Washington DC, 1993.
424
Piling for marine structures
8.21 GERWICK, B. C. Construction of Offshore Structures, Wiley, 1986.
8.22 YARON, S. L. and SHIMONI, J. The Hadera offshore coal unloading terminal, Proceedings of the
Offshore Technology Conference, Paper OTC 4396, Houston, 1982.
8.5
Worked examples
Example 8.1
A breasting dolphin is constructed by linking at the head four 350  350 mm reinforced
concrete piles which are driven through 2.5 m of soft clay into a stiff clay, to a total
penetration below sea bed of 9.0 m. Find the kinetic energy which can be absorbed by the
pile group for an impact at a point 8 m above the sea bed. The maximum energy absorption
value is to be taken as the figure which stresses the piles to their yield point.
The piles can be considered as fixed at the surface of the stiff clay stratum, and the
ultimate resistance moment of each pile at the yield point is 125 kN m. Therefore from
equation 8.4:
work done in deflecting piles to yield point
Example 8.2
A steel tubular pile having an outside diameter of 1300 mm and a wall thickness of 30 mm
forms part of a pile group in a breasting dolphin. The pile is fabricated from high-tensile alloy
steel to BS 4360 Grade 55C. The piles are driven into a stiff over-consolidated clay (cu  150
kN/m2). Calculate the maximum cyclic force which can be applied to the pile at a point 26 m
above the sea bed at the stage when the failure in the soil occurs at sea-bed level, the deflec-
tion of the pile head at this point, and the corresponding energy absorption value of the pile.
Steel to Grade 55C should have a minimum yield strength of 417 N/mm2 and an elastic
modulus of 2  105 MN/m2.
The first step is to establish the p–y curves. In equations 6.36 and 6.37, the submerged
density of the soil is 1.2 Mg/m3, and a value of 0.25 can be taken for the factor J.
At sea-bed level
Nc  3  0  0  3
pu 3 1501.3 585 kN per m depth
Critical depth xr 
6  1.3
1.2  9.81  1.3
150
 0.25
 22.1 m
Moment of resistance of pile at yield point 417 0.024
0.65
15.4 MN m
Moment of inertia of pile(1.304 1.244)64 0.024 m4

41252(82.5)
6 26 106 0.0833 0.354 3.37  kJ
Piling for marine structures
425
For cyclically applied loading take
In the absence of laboratory compression tests, the appropriate value of ‡c in equation 6.39
can be taken as 0.01, and the p–y curves will be derived in the same manner as for a
normally consolidated clay.
Therefore
The deflection corresponding to pb is 
mm.
Other points of the p–y curve are calculated from equation 6.38. Thus for y  15 mm:
Similarly for
y  25 mm, p  268 kN per m depth
y  50 mm, p  338 kN per m depth
y  75 mm, p  386 kN per m depth.
Beyond the critical point at 3yc, the p–y curve decreases linearly from pb  0.72pu to zero
at y  15yc  487 mm for x/xr  0.
The p–y curve at sea-bed level for the six points established above is shown in
Figure 8.19a.
At 0.5 m below sea bed
For y  15 mm, p 
kN per m depth. Similarly
y  25 mm, p  280 kN per m depth
y  50 mm, p  352 kN per m depth
y  75 mm, p  403 kN per m depth.
The p–y curve falls linearly at 15yc  487 mm to a value of 
10kN/m.
The p–y curve for x  0.5 m is also plotted in Figure 8.19a and the curves for values of
x of 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 m below sea bed, established in a similar manner, are also shown
on this figure.
The value of p  421 kN/m represents the pressure at which yielding of the soil at the sea
bed occurs. Therefore
bending moment at sea-bed level Mt26 0.421 10.9 MN m
p  0.72  610  0.522.1 
610 0.5
3 15/32.5236
pb  0.72  610  439 kN/m at y  97 mm.
pu  3.13  150  1.3  610 kN per m depth.
Nc  3  1.2  9.81  0.5
150
 0.25  0.5
1.3
 3.13
p  0.5  585 
3 15
32.5  226 kN per m depth.
3yc  3  32.5  97
yc2.5 0.01 1.3 0.0325 m32.5 mm
pb 0.72pu 0.72585 421 kN per m depth
426
Piling for marine structures
The deflections at various points below the sea bed are obtained from Figures 6.29a and
6.29b, taking as a first trial R  3.78, corresponding to a k value from equation 6.11 of
about 24 MN/m2. Required penetration depth is 
, say 14 m. Then
From equation 6.30, MA  10.9 Mm MNm
From equation 6.32, 
MNm
From equation 6.31, 
mm
yA  10.9  3.782  1000
2  105  0.024
ym  32.4ym
MB  0.421  3.78  Mh  1.6Mh
Zmax  14
3.78  3.7
3.5  3.78  13.2
Piling for marine structures
427
Figure 8.19
10 20 30 40 50
60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
Deflection y (mm)
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
x 5 2.5 m below sea bed
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
3 yc 5 97 mm
15 yc 5 487 mm
200
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Soil resistance p in kN per m of depth
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
Es in kN/m2/m × 1 000 per metre
Depth below sea bed (m)
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0
1st trial
2nd trial
Equality line
R, obtained
R, tried
(b)
(c)
(a)
1st trial value
Es58 kN/m2/m × 1 000
2nd trial value
Es5 8 kN/m2/m × 1 000
From equation 6.33, 
mm
x (m)
ym
yA  32.4ym
yh
yB  4.7yh
yA  yB  y
(mm)
(mm)
(mm)
(mm)
0
0
1.0
32.4
1.40
6.6
39.0
0.5
0.13
0.78
25.3
1.32
6.2
31.5
1.0
0.26
0.63
20.4
1.15
5.4
25.8
1.5
0.40
0.50
16.2
1.00
4.7
20.9
2.0
0.53
0.40
13.0
0.90
4.2
17.2
2.5
0.66
0.32
10.4
0.80
3.8
14.2
The above values of y are referred to the p–y curves to obtain the corresponding values of p
and hence to obtain Es from the linear relationship Es  p/y, as tabulated below.
x (m)
y (mm)
p (kN/m)
pp/1.3 (kN/m2)
(kN/m2/m)
0
39.0
320
246
6.3
0.5
31.5
310
238
7.6
1.0
25.8
295
227
8.8
1.5
20.9
290
223
10.7
2.0
17.2
285
219
12.7
2.5
14.2
280
215
15.1
The values of Es are plotted against depth in Figure 8.19b, from which an average constant
value of Es of 
kN/m2/m is obtained. From equation 6.11:
This value of R (obtained) is plotted against R (tried) in Figure 8.19c, from which a second
trial value of R of 6.5 is taken. This higher value requires a deeper penetration of the pile, i.e.
L  3.5  6.5  22.75; say 23 m. Thus 
, and from equation 6.31:
From equation 6.33:
yB 0.421 6.53 1000
2 105 0.024
yh 24.1yh mm
yA 10.9 6.52 1000
2 105 0.024
ym95.9ym mm
Zmax  236.5  3.5
R (obtained) 
4 2  105  0.024
8
 4.9
8  103
Es   p/y
Z  x
R
yB  0.421  3.783  1000
2  105  0.024
yh  4.7yh
428
Piling for marine structures
From Figures 6.29a and b the computed deflections are as tabulated below.
x (m)
Z  x/R
ym
yA  95.9ym (mm)
yh
yB  24.1yh (mm)
yA  yB (mm)
0
0
1.00
95.9
1.45
34.9
130.8
0.5
0.08
0.85
81.5
1.37
33.0
114.5
1.0
1.15
0.75
71.9
1.30
31.3
103.2
1.5
0.23
0.65
62.3
1.20
28.9
91.2
2.0
0.31
0.57
54.7
1.11
26.7
81.4
2.5
0.38
0.52
49.9
1.05
25.3
75.2
From the p–y curve 
x (m)
y (mm)
p (kN/m)
pp/1.3 (kN/m2)
Esp/y (kN/m2/m)
0
130.8
385
296
2.3
0.5
114.5
420
323
2.8
1.0
103.2
455
350
3.4
1.5
91.2
470
362
4.0
2.0
81.4
470
362
4.4
2.5
75.2
470
362
4.8
From Figure 8.19b, the second trial value of 
, and
This is sufficiently close to the equality line for 6.5 to be accepted as the final value of R
(see Figure 8.19c).
The deflection of the pile head at the loading for the critical value of 
for soil
rupture is the sum of the following deflections (a) to (c).
(a) Deflection of pile considered as cantilever fixed at sea bed
(b) Deflection of pile at sea bed due to soil compression (from table above)  130.8 mm.
(c) Deflection of pile head due to slope of pile below sea bed.
This can be obtained from the difference of the deflections at the sea bed and 1.0m below
the sea bed. From the above table the deflection at 1 m below sea bed  103.2 mm. Therefore,
slope below sea bed  130.8  103.2  27.6 mm in 1 m. Thus, deflection at pile head
 26  27.6  718 mm.
Total deflection at pile head  514  131  718  1363 mm.
It is necessary to check the bending moments at and below the sea bed to ensure that the
resistance moment of the pile section is not exceeded. From Figures 6.29a and b, for
 0.421263 1000
3 2 105 0.024
514 mm
H  421 kN
R (obtained)
4 2 105 0.024
3.3
6.2
Es  3.3  103 kN/m2
Piling for marine structures
429
Zmax  23/6.5  3.5,
x (m)
Z  x/R
Mm
Mh
0
0
1.00
10.9
0
0
10.9
0.5
0.08
0.98
10.7
0.10
0.3
11.0
1.0
1.15
0.97
10.6
0.15
0.4
11.0
1.5
0.23
0.95
10.4
0.20
0.5
10.9
2.0
0.31
0.94
10.2
0.27
0.7
10.9
4.0
0.62
0.85
9.3
0.40
1.1
10.4
8.0
1.23
0.55
6.0
0.45
1.2
7.2
The maximum bending moment of 11.0 MNm provides a safety factor of 15.4/11.0  1.4
against yielding of the steel.
From equation 8.3, the kinetic energy absorption value of the pile for horizontal
movement at the stage of soil rupture at sea-bed level:
In a similar manner to that set out above, it is possible to obtain pile head deflections and
bending moments for various stages of horizontal loading up to the stage of yielding of the
steel and hence to draw curves of deflection and energy absorption against horizontal load.
The deflection of the pile at sea-bed level caused by a lateral force of 421 kN applied at
the sea bed can be calculated using Randolph’s curves (Section 6.3.8).
Effective Young’s modulus of equivalent solid section pile:
An average constant soil modulus of 3.3 MN/m2 from Figure 8.19b was used to calculate
pile deflections and bending moments. For undrained loading take Poisson’s ratio vu  0.5.
Shear modulus 
G*
Critical length 
In Figure 6.36a,
At 0.5 m below sea bed
z/lc  0.5/22.9  0.02 m
yr0Gc
H0 
E
p
Gc
17
 y0.65 1.5
0.421

34.2103
1.5 
17
 9.7y
Homogeneity factor  1
 lc  2  0.65
34.2  103
1.5 
27
 22.9 m
 1.1(1  0.75  0.5)  1.5  MNm2
Gc
3.3
2(1 0.5) 1.1 MNm2
E
p  4 2 105 0.024
0.654
34.2 103 MNm2

1
2 421 13631000 287 kJ
(MNm)
 2.74Mh (MNm)
(MNm)
M  MA  MB
MB  0.421  6.5Mh
MA  10.9Mm
430
Piling for marine structures
Example 8.3
A cross-section of an approach trestle giving roadway access to a cargo jetty is shown in
Figure 8.20. The trestle is sited at right-angles to the direction of maximum current velocity
and travel of storm waves. The distribution of current velocity with depth is shown on the
cross-section. The deck slab and other components of the superstructure impose a total
horizontal wind force of 25 kN on each pile bent. Storm waves have a maximum height from
crest to trough of 3 m. Determine the distribution of current and wave forces on the pile bent
and calculate the bending moments on the piles produced by these forces.
The maximum horizontal force on the piles will be due to the combined current and wave
action at HWST (6.0 m). At this stage of the tide the storm wave crest will be at 7.5 m.
The underside of the transom beam is at 8.0 m and therefore the wind force on the exposed
length of pile from 7.5 to 8.0 m will be relatively small and can be neglected. It is con-
venient to divide the length of the pile into 2 m elements. Allowance is made for barnacle
growth on the piles. Thus,
giving 9.7y  0.26,  y 0.26103
9.7
27 mm
Piling for marine structures
431
Figure 8.20
0
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Current velocity in m/s
Wind formce-25 kN
HWST5 +6.0
Wave trough5 +4.5
0.00
610 mm steel
tubular pile
(12.7 mm wall
thickness)
Distribution
of current velocity
Stiff boulder
clay
Cross-section
of pile bent
Distribution of
current and wave force
–5.5
–3.5
–1.5
+0.5
Combined current
and wave force
+6.5
+4.5
+2.5
11.91 kN/m2
9.93 kN/m2
8.37 kN/m2
7.14 kN/m2
6.71 kN/m2
6.14 kN/m2
6.14 kN/m2
D5 0.800 m
D50.68 m
–1.5
+3
+8.0
+8.5
Deck slab
Transom beam
Sea bed
–6.5
D5 0.610 m
Wave crest 5 +7.5
Table 8.4 Calculations for current and wave forces in Example 8.3 
Elevation
Average
Pile
Current
Wave drag
Wave inertia
Total
Horizontal
Bending moment
(m) (CD)
height
diameter
Velocity
Force
(u/C)2
Force
Force
force
load on
(kNm)
above sea
(m)
(m/s)
(kN/m2)
(kN/m2)
(kN/m2)
(kN/m2)
element
bed (m)
(kN)
7.5 – 5.5
13
0.610
1.2
0.36
1.18
0.21
9.01
0.26
2.54
11.91
14.53
14.5  210.69
5.5 – 3.5
11
0.610
0.8
0.16
1.00
0.18
7.72
0.21
2.05
9.93
12.15
12.5  151.87
3.5 – 1.5
9
0.680
0.6
0.09
0.82
0.15
6.43
0.17
1.85
8.37
11.38
10.5  119.49
1.5 – 0.5
7
0.680
0.4
0.04
0.64
0.13
5.58
0.14
1.52
7.14
9.71
8.5  82.53
0.5 – 2.5
5
0.680
0.3
0.02
0.45
0.12
5.15
0.12
1.31
6.48
8.81
6.5  57.25
2.5 – 4.5
3
0.800
0.25
0.01
0.27
0.11
4.72
0.11
1.41
6.14
9.82
4.5  44.19
4.5 – 6.5
1
0.800
0.25
0.01
0.09
0.11
4.72
0.11
1.41
6.14
9.82
2.5  24.55
Maximum bending moment (at 6.5 m) in kN m  690.57
z
h
1
g · du
dt
Piling for marine structures
433
From 7.5 to 3.0 m: no increase of diameter
(i.e. D  0.61 m)
From 3.0 to 1.5 m: increase of 70 mm
(D  0.68 m)
From 1.5 m to sea bed: increase of 190 mm
(D  0.80 m)
Taking Newmark’s values a drag force coefficient of 0.5 is used to calculate the current
and wave drag forces, and an inertia coefficient of 2.0 is used to calculate the wave inertia
forces. Thus in equation 8.10:
In equation 8.9
The calculated wave and current forces are shown in Table 8.4 and Figure 8.20. The bending
moments shown in Table 8.4 have been calculated on the assumption of virtual fixity of the
pile at a point 1.5 m below the sea bed in the stiff boulder clay. Scour would not be expected
around the piles in this type of soil. From Table 8.4, the combined wave and current forces
produce a maximum bending moment at the point of fixity of 690.57 kN m.
Bending moment due to wind force on deck slab:
The direct stress resulting from the dead load of the deck slab and self weight of the pile is
added to the bending stress calculated above. It is also necessary to calculate the suscepti-
bility of the pile to current-induced oscillations.
Assuming the pile to be filled with fresh water, the effective mass is approximately equal
to the mass of metal plus twice the mass of the displaced water. Therefore
When the pile is in an unsupported condition cantilevering from the sea bed, from
equation 8.13:
From equation 8.12 critical velocity for onset of cross-flow oscillation  5.5  1.5  0.61 
5 m/sec.
Therefore cross-flow or in-line oscillations should not take place for the flow velocities
shown in Figure 8.20.
fN 0.56
142
200 109 1.063 103
771.5
1.50 Hz
M187 (2 
1
40.612 1 000)771.5  kgm
Extreme fibre stress of pile 
896.82  0.305
1.063  103  103  257 MNm2.
Moment of inertia of pile section  (0.61004  0.58464)64  1.063  103m4.
Total bending moment  896.82 kNmpile.

1
2  25  (15.0  1.5)  206.25 kN m
f  7.8  0.5  11(uc)2  8  2  D
1
g · du
dt  42.9(uc)2  16D
1
g · du
dt.
FD0.5 0.5  V2 An 0.25V 2An kN  (for  1 mgm3)
9.1
Piling for machinery foundations
9.1.1
General principles
The foundations of machinery installations have the combined function of transmitting the
dead loading from the machinery to the supporting soil and of absorbing or transmitting to
the soil in an attenuated form the vibrations caused by impacting, reciprocating, or rotating
machinery. In the case of impacting machinery or equipment such as forging hammers or
presses, and reciprocating machines, piston compressors and diesel engines, the dynamic
loads transmitted to the soil take the form of thrusts in a vertical, horizontal or inclined
direction. Rotating machinery, such as gas and steam turbines, creates a torque on the shaft,
resulting in lateral loads or moments applied to the foundation block. Rock crushers and
metal shredders produce random dynamic loads as a result of rotating imbalances depending
on the particular operation. Dynamic loading from hammers or presses, or from low-speed
reciprocating engines has a comparatively low frequency of application, but the vibrations
resulting from out-of-balance components in high-speed rotating machinery can have a
high frequency.
The higher the frequency of dynamic loading, the less is the amplitude which can be
permitted before damage to the machinery occurs, or before damage to nearby structures,
and noise and discomfort to people in the vicinity becomes intolerable. When the frequency
of vibration of a machine and its foundations approaches the natural frequency of the
supporting soil, resonance occurs and the resulting increased amplitude may result in
damage to the plant and excessive settlement of the soil. The latter is particularly liable to
happen when the vibrations are transmitted to loose or medium-dense coarse soils.
When the mass of the machine and its foundations and vibration characteristics of the
soils are known, it is possible to calculate the resonant frequency of the combined
machine–foundation–soil system. In order to avoid resonance, the frequency of the applied
dynamic loading should ideally not exceed 50% of the resonant frequency for most impact
hammers or reciprocating machinery. In the case of high-speed rotating machinery it is
probable that the applied frequency will be higher than the resonant frequency of the
machine–foundation–soil system. For this condition the aim should be to ensure that
the applied frequency is at least 1.5 times the resonant frequency. The need for the wide
divergency is to allow for the starting-up and shutting-down periods when the frequency
of the machine passes through the resonant stage. If the applied frequency is too close to
the resonant frequency the stage of resonance at the acceleration or slowing down of the
machine might be too protracted.
Chapter 9
Miscellaneous piling problems
Miscellaneous piling problems
435
When designing shallow foundations for machinery, vibrations which might cause damage
or nuisance to the surroundings can be absorbed or attenuated by increasing the mass of
the foundation block. There are old ‘rules-of-thumb’ which require the ratio of the mass of the
foundation to the mass of the machine to be in the range of 1:1 to 4:1 depending on the type
of machine. The resulting required mass of the foundation may be excessive for loose or weak
soils leading to excessive settlement, even under static loading conditions, and necessitating
the provision of a piled foundation. Also, it may be necessary to employ piles on sites where
the water table is at a depth of less than one-half of the width of the block below the underside
of the base or even within a depth of twice the width of the block. This is because water trans-
mits amplitudes of vibration almost undamped over long distances which might result in
damaging effects over a wide area surrounding the installation. Similarly, piles may be desir-
able if a rigid stratum of rock or strongly cemented soil exists within a depth of 
times the
block width. Such a stratum reflects energy waves and magnifies their amplitude of vibration.
Generally, the effect of providing a piled foundation to a reciprocating or rotating machine
is to increase the natural frequency of the installation in the vertical, rocking, pitching, and
also possibly longitudinal, modes. This is because of the behaviour of the mass of soil
enclosed by the pile group acting with the pile cap and the piles themselves. The soil mass
may be relatively small where the piles act in end bearing, or large in the case of friction
piles. The natural frequency may be decreased in the lateral and yawing modes of vibration
because of the low resistance of piles to lateral loads at shallow depths.
To ensure that the ratio of the frequency of the disturbing moment or disturbing force
applied by the machinery to the natural frequency of the machine–foundation–soil system
is either greater or less than the required value, it is necessary to calculate the natural
frequency of the system. This is a complex matter, particularly for piled foundations, and is
beyond the scope of the present book. The reader is referred to the publications of
Barkan(9.1), Hsieh(9.2), Whitman and Richart(9.3), and Richart et al.(9.4) for general guidance.
Irish and Walker(9.5) have established design curves relating the natural frequency of piles
of various types to their effective length, both for the vertical and the rocking modes of
vibration. The American Concrete Institute(9.6) presents various design criteria and methods
of analysis, design and construction as currently applied to dynamic equipment foundations.
9.1.2
Pile design for static machinery loading
Piles and pile groups carrying static loads from machinery should be designed by the
methods described in Chapters 4 and 5. Particular attention should be paid to the avoidance
of excessive differential settlement of the pile cap; the differential movement should
not exceed 8 mm. The centre of gravity of the machine combined with the pile cap and
supporting piles should be located as nearly as possible on a vertical line through the
centroid of the pile group, and the eccentricity of the combined masses should not be greater
than 5% of the length of the side of the pile group. If possible the centre of gravity of the
machine and soil mass should be below the top of the pile cap.
9.1.3
Pile design for dynamic loading from machinery
Generally, it can be stated that the effect of applying dynamic loads to piles in fine-grained soils
is to reduce their shaft friction and end-bearing value, i.e. to reduce their ultimate carrying
capacity, and the effect in coarse-grained soils is to reduce their shaft friction but to increase
their end-bearing resistance at the expense of increased settlement under working load.
1
1
2 
The reduction in the shaft friction and end-bearing resistance of piles in fine-grained soils
is the result of a reduction in the shearing strength of these soils under cyclic loading. The
amount of reduction for an infinite number of load repetitions depends on the ratio of the
applied stress to the ultimate stress of the soil. It is the usual practice to double the safety
factor on the combined shaft friction and end bearing to allow for the dynamic application
of load (see Section 6.2.2).
The torque of rotating machinery can cause lateral loading on the supporting piles. The
deflection under lateral loading can be calculated by the methods described in Chapter 6. To
allow for dynamic loading the deflections calculated for the equivalent static load should
be doubled.
The type of pile, whether driven, driven and cast-in-place, or bored and cast-in-place, is
unlikely to have any significant effect on the behaviour of piles installed wholly in fine-
grained soils. It is possible that the lateral movements of piles with driven pre-formed shafts
(e.g. precast concrete or steel H-piles) will be greater than those of cast-in-place piles, because
of the formation of an enlarged hole around the upper part of the shaft (see Figure 4.5).
The frictional resistance of a pile to static compressive loading in a coarse soil is relatively
low. This resistance is reduced still further when the pile is subjected to vibratory loading, and
it is advisable to ignore all frictional resistance on piles carrying high-frequency vibrating
loads. If such piles are terminated in loose to medium-dense soils there will be continuing
settlement to a degree which is unacceptable for most machinery installations. It is therefore
necessary to drive piles to a dense or very dense coarse soil stratum and even then the
settlements may be significant, particularly when high end-bearing pressures are adopted.
This is due to the progressive attrition of the soil grains at their points of contact. The
continuing degradation of the soil particles results in the slow but continuous settlement of
the piles. If possible, piles carrying vibrating machinery should be driven completely
through a coarse soil stratum for termination on bedrock or within a stiff clay. The ACI
Report(9.6) considers the complex interaction of piles in a group under dynamic loading
when piles are closer than 20 diameters and recommends suitable computer programs to
consider group dynamic stiffness and damping effects in such cases.
A problem of piled foundations for machinery sensitive to small differential settlements
was experienced at John Brown Company’s shipyard at Clydebank. At this site 18.6 m of
loose to medium-dense silty sand were overlying stiff glacial till. Gear-cutting machinery
comprising large hobbing, shaving and grinding machines had to operate to an accuracy of
0.009 mm and each machine was installed in a separate enclosure under conditions of con-
stant temperature and humidity. It was essential to avoid any appreciable settlement of the
machines due to vibrations caused by their own motion, or transmitted from elsewhere on
the shipyard and the adjacent main road. It was expected that settlements of raft or piled
foundations terminated in the medium-dense sand (with a standard penetration test N-value
of 20 to 30 blows per 300 mm) would be excessive and a type of pile had to be selected
which could be driven through the deep sand layers to reach the glacial till. The possibility
of the compaction of the sand due to driving a number of piles in a closely spaced group was
considered and this led to the choice of a small displacement pile in the form of a Larssen
BP2 box-section driven with an open end. It would have been possible to use water jetting
to assist the penetration of these piles, but all the piles were driven by a double-acting
hammer into the glacial till without recourse to jetting. The building surrounding the plant
was carried by driven and cast-in-place piles terminated at a penetration of about 4.6 m into
the sand stratum.
436
Miscellaneous piling problems
9.2
Piling for underpinning
9.2.1
Requirements for underpinning
Underpinning of existing foundations may be required for the following purposes:
(1) As a remedial measure to arrest the settlement of a structure
(2) As a precautionary measure carried out in advance to prevent the excessive settlement
of a structure when deep excavations are to be undertaken close to its foundations, and
(3) As a strengthening measure to enable existing foundations to carry increased loading,
or to replace the deteriorating fabric of a foundation.
An example of the use of piling as a remedial measure is shown in Figure 9.1a. The col-
umn has settled exclusively due to the consolidation of the soft clay beneath its base. Piles
are installed on each side of the base and the load transferred to the pile heads by needle
beams inserted below the base.
A typical use of piles as a precautionary underpinning measure is shown in Figure 9.lb.
A deep basement is to be constructed close to an existing building on shallow strip founda-
tions. Underpinning of the foundation adjacent to the basement is required since yielding of
the ground surface as a result of the relief of lateral pressure due to the excavations would
cause excessive settlement. Rows of piles are installed close to the wall foundation inside
and outside the building and the loads are transferred to them by a system of longitudinal
and transverse beams. The external row of piles also serves as a support for the horizontal
sheeting members used to retain the face of the excavation.
Piling as a strengthening measure is shown in Figure 9.1c. Pits are excavated beneath the
existing foundation and piles are jacked down to a bearing on a hard incompressible stratum.
Underpinning of the foundations may be required where the existing piles have deteriorated
due to attack by aggressive substances in the soil or groundwater. New piles can be installed
in holes drilled through the cap or raft (Figure 9.1d). The new pile heads are bonded to the
reinforcement of the existing substructure.
Piling has a somewhat limited application to underpinning work. This is because it is usu-
ally necessary to excavate pits below the existing substructure to place supporting beams or
pads. In a high proportion of the cases where remedial or strengthening works are required
a suitable bearing stratum exists at no great depth and it is cheaper to take the pits down to
this stratum and to backfill the void with mass concrete rather than to install piles in condi-
tions with a low headroom and a restricted working area. Also a considerable force may be
required to jack down an underpinning pile even though the soil is removed from the piling
tube at each stage of jacking. There may be insufficient mass in the existing structure to pro-
vide the required reaction to this jacking force. It is not usually feasible to employ jacked
piles beneath two-storey or three-storey buildings of load-bearing wall construction, since
the usual mass concrete strip foundation and brick footing walls have insufficient bending
strength to withstand the loading that results from jacking down a pile, even though a
spreader beam is used between the ram of the jack and the foundation.
9.2.2
Piling methods in underpinning work
Before underpinning by piling is considered, it is essential to determine the cause of structure–
foundation instability and confirm the ground conditions at depth. Means of checking pile
capacity and integrity once installed should be available.
Miscellaneous piling problems
437
Figure 9.1 Use of piles in underpinning (a) Remedial measures to support column base
(b) Precautionary measures in underpinning strip foundation adjacent to deep excavation
(c) Jacked piles to strengthen column base (d) Drilled piles to replace existing piles beneath
raft slab.
Column base
to be underpinned
Steel plates and
dry packed mortar
Concrete
surround
Existing load-bearing
wall
Bored-
and-cast-
in-situ
piles
Needle beams
Soft clay
Column propped
at higher level
Packing
plates
Steel
block
Bearing
plate
Piled
jacked
down to 
bearing
stratum
Hydraulic
jack in 
inverted
position
Timbering
to pit
Slab raft
Pad foundation
Timber
sheeting
secured to
the face of
piles
Limiting line beyond
which settlement of
ground due to basement
excavation will not
cause excessive
settlement of shallow
foundations
Steel H-piles
Holes drilled
in raft
Existing piles
(deteriorated)
New underpinning
piles
Spreader beams
Bearers
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Bored piles are suitable for underpinning light structures and they are installed outside
the periphery of the existing foundations as shown in Figure 9.1a. In addition to light tripod
percussion rigs many short-masted rotary auger rigs are available for installing the piles
inside buildings in conditions of low headroom. However, it is desirable, for reasons of
economy, to install piles outside a building as far as possible. This can be done at the corners
of buildings as shown in Figure 9.2. Precast reinforced concrete sections or steel H-piles can
be concreted or grouted into the pile boreholes in cases where it is desired to transfer the
loading to underpinning piles as quickly as possible after installing them. When using bored
piles inside basements spoil removal can be a drawback.
Light structures can be underpinned from a single row of bored piles located outside the
building. After concreting the piles, cantilever brackets are cast onto their heads as shown in
Figure 9.3a. The bending resistance of a small-diameter pile is relatively low, and therefore
the form of construction is limited to strip foundations of light buildings or to lightly
Miscellaneous piling problems
439
Figure 9.2 Layout of piles for light structures.
Underpinning
piles
Capping beams
(a)
(b)
Cantilever
bracket
Head of pile
cut down
Tension
pile
Compression
pile
Cantilevered
capping beam
Figure 9.3 Cantilevered brackets for supporting light structures (a) From single piles (b) From pairs
of piles.
loaded columns. Heavier structures can be underpinned by pairs of piles located outside the
building but carrying a cantilevered bracket as shown in Figure 9.3b. This system can cause
difficulties in pile design. The compression pile is required to carry heavy loading and
there may be problems in achieving the required resistance to uplift in shaft friction on the
tension pile.
The Fondedile piling system employing the ‘Pali Radice’ (root pile) is suitable as a means
of underpinning structures undergoing settlement or for strengthening existing foundations
to enable them to carry heavier loads. Small-diameter holes lined temporarily with casing
tubes are drilled through the existing foundations or through both a load-bearing wall and
its foundation (Figure 9.4). A rich sand–cement mortar is then pumped down a tremie pipe
to fill the borehole and any cavities in the existing structure. Reinforcement is provided in
the form of a single bar for small-diameter (100 mm) piles or a cage or tube for the larger-
diameter (250–300 mm) piles. The casing is extracted with the assistance of compressed air
to push the grout into the cavities and against the walls of the drilled holes.
440
Miscellaneous piling problems
Holes drilled
through wall to
be underpinned
Cement–sand
mortar pumped
into place
Single bar
reinforcement
Figure 9.4 Underpinning with Fondedile piles (Pali Radice).
The usual method of application is to install the piles in relatively large numbers at differing
angles of rake so as to provide resistance to lateral loads and overturning moments as well as
to support loads in a vertical direction. The rotary drilling machines used by Fondedile require
a working space of only 2  1.5 m and a headroom of 1.8 m, and the drilling is performed
with relatively little vibration. Thus the piles can be installed in confined surroundings and
very close to the foundations to be underpinned (Figure 9.5). Other systems employ minipiles
of the type described in Section 2.6 such as small-diameter steel tubes which are drilled down
or set in drilled holes. Grout is pumped down the tubes which remain in place as permanent
reinforcement. A detailed account of the Fondedile system and underpinning with other types
of small-diameter piles with numerous case histories is given by Lizzi(9.7).
Bored piles installed by continuous flight auger as described in Section 2.4.2 are also
suitable for strengthening and underpinning work since the rotary drilling methods and
continuous support given to the soil result in little vibration and a negligible loss of ground
in properly controlled operations.
Bottom driven piles using thin wall steel tubes up to 300 mm diameter may be used in
difficult conditions such as brownfield sites, peaty soils and soft clay, and founded on a
competent stratum. Such piles will have limited tension capacity and should not be used in
heaving ground or where vibration may cause problems. A pneumatic piling hammer may
be used for driving tubes up to 100 mm diameter.
Heavily loaded foundations can be underpinned by jacking piles down to the bearing
stratum using the dead load of the existing foundations and superstructure as the reaction to
the jacking operation. The Presscore precast jacked-in pile with a central hole is described
Miscellaneous piling problems
441
Figure 9.5 Fondedile piling rig working close to foundations to be underpinned.
in Section 2.2.3 and Figure 2.15. Typical jacked piles require a pit excavation beneath
the foundation, and a hole in the floor of the pit to receive the bottom-pointed unit of the
pile. A hydraulic jack is placed on top of this unit and is surmounted by short lengths of steel
plate or beam sections to spread the load onto the underside of the existing foundation. The
bottom unit is then jacked down until it is flush with the bottom of the pit. The jacks and
packers are removed and another precast concrete section added, which is in turn jacked
down. Additional units are now added and jacked down until the bearing stratum is reached
or until the resistance of the pile as measured by the pressure gauge on the jack indicates that
the desired ‘preload’ has been attained. The elements are next bonded together by inserting
short steel bars into the longitudinal central hole and grouting them with cement. On the
completion of the jacking operation short lengths of steel beam are driven hard into the
space between the pile head and the foundation, or between the pile head and the spreader
beams. The jack is then removed and the head of the pile, packers, and spreaders encased
solidly in concrete. Grout bags which are inflated and pressurized with cement grout are a
convenient alternative to the steel packing.
It is essential to maintain the load on the jack until the packing is completed. This is
to avoid any rebound of the pile head, and subsequent settlement when the load from the
structure is transferred to the piles.
An alternative method which ‘pre-tests’ the jacked-in pile once it reaches the bearing
stratum, or the desired value of preload has been attained, requires a pair of hydraulic jacks
to be inserted between the head of the pile and a bearing plate packed up to the underside
of the existing foundation. The thrust on the rams of these jacks is adjusted to apply a load
of 1.5 times the working load onto the pile. When downward movement of the pile has
ceased a short length of steel H-section with end-bearing plates is wedged tightly into the
space between the jacks (Figure 9.6). The latter can then be removed and used for the same
442
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.6 Underpinning with pre-test load (a) Jacking down underpinning pile (b) Insertion of steel
strut (c) Steel strut wedged into place before encasement in concrete.
Pile jacked
into place
Bearing
plate
Steel strut
Dense
concrete
packing
(a)
(b)
(c)
procedure on the adjoining piles. Where piles are installed in rows or closely spaced groups
by preloading or ‘pre-testing’ methods, the operation of jacking an individual pile relieves
some of the load on the adjacent piles which have already been installed and wedged-up. It
then becomes necessary to replace the jacks and re-load these piles, after which the inserted
struts are re-wedged. Alternatively, all the pre-testing jacks can remain in position until
the last pile in the group or row is jacked down. Then all the loads on the jacks are balanced,
the struts installed, and the jacks removed. The final operation is to encase the struts and
pile heads in concrete well rammed-up to the underside of the existing foundation.
Steel tube or box section ‘jacked piers’ such as those manufactured by Atlas Systems and
A B Chance in the USA and Rautoruukki Metform in Finland support the foundation being
underpinned on a steel bracket fixed to the top of the pile section. Diameters range from 60
to 320 mm, provided in short lengths appropriate to the jack stroke, with friction or welded
joints for the thin wall sections and threaded joints for 10 mm wall. The bearing capacity of
slender piles will be governed by the buckling resistance in weak soils. Corrosion protection
should be provided.
Where steel sections have to be added by welding during pile jacking to reach the required
stratum or resistance, the alignment and welding quality can be difficult to control when
working in constricted spaces excavated under existing foundations.
Whichever system of jacked piles is used, safeguards are needed to avoid a sudden drop
in the ram due to loss of oil pressure. Also care must be taken to restrain the existing
foundation, or the rows of jacks and struts, from moving horizontally due to lateral or eccentric
thrusts. Raking shores to the superstructure, strutting of the existing foundation to the walls
of the underpinning pit, or bracings between jacks and pile heads can be used to restrain
lateral movement.
The existing columns or walls of the structure to be underpinned can be used to provide
the reaction to jacking if they are sufficiently massive. Niches are cut into the faces of the
structure and concrete corbels or brackets are cast into these pockets to form the bearing
members for the jacks, as shown in Figure 9.7. The pairs of jacks must, of course, be
operated simultaneously to avoid applying eccentric loading to the existing structure.
Where H-section piles are used to provide underpinning combined with lateral support to
a deep excavation, as shown in Figure 9.1b, they can be installed by placing them in holes
previously drilled by mechanical auger or, in stable ground, by tripod rigs. If the drill holes
are given continuous support by a bentonite slurry or by casing there should be a negligible
loss of ground around the borehole and the installation of the piles is effected with little
noise or damaging vibration. Where it is necessary to use tripod rigs in unstable coarse soils,
there is a risk of loss of ground around the boreholes as described in Section 3.3.7. If there
is such a risk it will be necessary to shore the building temporarily with supports bearing on
the ground outside the zone of subsidence. Below the level planned for the base of the
excavation the space between the pile and the borehole is filled with a weak sand–cement
mortar. This provides the required passive resistance to lateral loads on the piles and allows
the latter to be removed if permitted by the planned sequence of underpinning and
construction of the permanent work.
Bored piles used in the combined role of underpinning and lateral support to the sides of
the excavation can be arranged in a single row (Figure 9.8a) or a double row of abutting
piles, or in a single row of interlocking piles (Figure 9.8b). When they are abutting the sys-
tem is known as ‘contiguous piling’ and when interlocking as ‘secant piling’. Contiguous
piles are cheaper to install, but because it is impossible to drill the holes in a truly vertical
Miscellaneous piling problems
443
direction or to maintain a constant shaft diameter, there are always gaps present between
adjacent piles. Below the water table, sand and silt can bleed through these gaps causing
a considerable loss of ground, and the installation of the piles in a double staggered row
cannot prevent this happening. Contiguous piles are best suited to underpinning and to
support excavations in firm to stiff clays or damp silts and sands above the water table.
Where the excavation is to be performed in water-bearing coarse soils, any loss of ground
can be avoided by adopting secant piling (Figure 9.8b). Alternate piles are first installed by
conventional drilling and casting relatively weak concrete in-situ. The soil in the space
between the pile shafts is then drilled out and a ‘secant’ is cut into the wall of the ‘soft’ pile
on each side, using appropriate drilling tools, including CFA techniques. Concrete is next
placed to fill the drill hole, thus forming the interlocked and virtually watertight wall.
444
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.7 Underpinning load-bearing wall by jacking piles from corbels.
Niches cut in
masonry wall
Concrete corbel
Hydraulic jack
Underpinning pile
jacked down in
short sections
Figure 9.8 Bored piles used for combined underpinning and lateral support (a) Contiguous piles
(b) Secant piles.
Piles cast in
first stage
Piles cast in
second stage
(a)
(b)
Longitudinal reinforcement is provided in the piles to the extent necessary to carry vertical
loading, eccentric loads from the underpinning bearers, and lateral loading from earth and
hydrostatic pressure.
Screw or helical piles comprising solid square shafts up to 60 mm and tubular shafts up
to 90 mm with helical plates between 200 and 350 mm diameter attached at intervals along
the shaft, such as the AB Chance systems and ScrewFast Foundations in the UK, are effec-
tive as underpinning support. They are screwed into the ground adjacent to the foundation
using rotary drives, either attached to hydraulic excavators with torque capacity up to 68 kNm
or hand-held units with around 3 kNm torque – resisted by a torque bar. The bearing capacity
is related to the area of the helical plates, four plates being typical and spaced so that over-
lap of bearing zones does not occur. Shaft friction is not usually applied unless the shaft
diameter is greater than 90 mm. As for the slender steel-jacked piers above, buckling has to
be considered and corrosion protection provided (note this form of slender pile should not be
confused with the large-diameter displacement pile formed by screwing a mandrel into the
ground – see Section 2.3.5).
9.3
Piling in mining subsidence areas
The form in which subsidence takes place after extracting minerals by underground mining
depends on the particular technique used in the mining operations. In Great Britain the prob-
lems of subsidence mainly occur in coal-mining areas where the practice in the remaining
working collieries is to extract the coal by ‘longwall’ methods. Using this technique the
entire coal seam is removed from a continuously advancing face. The roof of the workings
behind the face is supported by multiple rows of hydraulically operated props. As the face
moves forward the props in the rear are systematically lowered to allow the roof of the
workings to sink down onto heaps of mine dirt or ‘stowage’. The overlying rock strata and
over-burden soil follow the downward movement of the roof and the consequent subsidence
of the ground surface is in the form of a wave which advances parallel to and at approxi-
mately the same rate as the advancing coal face. The subsidence is accompanied by very
substantial horizontal strains of the ground surface, these strains being tensile at the crest
of the wave and compressive at the trough and thus taking the form shown in Figure 9.9.
Miscellaneous piling problems
445
Figure 9.9 Profile of ground subsidence over longwall mine workings.
Tension
500
2000
1000
1500
Subsidence
(mm)
Subsidence
curve
Worked-out seam
Limit angle
Unworked coal
Ground
surface
+0.004
+0.002
–0.002
–0.004
0
Compression
Strain
0
The magnitude of the strain can range from as much as plus or minus 0.8% of the overburden
thickness above shallow workings to 0.2% over deep seams.
The horizontal ground movements make it virtually impossible to use piled foundations
in areas where longwall mining is proposed, or is currently being practised. The horizontal
shearing forces accompanying the strains are so high that it is quite uneconomical to attempt
to resist them by heavily strengthening the pile shafts. However, in areas where subsidence
following longwall mining has virtually ceased it is possible to use piled foundations if it is
recognized that some residual movement will take place as the collapsed strata slowly reach
final equilibrium. In these cases it is desirable to terminate piles in a soil layer overlying
rockhead, as shown on the left-hand side of Figure 9.10. The soil acts as a cushion, preventing
any concentration of load on the broken rock strata. Long-term movements may be substantial
near the boundary of the worked-out seam. If the workings are shallow, piles may be taken
down through the collapsed overburden to intact rock layers below the coal seam as shown
on the right-hand side of Figure 9.10. Bored and cast-in-place piles are used for this pur-
pose, but it is essential to isolate the shaft of the pile from the overburden above the coal
seam in order to avoid heavy compressive loading caused by downdrag from the collapsing
strata. This isolation is achieved by placing the concrete within a shell formed from stiffened
light-gauge steel sheeting, the sheeting terminating at the base of the coal seam. Below this
level the concrete can be cast against the surface of the stable strata to form a ‘rock socket’,
as shown in Figure 9.11. The space between the shell and the wall of the drill hole through
the overburden can be filled with bentonite slurry, soft bitumen or loosely placed rock
fragments. A minimum clearance of 150 mm should be provided to accommodate minor
446
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.10 Piling through collapsed ground over longwall mine workings.
Piling
Subsidence complete
Long-continuing
small subsidence
No
subsidence
Very soft clay
Stiff boulder clay
Unworked
seam
Stowage
Collapsed
over burden
lateral movements as the rock strata adjust themselves to their equilibrium position. A
bentonite or bitumen infill to seal the annulus completely would be used if there is a risk
of emission of natural gas from the coal seam.
During the nineteenth century and the early years of the present century, coal and other
minerals were extracted using mining techniques variously known as ‘pillar and stall’, ‘board
and pillar’, and ‘stoop and room’. A main heading or road was driven from the shaft to
follow the coal seam to the planned boundary of the workings. Transverse galleries were
then driven from the main roadway to form a rectangular, triangular, or lozenge-shaped
pattern of galleries separated by pillars of unworked coal. These pillars served to support the
overlying rock strata until the general area had been mined. The pillars were then either left
intact or were wholly or partially removed as the coal extraction operations retreated towards
the shaft. Where the pillars were wholly removed the pattern of subsidence followed that of
longwall mining (Figure 9.9). Chalk was mined in south-east England for flints and
agricultural purposes from pre-historic times until comparatively recently. The mining was
usually in the form of a rather haphazard pillar and stall method. Where pillars were left in
place they remained, and still remain, in an unpredictable state of stability which has
resulted in complex problems concerning building over abandoned mineworkings, problems
which are still encountered in the built-up areas of Britain to the present day(9.8).
The instability of coal pillars may be due to the slow decay of the coal, to changes in the
groundwater regime in flooded workings, to increased loading on the ground surface, to an
increase in the load transferred to pillars due to the collapse of neighbouring areas, or to
longwall mining in deeper coal seams. If massive rock strata such as the thick sandstones of
Miscellaneous piling problems
447
Figure 9.11 Isolating shafts of bored piles from surrounding collapsed ground.
Space loosely filled
with rock spalls or
      bentonite slurry
Concrete
cast in-situ
Rock
socket
Base of worked-out seam
Stowage
Collapsed
overburden
Light-gauge
steel lining
tubes
the Coal Measures are overlying the partly worked seam they may form a bridge over the
cavities such that the collapse of the weak strata forming the roof of the working will
not extend above the base of the massive rock stratum (Figure 9.12a). Provided that the
coal pillars themselves do not decay, the workings may remain in a stable condition for
centuries and it will be quite satisfactory to construct piled foundations overlying them.
Again it is desirable to terminate the piles in a soil layer to avoid any concentration of
loading at the rockhead.
Where massive rock strata are not present and the overburden consists only of weak and
thinly bedded shales, mudstones and sandstone bands overlain by soil, a collapse of the roof
will eventually work its way up to the ground surface to form a chimney-like cavity known
as a ‘crownhole’ (Figure 9.12b).
Piling should be avoided above these unstable, or potentially unstable, areas, but if the
workings lie at a fairly shallow depth, it is possible to install bored and cast-in-place piles
completely through the overburden, terminating them in a stable stratum below the coal
seam as shown in Figure 9.12b. The pile shaft must be isolated from the soils and rocks of
the overburden in the manner illustrated in Figure 9.11. Any collapse of the strata over pillar
and stall workings usually takes place in a vertical direction with little lateral movement, but
nevertheless a generous space (a minimum of 150 mm) should be allowed between the pile
shaft and the walls of the drill hole. As noted above, it is necessary to seal the annulus
around the piles to prevent gas seepage to the surface. Large-diameter piles are preferable
to small sections because of their higher resistance to lateral loading that may be due to local
distortions of the rock strata. The large-diameter drill holes also serve as a means of access
for inspecting any cavities and to enable geologists to judge the stability conditions of
the overburden.
448
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.12 Piling in areas of abandoned ‘pillar and stall’ mine workings (a) Where massive rock forms
stable roof over workings (b) Where roof over workings is weak and unstable.
Unworked
coal pillars
Cavity extending
only to base of
sandstone
Abandoned workings
Collapsed overburden
Pillar
Rock socket
Coal
seam
Piles sleeved
over whole of
shaft down to
base of
coal seam
Crown hole
(a)
(b)
Soil overburden
Weak thinly-bedded
shales and mudstones
When inspecting the geological conditions in the shafts full precautions should be taken
against the collapse of the walls or base of the drill hole and against the presence of
explosive or asphyxiating gases (see Section 11.3.3). The advice of an experienced mining
engineer should be sought before exploring abandoned workings from the pile borehole.
9.4
Piling in frozen ground
9.4.1
General effects
In most parts of the UK the depth of penetration of frost into the ground does not exceed
600 mm, and consequently frozen soil conditions are not detrimental to piled foundations.
However, in countries lying in the northern latitudes with continental-type climates the
penetration of frost below the surface gives rise to considerable problems in piling work. In
the southern regions of Canada and in Norway the frost penetrates to depths of 1.2 to 2.1 m.
In far-northern latitudes the ground is underlain by great depths of permanently frozen soil
known as ‘permafrost’. About 49% of the land mass of the former USSR is a permafrost
region, which generally lies north of latitude 50	. The depth of permafrost extends to 1.5 km
in some areas. Permafrost regions are also widespread in Northern Canada, Alaska,
and Greenland.
In areas where frost penetration is limited to a deep surface layer overlying non-frozen
soil, the effect on pile foundations is to cause uplift forces on the pile shaft and on the pile
caps and ground beams. These effects occur in frost-susceptible soils, i.e. soils which exhibit
marked swelling when they become frozen. Frost-susceptible soils include silts, clays, and
sand–silt–clay mixtures. Swelling of these soils occurs when water in the pores migrates into
layers or lenses and becomes frozen. The increase in volume when the ice lenses form
results in a heave of the ground surface. When these soils are frozen onto the shafts of piles,
or onto the sides of pile caps and ground beams, the uplift forces tend to lift the foundations.
The soil heave also causes uplift forces to develop on the undersides of the pile caps and
ground beams. The uplift forces on the sides of the sub-structure are referred to as
‘adfreezing’ forces and measures to prevent the upward movement of piled foundations are
described in the next section of this chapter.
The foundation problems presented by permafrost are much more severe, because of the
extreme conditions of instability of this material within the depths affected by piling work.
The permanently frozen ground is overlain by an ‘active layer’ that is subject to seasonal
freezing and thawing. In the winter adfreezing occurs on foundations sited within frost-
susceptible soils in the active layer. In summer there is rapid and massive collapse of thawing
ice lenses in the active zone. Severe freeze-thaw conditions in highly frost-susceptible soils
can result in the formation of dome-shaped ice-caverns as much as 6 m high above the
permafrost. The thickness of the active layer is not constant, but varies with cyclic changes
in the climate of the region, with changes in the cover of vegetation such as mosses and
lichens, and with the effects of buildings and roads constructed over the permafrost.
The laws governing the physical, chemical and mechanical properties of frozen soil have
been reviewed by Anderson and Morgenstern(9.9), and Andersland and Ladanyi(9.10) provide
extensive soil mechanics data for frozen ground conditions with worked examples of a
variety of foundation support systems.
Tsytovich(9.11) has described three modes of formation of permafrost: these are when
water-bearing soils are frozen through, when ice and snow are buried, and when ice is formed
Miscellaneous piling problems
449
in layers in the soil. The latter formation, referred to by Tsytovich as ‘recurrent vein ice’,
frequently occupies some 50% of the top 20 m of the soil in the northern parts of Russia and
is responsible for the severe foundation problems in the region. The recurrent vein ice can
contain layers of unfrozen water within the permanently frozen soil and foundation pressure
applied to such ground can result in substantial settlement. Because of the variation in thick-
ness of the active layer the upper zone of the permafrost can undergo considerable changes
such as major heaving, the collapse of ice caverns, and the migration of unfrozen water.
9.4.2
The effects of adfreezing on piled foundations
Penner and Irwin(9.12) measured the uplift forces caused by adfreezing on 89 mm steel pipe
anchored into unfrozen soil. The measurements were made in the Leda clay of Ontario in a
region where a deep penetration of frost occurs below the ground surface. The Leda clay
consists of a 70% clay fraction and a 30% silt fraction. The formation of ice lenses in the
soil caused a surface heave of 75 to 100 mm where the frost penetrated to a depth of 1.2 m.
The adfreezing force on the steel pipe was 96 kN/m2.
Further measurements in the Leda clay have been reported by Penner and Gold(9.13).
When the frost penetrated to a depth of 1.09 m, causing a surface heave of 100 mm, the
measured peak adfreezing forces on anchored columns were as follows:
Steel:
113 kN/m2
Concrete:
134 kN/m2
Timber:
86 kN/m2
Penner and Irwin(9.12) quote similar measurements by Kinoshita and Ono(9.14) as follows:
Iron pipe:
204 kN/m2
Vinyl pipe:
193 kN/m2
Concrete pipe:
134 kN/m2
Epoxy-resin coated concrete pipe:
600 kN/m2
Grain size can affect adfreeze strength, with clays and coarse soils, particularly those with
low moisture content, being lower than sandy soils.
Dalmatov(9.15) (as quoted by Andersland and Ladanyi(9.10)) expressed adfreezing forces by
the equation:
F  Lha(c  0.5b Tm)
(9.1)
where F is the total upward force due to frost heave (kgf), L is the perimeter of the foundation
in contact with the soil in centimetres, ha is the thickness of the frozen zone in centimetres,
Tm is the surface temperature (	C), and b and c are constants determined experimentally.
Dalmatov’s values of b and c for timber piles in a silty sandy clay were 0.1 and 0.4
respectively. The measured forces on the steel pipe in Leda clay when expressed by Dalmatov’s
equation gave the same values of b and c but Penner and Irwin(9.12) regard this as somewhat
coincidental.
Measurements of the magnitude of frost heave forces on steel plates restrained from uplift
in Leda clay were made by Penner(9.16), the plates being placed at various depths in the
450
Miscellaneous piling problems
frozen layer. When the surface heave was 55 mm the maximum swelling pressures of 54 to
91 kN/m2 occurred at the base of the frozen soil layer.
Andersland and Ladanyi(9.10) offer a more comprehensive theoretical solution to the heave
rate and mobilized adfreeze stress taking account of climate data, soil thermal properties,
frost penetration and creep which compares well with the observations by Penner and Gold
and the other field researchers. Design for frost heave must ensure that uplift forces are not
sufficient to cause movement of the structure and that the adfreeze bond is not ruptured
causing increased rate of uplift in the permafrost zone.
Adfreezing forces on the shafts of piles and on the sides of pile caps and ground beams
can be eliminated or greatly reduced by removing frost-susceptible soils from around these
substructures to a depth equal to the maximum penetration of frost predicted. These soils are
replaced by suitable non-susceptible material such as clean sandy gravel or crushed and
graded rock. Open gravels should not be used since groundwater movements at periods of
thawing might wash fine soil particles into the voids in the gravel, leading to the formation
of a silty gravel susceptible to frost heave. Bond breakers such as grease or polyethylene
wrap on pile surfaces or an oil–wax mix in the annulus in the active zone can effectively
reduce uplift forces.
Uplift forces on the undersides of pile caps and ground beams can be reduced by
interposing a layer of compressible material between the substructure and the soil. Cellular
cardboard or low-density expanded polystyrene can be used for this purpose as shown in
Figure 7.15.
Instantaneous deformation and time-dependent deformation (creep) will occur in frozen
soil under load due to the breaking of ice bonds and the melting of a film of water around the
soil particles under compression. The degree of deformation is complex and will depend on
the stress applied, soil type and temperature. Piles in ice-rich frozen soil can be expected to
creep at a steady rate at stresses below the adfreeze strength.
9.4.3
Piling in permafrost regions
Piled foundations are generally employed where structures in permafrost regions are sited in
areas of frost-susceptible soils. Shallow foundations cannot normally be used because of the
massive volume changes which take place in the active layer under the influence of seasonal
freezing and thawing.
The general principle to be adopted when designing piled foundations is to anchor the
piles securely into a zone of stable permafrost (which can be difficult to locate) or into
non-susceptible material such as well-drained sandy gravel or relatively intact bedrock.
Where the piles are anchored into the permafrost layers their stability must be maintained
by conserving as far as possible the natural regime which existed before construction
was commenced in the area. Thus buildings must be supported well clear of the ground
(Figure 9.13) to allow winds at sub-zero temperatures to remove the heat from beneath the
buildings, and so prevent thawing of the active layer in the winter season.
The depth to which piles should be taken into the permafrost depends on the state of
stability of this zone. Consideration must be given to the recurrence of cyclic changes in the
upper layers, to the presence of layers of unfrozen water, and to the pre-treatment which can
be given to the permafrost by thawing, compaction of the soil, and re-freezing.
Compressive loads on the piles are carried almost entirely by adfreezing forces on the pile
shaft in the permanently frozen zone. Little end-bearing resistance is offered by the frozen
Miscellaneous piling problems
451
ground due to the re-packing and re-crystallization of ice under pressure and the migration of
unfrozen water. Uplift forces on the piles which occur as a result of adfreezing in the active
layer in the winter season must be allowed for. Results of tests on laterally loaded piles in
permafrost and computer simulations of the displacements are described by Foriero et al.(9.17)
Generally, it is not recommended to drive piles into permafrost at temperatures less than
5	C since this will cause splitting of the frozen ground, allowing thawing waters to
penetrate deeply into the cracks, and so upsetting the stable regime. However, reinforced
H-piles and tubular steel piles with wall thickness greater than 12.5 mm can be driven into
relatively warm permafrost (1	C to 5	C) using vibratory hammers without pilot holes.
In a research project, Canadian Petroleum Engineering Inc has driven 500 mm diameter
steel piles 53 m into permafrost at 7	C using a high frequency pile driver. Generally,
adfreeze occurs earlier in driven piles, but driving resistance should not be used to calculate
long-term capacity of piles in permafrost. Driving can be easier in saline permafrost in
fine and coarse soils, because of the greater quantities of unfrozen moisture around the pile;
however, the bond is reduced due to the saline porewater pressure, reducing the pile capacity
by as much as 50% with salt concentrations of 10 g/litre. Enlarged base piles in ice-rich
permafrost formed using jet cutting are considered by Sego et al.(9.18) While improvements
in end-bearing capacity of 30% to 40% are claimed as a result of the belling, this is from a
low base value and when the costs of the high-alumina grout used to fill the bell are
considered, the benefits of the belling are marginal.
Drilled and cast-in-place piles are suitable but the concrete must not be placed in direct
contact with the frozen ground. North American practice is to use powered rotary augers to
drill into the permafrost to the required depth, but wear on bits will be high in silts and
sands. A permanent steel casing is then placed in the drill hole and filled with concrete. The
heat of hydration thaws the surrounding ground and as the concrete cools the freezing of
the melt water bonds the pile permanently to the permafrost. Water or a sand slurry can be
poured into the annulus between the casing and the permafrost to ensure full bonding, but
this may result in high creep. The annulus should be less than 100 mm to ensure adequate
452
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.13 Piling into permafrost.
Building
Wind at freezing
temperature
Active layer subject
to seasonal freezing
and thawing
Unstable permafrost
subject to cyclic
changes
Piles frozen
into stable
permafrost
Bored-and-
cast-in-situ
piles with
permanent steel
tube casing
natural ‘freeze-back’ around the pile. Korhonen and Orchino(9.19) point out that freezing of
the concrete need not be the sole reason for rejecting the pile: concrete in cast-in-place piles
that has frozen after attaining a certain minimum strength and remains frozen will continue
to gain strength while frozen. Biggar and Sego(9.20) comment on the use of high-alumina
cement-based grout for infilling the annulus at temperatures of 10	C.
Timber piles installed in pre-drilled holes or driven in conjunction with steam jetting have
been used for many years in northern Canada. Timber piles will generally remain well
preserved in permafrost, but must be protected against deterioration in the active zone.
In Russia a form of reverse-circulation drilling with steam or gas burners is used to thaw
the soil and flush the cuttings to the surface before freezing-in the permanent steel casing.
Holes should be provided in the casing to drain off the water before the concrete is placed.
If this is not done freezing of the water inside the casing may cause bursting of the steel.
Precast concrete piles driven into pre-formed holes are extensively used in Siberia, but low
concrete tensile strength may result in cracking during frost heave. Prestressed concrete
piles perform better.
‘Thermal piles’ are piles on which natural convection or forced circulation cooling
systems have been installed to retain the adfreeze during warmer weather and lower the pile
surface temperature during the autumn. Johnson(9.21) describes two types of thermal piles,
including piles used to support the above-ground section of the Trans-Alaska oil pipeline.
9.5
Piled foundations for bridges on land
9.5.1
Selection of pile type
Bridge construction for developed countries is subject to many constraints concerned with
access to sites and environmental conditions. These have an important influence on the
selection of a suitable pile type and equipment for installation. In undeveloped territories the
constraints are fewer and selection of suitable pile types is influenced mainly by the ground
conditions.
When constructing new main highways it is desirable to complete under- and over-bridges
at an early stage in the overall construction programme in order to facilitate the operation of
earthmoving and paving equipment along the length of the highway without the need for
detours or the use of existing public highways by construction equipment. Hence, access
to bridges will be difficult at this early stage and it may be impossible to route the piling
equipment and material deliveries along the cleared highway alignment without interfering
with the early earthmoving operations.
In the case of small bridges, such as those carrying minor roads over or beneath the main
highway, it is desirable to use light and easily transportable equipment to install a number
of small- or medium-diameter piles rather than a few large-diameter piles requiring heavy
equipment. Suitable types are precast concrete or steel sections which have the advantage
over bored piles of the facility to drive them on the rake thus providing efficient resistance
to lateral forces, which are an important consideration in most bridge structures. Only small
angles of rake are feasible with bored piles (see Section 3.4.11) and it is usually preferable
to provide only vertical bored piles suitably reinforced to resist horizontal loads and
bending moments.
Some of the most difficult access problems are involved with bridges in deep cuttings
where the bridge is constructed in an isolated excavation in advance of the main
Miscellaneous piling problems
453
earthmoving operations. It is possible to install the piling for piers of bridges with
spill-through abutments at the toe of the cutting, and in the median strip from plant
operating from ground level before bulk excavation is commenced for the bridge. This
operation is similar to that adopted for ‘top-down’ basement construction in building work
(see Section 5.9). It may also be possible to excavate the cutting to a temporary steep slope
to enable piles to be driven at the toe of a cutting using trestle guides (Figure 3.6), the piles
being pitched by a crane standing at the crest of the cutting. However, such operations
involve a risk of instability of the slope due to surcharge load, and, in the case of clay
slopes, to excess pore pressures caused by soil displacement.
Bridge construction, or reconstruction, in urban areas involves piling in severely restricted
sites with the likely imposition of noise abatement regulations. Driven types of pile have the
advantages of speed and simplicity. Compliance with noise regulations may be possible by
adopting a bottom-driven type (see Sections 2.3.2 and 3.2) in conjunction with sound absorbant
screens surrounding the piling equipment. If possible pile caps should be located above ground-
water level in order to avoid pumping from excavations which could cause loss of ground or
settlement of adjacent buildings due to general drawdown of the groundwater table.
Piling over or beneath railways involves special difficulties. The presence of overhead
electrification cables will probably rule out any form of bored or driven pile requiring
the use of equipment with a tall mast or leaders. The railway authority will insist on piling
operations being limited to restricted periods of track possession by the contractor if there
is any risk of equipment or materials falling on to the track. Soil disturbance by large-
displacement-driven piles may cause heave or misalignment of the rails. If it is at all possible
the design of the bridge should avoid the need for piling the foundations.
As noted above, many of the constraints described in the preceding paragraphs do not
apply to bridges in undeveloped territories. However, conditions of access to remote bridge
sites should be investigated. Equipment should be capable of being transported over poor
roads and across weak bridges of limited width.
9.5.2
Imposed loads on bridge piling
The various types of loading imposed on bridge foundations have been reviewed by
Hambly(9.22) in a wide-ranging report published by the Building Research Establishment:
G
Dead and live loads on superstructure
G
Dead load of superstructure
G
Earth pressure (including surcharge pressure) on abutments
G
Creep and shrinkage of superstructure
G
Temperature variations in superstructure
G
Traffic impact and braking forces on bridge deck (longitudinal and transverse)
G
Wind and earthquake forces on superstructure
G
Impact from vehicle collisions, locomotives and rail wagons
G
Construction loads including falsework.
In UK practice the loading requirements are specified in British Standard 5400, and the rel-
evant parts of Actions on Structures as given in Eurocode 1 (BS EN 1991: 2003). The Highways
Agency’s Design Manual for Roads and Bridges gives guidance on the use of BS 5400.
Dead and live load combinations should be considered in relation to permissible differential
settlements between piers or between piers and abutments in longitudinal and transverse
directions. Permissible settlements are often poorly defined or not defined at all by
454
Miscellaneous piling problems
bridge designers. Hambly(9.22) states that foundations for simply supported deck bridges are
frequently designed for differential settlements of up to 1 in 800 relative rotation (25 mm in
a 20 m span). In reasonably homogeneous soils, differential settlements between adjacent
foundations are often assumed to be half of the total settlement, thus a total settlement of
50 mm would be permissible under this criterion. Differential settlements of the order of 1 in
800 in a continuous deck bridge are required to be treated as a load producing bending
moments in the superstructure. This can add to the cost of the bridge, but it should also be
noted that limitation of total settlement to 5 to 10 mm is difficult to achieve with spread
foundations on soils of moderate to low compressibility. Some designers expect the rotation
to be limited to 1 in 4000, which is equivalent to a differential settlement of only 5 mm in
a 20 m span bridge. This would be difficult to ensure for bridges with longer spans even
when supported by piles taken down to a competent bearing stratum. Larger rotations have
to be anticipated in special conditions such as bridges in mining subsidence areas.
The distribution of live load when assessing total and differential settlement is usually a
matter of judgement. Full live load on the whole or part of the spans should be allowed for
calculating immediate settlements but the contribution of live load to consolidation settle-
ment may be small in relation to that from the dead loading. Figure 9.14 shows the loading
on a typical pier foundation for the 4 km-long elevated section of the Jeddah–Mecca
Expressway designed by Dar al-Handasah, consulting engineers. The piers support the 36 m
continuous spans of the three-lane carriageway. It will be noted that the predominant hori-
zontal force on the piers was in a longitudinal direction, the resulting bending moments
increasing the loads on the outer piles of the eight-pile group by about 25% above the
combined vertical dead and live loads. It was possible to carry the horizontal forces and
bending moments by 770 mm diameter bored and cast-in-place base-grouted piles of the
type described in 3.3.9 using the ‘flat-jack’ process.
Miscellaneous piling problems
455
Figure 9.14 Vertical and horizontal loads on viaduct piers of Jeddah–Mecca Expressway.
Moment in direction of span  6750 kN-m
transverse to
"
"
 4500
Dead load
Live
 14500 kN
 16700 kN
   2200 kN
Total
H transverse to span  100 kN
H in direction of span  450 kN
770 mm bored and cast-in-place piles
with grouted base
Bending moment in pile (max)
220 kN-m
Pv max 2510 kN
6.50 m
7.50 m
456
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.15 Piling for bridges with spill-through abutments (a) Bank seat carried by piles driven
from completed embankment (b) Bank seat carried by columns with pile cap at original
ground level.
Horizontal earth and surcharge pressures on bridge abutments and wing walls are resisted
much more efficiently by raking piles than by vertical piles. However, rakers provide a high
degree of rigidity to the foundation in a horizontal direction which may require designing for
at-rest earth pressures rather than the lower active pressures which depend on permitted
yielding of the retaining structure. At-rest pressures are likely to be operating when the top
of the abutment is strutted by the bridge deck as well as being restrained at the toe by the
rows of raking piles.
The simple and computer-based methods of determining individual pile loads in groups
of vertical and raking piles carrying a combination of vertical and lateral loads were
described in Section 6.5. Hambly(9.22) has pointed out the desirability of varying the angle
of rake in order to avoid concentration of load on the bearing stratum, although some design-
ers consider that because of ‘buildability’ considerations, raking piles should only be used
when absolutely necessary. The choice of bored or driven piles for combined vertical and
raked pile groups should take account of the need to install casing and reinforcement and
place concrete in a raking bored pile compared to achieving the designed set with a reduced
efficiency when driving on a rake.
In the case of bridges with spill-through abutments and embanked approaches the piles
supporting the bank seats are best installed from the surface of the completed embankment
(Figure 9.15a). In this way the drag-down forces from the settling embankment and any
underlying compressible soils are carried preferably by vertical piles. The drag-down force
can be minimized by using slender sections in high strength materials. If the piles are
constructed at ground level with the bank seat supported on columns erected on a pile cap,
the latter will act as a ‘hard-spot’ attracting load from the embankment fill (Figure 9.15b).
Unless precautions are taken the higher loading on the piles supporting the low level pile
cap will result in greater tendency for them to settle relatively to the piles supporting the
adjacent bridge pier with consequent differential movement in the bridge deck.
Vertical piles as shown in Figure 9.15b are preferable to rakers for supporting bridge
abutments constructed on ground underlain by a soft deformable layer, whether or not the
abutments are of the spill-through type or in the form of vertical retaining walls and inclined
Bank seat
Embankment
Dragdown
force on
pile shaft
Compressible soil
Original
ground level
Compressible soil
Columns
Dragdown force
reduced by pile
cap
Pile cap
(a)
(b)
Load on pile
cap from
settling fill
wing walls. The abutment is only partially restrained from moving forward under the
influence of the retained soil. A small degree of restraint is provided at the top of the wall
by friction or rotation in the bearings supporting the deck structure. At pile cap level higher
restraint is provided by the stiffness of the supporting piles, but the amount of forward
movement should, theoretically, result in earth pressure on the back of the abutment
corresponding to the ‘active’ state. However, heavy compaction of the embankment filling
is required to prevent settlement of the road surface, such that the earth pressure, particu-
larly near the top of the wall, can be higher than the ‘at rest’ (K0) condition. The UK
Department of Transport(9.23) specifies that the abutment retaining walls should be designed
to resist a pressure of 1.5K0 at the Ultimate Limit State.
Raking piles to support abutments should be avoided if at all possible because rigidity at
pile cap level could result in earth pressures at low levels approaching ‘passive’ conditions.
If, because of ground or loading conditions, the use of rakers is unavoidable, the angle of
rake should be varied as shown in Figure 9.16 to prevent a high proportion of load being car-
ried by a single row of rakers when used in combination with vertical piles on the rearward
side of the foundation.
Bending moments and deflections in rows of vertical piles caused by earth pressure on
the abutment can be calculated by the methods described in Sections 6.3 to 6.5. Where the
abutment is underlain by a weak deformable layer such as soft clay, horizontal and vertical
movements take place in the soft layer under the loading of the embankment. The vertical
movements are restrained if there is a stiff underlying layer, but the only restraint to
Miscellaneous piling problems
457
Piles at varying angle of rake
Spread of load
Figure 9.16 Bridge abutment supported by raking piles.
horizontal movement is shear resistance between the soft clay and the underside of the pile
cap and at the interface between the soft clay and the stiff layer. As the embankment loading
increases plastic deformation occurs in the soft clay which flows horizontally away from the
abutment. In effect, the clay layer is extruded between the piles accompanied by horizontal
pressure on the ‘upstream’ face of the piles and an upward pressure on the underside of the
pile cap. The horizontal pressure is low at pile cap level because the pile and soil are moving
together. It is also low at the interface with the stiff layer because the pile movement at this
level is relatively small and the stiff layer is also moving forward as a result of shear stress
on it from the soft clay.
Springman and Bolton(9.24) undertook research on behalf of the Department of Transport
into the behaviour of a single vertical free-head pile subjected to one-sided surcharge pressure
caused by placing fill on a weak deformable layer underlain by a stiffer but yielding stratum.
They used finite element analyses confirmed by centrifuge modelling to reproduce the pres-
sure distribution on the pile and the resulting deflections. These are shown diagrammatically
in Figure 9.17. The research was subsequently extended by Springman et al.(9.25) to deal with
the case of a full-height bridge abutment supported by two rows of vertical piles driven
through a soft clay layer into a dense sand stratum (Figure 9.18). Two loading cases were
considered: (a) rapid placing of the embankment fill at a rate equivalent to a one-day
construction period in the prototype, and (b) slow placing of the embankment over a 21-day
period. Vertical drains beneath the embankment were also incorporated in the model. These
extended from a drainage layer beneath the embankment into the sand stratum.
458
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.17 The effect of asymmetrical surcharge loading on a vertical pile with a free-head pile driven
through soft deformable soil on to a stiff layer (a) Lateral pressure distribution (b) Relative
soil/pile movement (after Springman and Bolton(9.24)). Crown copyright 1995. Reproduced
by permission of HM Stationery Office.
Equivalent surcharge pressure q
h
hu
Free head
pile
Mean
pressure
Group
Pile
(b)
(a) 
pm
d
Soil movement
Soil line
Pile deflection
p9m =1.5 × pm
Measurements made in the centrifuge model of pile head deflections, bending moments,
and deduced horizontal soil pressures on the surfaces of the central pile of the three-pile row
furthest from the embankment are shown in Figure 9.18. They show a marked difference in
the magnitude of deflection and pressure between the short-term (end of construction) and
long-term (125 weeks after end of construction) loading periods. The pressure on the pile
surface within the soft clay was negative at the end of construction as a result of the large
deflections causing the pile to pull away from the soil. With time the clay closed-up against the
Miscellaneous piling problems
459
Figure 9.18 Lateral pressure distribution on full height bridge abutment supported by two rows
of piles driven through soft clay into dense sand (a) deflection (b) bending moments
(after Springman et al.(9.25)). Crown copyright 1995. Reproduced by permission of HM
Stationery Office.
(b) 
(a) 
5.0
0
10.0
15.0
–10
–5
5
Bending moment (MN/m)
Depth below soft clay surface (m)
0
10
15
20.0
5.0
–100
0
Pressure
Pressure
Abutment wall
Fill
8.0 m
6.0 m
5.0 m
1.0m dia RC piles
13.0 m
GL
Soft
clay
Dense
sand
Long term
Short term
Key
Drainage
layer
10.0
15.0
–50
0
100
Deflection (mm)
Deflection
Deduced pressure (kN/m2)
Depth (m)
50
150
200
200
100
300
400
500
20.0
pile causing a small positive pressure to develop. Generally, the measurements on the model
piles showed increases in maximum bending moments over the 125 week (prototype) loading
period of 30% for the rear (furthest from the embankment) and 15% for the front row of piles.
The research studies of Springman and Bolton, and Springman et al. were based on
considerations of the undrained shear strength and undrained shear modulus of the soft clay.
These undrained soil parameters formed the basis, in the earlier work, of a computer
program given the name SIMPLE(9.26) from which the distribution of lateral pressures,
bending moments and deflections of over the full length of piles subjected to similar
loading conditions can be determined. The general pattern of the effects on piles as predicted
by the SIMPLE program was to some extent confirmed by full-scale measurements on piles
supporting the south abutment of the Wiggenhall Overbridge near Kings Lynn in Norfolk(9.27).
Four rows of 11 piles were driven through 10.4 m of weak Marine Alluvium to a depth of
about 5 m into a very stiff Kimmeridge Clay. Horizontal soil movements were recorded by a
tube close to the instrumented pile. Embankment filling was undertaken over a period of
about 5 months after completing pile driving.
The instrumented ground tube showed that flow of the soft clayey alluvium had occurred
between the piles over the period of the embankment placing with lateral movements at pile
cap level of 29 mm in the soil and 19 mm in the pile. The SIMPLE program had over-
predicted both the pile deflections and bending moments. The instrumented pile head had
deflected about 19 mm compared with the prediction of 60 mm. However, it should be
pointed out that the design of the bridge as a spill-through structure with fill on both sides of
the abutment and the multiple rows of supporting piles did not correspond to the arrangements
studied in the laboratory research.
Generally, before commencing detailed design studies into the behaviour of piles
subjected to the loading conditions described above it is desirable to consider the
maximum lateral pressure which can be applied to the piles within the soft layer. This was
shown by Randolph and Houlsby(9.28) to correspond to 9.14cu for a perfectly smooth
pile and 11.94cu for a perfectly rough pile. When the pressure on the leading face of a
pile reaches these values the clay flows past them and cannot exert any higher pressure.
Hence, if it can be shown that the pile section, as designed to resist vertical and horizon-
tal forces on the abutment or bank seat, has an adequate safety factor against failure or
excessive deflection when subjected to additional forces caused by soil movements
applied directly to the supporting pile shafts, then further detailed design work may be
judged unnecessary.
Springman and Bolton(9.24) recommended that the embankment–pile–soil system should
be designed to ensure that the ratio of the mean horizontal soil pressure (pm) to the undrained
shear strength (cu) should lie within the pseudo-elastic zone shown in the interaction dia-
gram (Figure 9.19). In this diagram the ratio pm/cu is plotted as the ordinate with an upper
limit of 10.5. At this stage the clay flows plastically around the pile (it was noted above that
Randolph and Houlsby put this limit between 9.14 and 11.94 depending on the surface
roughness of the pile). The ratio of the embankment surcharge pressure (q) to cu is plotted
as the abscissa, for which the limit is given by q  (2 )cu which represents the stage of
plastic yielding of soil beneath the embankment. To avoid excessive deformation of the
embankment causing soil to flow between the piles supporting the abutment, there should
be a safety factor of at least 1.5 against base failure. Elastic behaviour of the system is
defined by the limits of h/d in Figure 9.19 between 4 and 10. The height h, the pile diameter d,
460
Miscellaneous piling problems
and the mean horizontal pressure pm are shown in Figure 9.17. Methods of calculating pm
and the height hu are described by Springman and Bolton.
When calculating lateral forces on the piles for a range of values of cu the higher values
should be used to obtain the bending moments and pile deflections, and the lower values for
assessing the stability of the embankment. It is also important to ensure that the side slopes
of the embankment have an adequate safety factor against rotational shear failure.
De Beer and Wallays (9.29) have established an empirical method of calculating the lateral
pressure on vertical piles due to unsymmetrical surcharge loading. The surcharge is represented
by a fictitious fill of height Hf with a sloping front face, as shown for three arrangements of
piles and embankment loading in Figure 9.20a to c. The height Hf is given by
(9.2)
where  is the density of the fill in tonne/m3.
The fictitious fill is assumed to slope at an angle  which is drawn by one of the methods
shown in Figure 9.20a to c, depending on the location of the surcharge loading in relation
to the piles. The lateral pressure on the piles is then given by
pz  fp
(9.3)
where f is a reduction factor given by
(9.4)
f    0.5
90	  0.5
Hf  H 
1.8
Miscellaneous piling problems
461
Figure 9.19 Interaction diagram for horizontal soil pressure on vertical pile driven through soft clay
into an underlying stiff stratum (after Springman and Bolton(9.24)). Crown copyright 1995.
Reproduced by permission of HM Stationery Office.
Plastic flow around pile
Ultimate plastic failure
of soil mass and soil
around pile
Ultimate bearing
capacity
Elastic loading lines
(2+p) (1+2d/s)
(2+p)
q/cu
pm/cu
(2+p)
1.5
Elasto-plastic
zone
Local onset of yield on pile
0
10.5
2p
Pseudo-elastic
zone
h/d = 10
h/d = 4
Serviceable
bearing capacity
p is the surcharge pressure, and  is the effective angle of shearing resistance of the soil
applying pressure to the pile.
It should be noted that when 0.5 the lateral pressure becomes negligible. De Beer
and Wallays point out that the method is very approximate. It should not be used to obtain
the variation in bending moments along the pile shaft but only to obtain the maximum
moment. They also make the important point that the calculation method cannot be used
if the safety factor for conditions of overall stability of the surcharge load is less than 1.6.
It has the advantage of being based on drained soil conditions.
Driving piles within or close to the toe of clay slopes can result in the development of excess
pore pressure which may cause slipping of the slope. Massarsch and Broms(9.30) have developed
a method of predicting the excess pore pressures induced by the soil displacement.
It is very difficult to avoid relative settlement between a piled bridge abutment and the fill
material forming an embanked approach behind the abutment. Settlement of the fill often
occurs even when well-compacted granular material is used. Relative settlement can be large
where the embankment is placed on a compressible clay. The concept of allowing piles to
yield under load was adopted by Reid and Buchanan(9.31) for the purpose of reducing the rel-
ative settlement of a piled bridge abutment and the approach embankment which was
founded on soft compressible clay. The arrangement of piles is shown in Figure 9.21. The
piles beneath the embankment close to the abutment were at close-spacing and were
designed to carry the whole of the embankment load with a safety factor of 2. After the first
four rows the spacing was increased to a 3 to 4 m grid and the piles were made successively
shorter so that they would yield under a progressively increasing proportion of the embank-
ment load. The piles had circular caps 1.1 to 1.5 m diameter. Loading from the embankment
was distributed to the pile heads by a flexible membrane consisting of two layers of Terram
plastics fabric reinforced with Paraweb strapping. If piles are used to support a bridge
approach slab, the embankment design and construction and the subsoil conditions will
affect the drag-down load on the piles.
462
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.20 Calculation of lateral pressure on vertical piles due to unsymmetrical surcharge loading
(after De Beer and Wallays(9.29)).
Surcharge pressure p
Fictitious fill
Embankment
fill
a
a
a
p Hf
Hf
Hf
Pz
Pz
Pz
H
H
H
P
(a)
(b)
(c)
9.6
Piled foundations for over-water bridges
9.6.1
Selection of pile type
Because of the desirability of avoiding different types of piling on the same bridge project
the piling used for piers constructed in over-water locations will usually dictate the type to
be used for the abutments. Driven piles are the favoured type for over-water piers. The
installation of bored piles is limited to work carried out either in a pumped-out cofferdam,
or in a permanent casing driven below river bed. In fast-flowing rivers the casing will have to
be taken down to a sufficient depth below the river bed to obtain fixity against overturning
particularly in conditions of bed scour. Tubular steel piles or precast concrete piles of cylin-
drical section are preferred to H-sections in order to minimize current drag and eddies
causing bed scour. The need for raked piles for efficient resistance of lateral forces again
favours a driven type of pile. Where precast prestressed cylindrical piles are used in
deep-water locations or for deep penetrations below bed level there can be problems with
handling long heavy piles. Also, forming joints to extend partly driven piles can cause
difficulties and delays.
Attrition by soil particles of the exterior surface of piles at the sea or river bed can be
a factor influencing the material of the pile and its wall thickness. This is more likely to be a
problem where the bed level is constant or changing over a limited range rather than rivers
where seasonal floods cause wide variations in bed contours.
Miscellaneous piling problems
463
Figure 9.21 Arrangement of settlement reducing piles beneath bridge approach embankment (after
Reid and Buchanan (9.31)).
PF ash fill
Terram fabric reinforced with
‘Paraweb’ strapping
Cross section A-A
A
PF ash fill
Reinforced fabric
Reinforced concrete pile caps
General fill
Soft alluvium
Precast concrete piles
Transition piles
Embankment support piles
Bridge abutment
support piles
A
A notable example of precast concrete piling for bridge works is the over-water sections of
the 25 km causeway between Saudi Arabia and Bahrain Island.(9.32) The bridge sections of the
causeway form a total length of 12.5 km and were constructed in water depths ranging from
5 to 12 m. A single 3.50 m OD  0.35 m wall thickness precast concrete cylinder supports
the 50 m span box girder carrying the two-lane carriageway of the dual carriageway bridge
(Figure 9.22). The cylinders were cast vertically in short sections at the shore-based casting
yard. The sections were then formed into complete piles by longitudinal prestressing and
transported to the bridge locations by a 1000 tonne crane barge. The crane lifted the piles into
the guides of the twin drilling rigs mounted on a jack-up platform (Figure 9.23). Reverse-
circulation drilling using a Wirth rotary table was used to take the piles down to the required
penetration below sea bed where the base was plugged with concrete.
The foundations for the cable-stayed Sutong Bridge(9.33) over the lower Yangtze River had
to deal with water depths of 30 m with maximum flow rates of 3 m/s and layers of silty sands
and silty clays extending up to 270 m below river level to bedrock. Drilled shafts 131No
2.8/2.5 m diameter, with ultimate capacity of 92 MN, support the two main pylon piers
constructed on a 13 m deep pile cap. Construction of the shafts was carried out from a steel
platform fixed over the pier 3 m above high water, and the 2.8 m casings driven by vibratory
hammers at the north pier and diesel hammer at the south pier to depths of around 60 m. Eight
rotary drills, using a variety of soft formation drill tools 2.5 m diameter, were used on each
464
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.22 Cylinder pile foundations for the Saudi Arabia–Bahrain Causeway (after Beestra et al.(9.32)
Courtesy of Ballast Nedam).
–7.605
0.000
Variable
Variable
Variable
Weak rock
Sand layers
13.10
Boxgirder
Elastomeric bearing
Pierhead
Precast concrete impact
plug
Scour protection
13.12
Grout
Bottom plug
(concrete cast under water)
min 7.0
3.0
0.35
2.80
0.35
Figure 9.23 Drilling equipment for sinking 3.5 m OD precast concrete cylinder piles,Saudi Arabia–Bahrain
Causeway.
platform to extend the shafts to depths of 114 to 117 m using bentonite to maintain hole
stability. Reinforcement cages were inserted and a batching plant rated at 100 m3/hour
moored downstream of the platform supplied concrete. Post-grouting of the pile tip was
carried out using methods similar to those shown in Figure 3.39, increasing pile capacity by
20% as indicated by before and after tests.
9.6.2
Imposed loads on piers of over-water bridges
In addition to the loadings listed in Section 9.5.2 the piles of over-water bridges are required
to withstand lateral forces from current drag and wave action, pressure from floating flood
debris or ice, and impact from vessels straying from the designated navigation channels.
Current drag and wave forces can be calculated using the methods described in Sections
8.1.3 and 8.1.4. The profile of the current velocity with depth varying from a maximum at
the water surface to a minimum at bed level must be considered in relation to the bending
moments on piles in deep fast-flowing rivers. Current-induced oscillation can also be a
problem in these conditions. It is also necessary to calculate the lateral deflections in the
direction of the river flow at pile head level because these can induce bending of the bridge
superstructure in the horizontal plane.
The depth of scour below river bed around piles at times of peak flood must be estimated for
the purpose of calculating bending moments due to current drag forces and wave action on
piles. The scour consists of three components: (a) general scour from changes in bed levels
across the width of the channel, (b) formation of troughs in ‘sand waves’ which move down-
stream with the passage of the flood and (c) local scour around the piles. Rip-rap, armouring,
cable-tied concrete block mats and grout bag mats are used to protect piers and abutment foun-
dations. Care has to be taken to prevent failure due to ‘winnowing’ of sediments between the
mats and blocks, causing uplift and rolling up of the leading edge of the mat if not anchored.
May et al.(9.34) review the causes and effects of, and remedies for, scour around bridge piers.
An extreme example of the influence of bed scour on bridge foundations is given by the
design of the foundations of the multi-purpose bridge over the Jamuna river near Sirajgang
in Bangladesh(4.33,4.34). The bridge provides a dual two-lane roadway, a metre gauge railway,
pylons carrying a power connector and a high-pressure gas pipeline. At the bridge location
the river was 15 km wide. The waterway had a braided configuration with numerous deep
scour channels and shifting sandbanks. In order to limit the overall length of the bridge the
waterway was narrowed by constructing massive armoured training bunds on each bank
which reduced the width to 4.8 km. It was calculated that the result of constriction of flow
would cause the river bed to scour to a depth of 40 to 45 m below bank level at the time of
a 1 in 100 year flood discharging 63000 m3/sec. An additional 1 m of scour was estimated
to occur around the foundation piles.
The bridge structure consists of 52 segmental box girder spans carried on piers, each pier
being supported by a pair of raking piles (Figure 9.24). The 3.15 m OD  40/60 mm wall
thickness piles were driven with open ends and have outside diameters of 2.50 and 3.15 m
depending on their location relative to the training bunds. The piles were driven to a depth
of about 70 m below bank level into a loose becoming medium-dense to dense silty medium
to fine sand containing upto 5% of micaceous particles. Support to the piles is provided
partly by shaft friction and partly by base resistance. The maximum load in compression on
a 3.15 m pile was estimated to be 57.1 MN resulting from the bridge loading combined with
current drag forces caused by the 1 in 100 year flood and by earthquake forces. The
maximum lateral load on each pile was calculated to be 1.5 MN.
466
Miscellaneous piling problems
At the time of a major flood more than one-half of the shaft friction available from the soil
below river bed level under dry conditions could be lost due to scour. Furthermore, the fric-
tional resistance in the upper part of the piles could be reduced as a result of relief of over-
burden pressure (see Section 4.3.6). These conditions could not be reproduced at the site of the
pre-construction trial piling, nor could loading tests to failure be contemplated on piles with
such large diameters. Accordingly, the tests were made on 762 mm tubular piles instrumented
to measure the distribution of shaft resistance during driving and test loading. The driving test
measurements were analysed by the CAPWAP method (see Section 7.3) to confirm that the
hammer selected to drive the piles was adequate for the purpose. This was a Menck 1700T
hydraulic hammer with a 102 tonne ram delivering 1700 kJ of energy per blow. The damping
constants and other characteristics obtained from the driving tests were used to correlate the
dynamic measurements made at the time of driving the permanent piles. The results of the
measurements of shaft friction resistance on the trial piles are discussed in Section 4.3.7.
On completion of driving the permanent piles the sand within the shafts was cleaned-out
by reverse-circulation drilling to within 3 m of the toe. A grid of tubes-à-manchette was
placed on the levelled sand surface, and the pile was filled with concrete followed by
grouting with cement through the tubes at a pressure of 50 bar.
Scour protection at the main piers is a major feature of the Sutong Bridge(9.33) where the steel
casings for the piles are exposed above river bed level. The initial inner protection zone, extend-
ing 20 m around the piles, comprises sand-filled geotextile bags (1.6  1.6  0.6 m) dumped
Miscellaneous piling problems
467
Figure 9.24 Two-pile bent supporting intermediate piers of Jamuna River Bridge, Bangladesh
(after Tappin et al.(4.33, 4.34)).
Min. water level +6 m
8
1
Min. bed level–30 m
Pile length 83m
Pile toe level–72 m
Max. water level +16 m
Cast-in-situ
concrete pier
Precast concrete
pile cap
3.15 m OD
tubular
steel piles in-situ
concrete filled
on the river bed, through which the pile casings were driven. On completion of piling,
protection was provided by layers of quarry-run filter and 1 m of rock armour with a density
of 2.65 t/m3. The outer zone, 20 m around the inner, consists of a layer of sandbags topped by
a filter layer and 1 m rock armour. A ‘falling apron’, in which the material in the apron is
intended to fall down a scoured slope to produce a stable profile, forms the next variable width
zone, set at 1.5 times the expected scour depth, and comprises quarry-run stone overlain by
armour with a D50 of 0.4 to 0.6 m (Figure 9.25). Dumping of the materials was monitored by
echo sounders.
Impact by ships can be a severe problem in the design of bridge support piles in situations
where impact cannot be absorbed by massive structures such as caissons or piers constructed
inside cofferdams. It is difficult to achieve an economical solution to the problem particu-
larly at deep-water locations. The incidence of random collisions between ships straying
from the navigable channel and bridge piers has not decreased since the introduction of
shipborne radar. In fact, it may have increased because of the false sense of security given
by such equipment.
Three possible methods of protecting piled foundations may be considered. In shallow
water not subject to major bed changes and with a small range between high and low water
the pile group can be surrounded by an artificial island protected against erosion by rockfill.
Figure 9.26 shows a cross-section of one of four islands protecting the piers of the Penang
Island Bridge(9.35). The Muroran Bay Bridge in Hokkaido features a 67 m diameter man-
made island formed by placing self-setting fly-ash slurry under water on the soft sea bed
within a cofferdam. These forms of protection have the added advantage of preventing local
scour around the foundations. The island must be large enough to prevent impact between
468
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.25 Sutong Bridge, scour protection at main pylons (after Bittern et al.(9.33)). Copyright Deep
Foundations Institute 2005.
Assumed scour slope
1 in 2
–43 m
–15 m river bed
0.0 River level
42 m
40 m
20 m
Permanent protection:
2 layers of 0.5m quarry stone
0.07 m quarry run
Temporary protection during piling:
3 layers of 0.8m filled geotextile bags
2 layers of 0.4m quarry stones
0.75 m quarry run
1 layer of 0.8m filled geotextile bags
FALLING APRON:
2–3 layers 0.6m quarry stones
0.75 m quarry run
20 m
40 m
24 m
113.8m × 48.1m pile cap 
over pile group
28m
Piles exposed
below cap
131No 2.8 m diameter piles in group
–121 m or –124 m 
the overhanging bows of a ship and the bridge pier or pile if the vessel should ride up the
slope of the island when drifting out of control in a fast-flowing river.
Piles can be strengthened against buckling under direct impact by increasing the wall
thickness and a group of piles can be given lateral restraint by a diaphragm connecting them
at some point between the cap and bed level. The cylinder piles of the Bahrain Causeway
bridge were strengthened by the insertion of precast concrete elements to increase the thickness
over the zone of possible impact (Figure 9.22).
Fender piles installed independently of the piers can be installed in deep-water locations.
Piles are required to protect the sides of the piers as well as the ends in case of impact at an
angle to the axis of the pier. The arrangement of fender piles capped by a massive reinforced
concrete ring beam to protect the piers of the Sungei Perak Bridge(9.36) in Malaysia is shown
in Figure 9.27. The ring beam was constructed by placing precast concrete trough sections
on the piles, sealing the joints between the sections, and placing the reinforcement and
concrete infill in dry conditions. The loading on fender piles is calculated in the same way
as fender piles for berthing structures (see Section 8.1.1).
9.6.3
Pile caps for over-water bridges
It can be advantageous to locate pile caps at or below low river or low tide level. It avoids
floating debris building-up between piles, and ensures that if collision by vessel does occur
the impact will be on a massive part of the substructure instead of directly on a pile. Also a
vessel is likely to sheer off at the first impact with a pile cap whereas it might become
trapped when colliding with a group of piles. A pile cap at or below water level is preferable,
aesthetically, to one exposed at low water. However, high-level pile caps are economical for
a bridge requiring a high navigation clearance, but such an arrangement would have to be
restricted to approach spans in water too shallow to be navigable by vessels which could
demolish piles supporting a high-level deck bridging the navigation channel.
Pile caps partly submerged or wholly below water level can be constructed within sheet
pile cofferdams (Figure 9.28a). The sheet piles can be cut-off at low water to give protection
against scour. Alternatively, if a heavy lifting barge is available a precast concrete cap in the
form of an open-topped box can be lowered on to collars welded to the heads of the piles and
prevented from floating by clamps. The annulus between the pile wall and the opening in the
box can be sealed by quick-setting concrete or by rubber rings. The box is then pumped out
and reinforcement and concrete is placed in dry conditions. The concrete seal is used in tidal
Miscellaneous piling problems
469
Figure 9.26 Artificial Islands protecting the piers of the Penang Island Bridge Malaysia (after Chin Fung
Kee and McCabe(9.35)).
Two layers of armour rock
Under layer
Sand
Sea-bed bottom
Channel bottom
Sand fill
Quarry run
1.0m  OD 3 0.13m wall thickness
prestressed concrete piles
2–4m marine
clay dredged out
1:10
1:1.5
RL – 6.0
MHW RL + 1.08
conditions where a sufficient period of time is available for the concrete to set before the
bottom of the box is submerged. Arrangements should be made to flood the box to equalize
pressures above and below the seal until the concrete has hardened (Figure 9.28b).
Where piers are located in deep water and there is a risk of ship collision it is desirable to
construct the pile cap at bed level in order to eliminate any unsupported length of piling.
This arrangement is also desirable if lateral forces from earthquakes are transmitted from
the bridge superstructure and piers on to the piles. The pier and pile cap can be constructed
470
Miscellaneous piling problems
Figure 9.28 Construction of submerged pile caps (a) In cofferdam (b) In open-topped box.
Pier
Pile cap
Sheet piles
High water
Low water
River bed
Impervious
stratum forming
cut-off for sheet piles
Precast concrete box
Pier
Concrete infill
High water
Low water
Collar
River bed
Rubber seal
to opening
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.27 Fender beam and piles protecting the river piers of the Sungei Perak Bridge, Malaysia
(after Stanley(9.36)).
1800 mm OD tubular
steel piles supporting
fender beam
1500 mm OD 
tubular steel
piles
Trough-section
RC fender beam
Pile cap supporting
bridge pier
Riverflow (tidal)
on shore as a single buoyant unit lowered on to the sea bed followed by driving piles through
peripheral skirts in a manner similar to the piled foundations of offshore drilling platforms.
Alternatively, the piles can be driven in the form of a raft with their heads projecting above
a rock blanket or geotextile mattress. A prefabricated pier unit is then lowered over the pile
group and the connection between the two formed by underwater concrete. The availability
of heavy-lift cranes on barges or jack-up platforms favours this type of design.
Prefabricated piers were used for 15 of the piers carrying the 3.3 km-long bridges between
the islands of Sjaelland and Falster in Denmark.(9.37) A group of forty-nine 700 mm tubular
steel piles in two concentric rings supported the deep-water piers in the navigable channel. The
first operation was to form a level bed by dredging with protection against scour by rockfill.
Then the piles were driven leaving their heads projecting about 6 m above the prepared
bed (Figure 9.29). During these operations a precast reinforced concrete conical base unit
weighing 440 tonne was being fabricated on shore. It was taken out to the pier site and low-
ered over the projecting pile heads on to three pinning piles. Concrete was then pumped into
place under water to about mid-height of the base unit. The next operation was to lower a
temporary circular steel cofferdam on to the top of the base unit to which it was locked by
stressed rods. The cofferdam consisted of an assembly of steel plate rings 10 to 11 m in diam-
eter and 3 m deep. The joints between the rings were sealed by rubber sheeting. This was fol-
lowed by dewatering the cofferdam and constructing the pier, after which the cofferdam was
flooded and lifted off the base unit by floating crane for transport to the next pier location.
Miscellaneous piling problems
471
Figure 9.29 Construction of deep-water piers for the Sjaelland–Faro–Falster Bridge, Denmark (after
Levesque(9.37)).
High water
3.0 m deep rings
Pier constructed
in cofferdam
Temporary steel
plate cofferdam
Transition section
0.5 m
7.0 m
1 in 3.3
1 in 5
Dredged sea bed
700 mm OD 
 9.5 mm
WT steel tubular piles
Rockfill
Permanent RC
base unit
Concrete placed
under water
10–11 m dia.
18.0 m dia.
9.7
Piled foundations in karst
The design and construction of piles for structures on land underlain by limestone formations
which exhibit karst conditions such as wide fissures and solution cavities present several
unique challenges. Because variations in rockhead and cavitation can occur over short
distances it is difficult to produce an overall geological model of the site to determine if
shallow foundations can be used or whether piles can be founded on ‘competent rock’. The
first requirements are therefore to assess the depth and strength of the overburden, the extent
of cavities and the degree of infilling under each foundation by drilling a series of closely
spaced probe holes using a combination of rotary percussive rigs capable of installing casing
and rotary coring drills. Waltham and Fookes(9.38) give an engineering classification of karst as
a means of identifying foundation difficulties but they point out that there is no simple answer
to the number of probes which may be required. The probes are usually taken to a depth of at
least 3 m below rockhead and any void encountered, or to a similar depth below the anticipated
depth of rock socket of each pile. Because of the possibility of vertical faces in the rockhead
and cavities it is advisable to include a percentage of raked probe holes in the investigation.
The selection of the pile installation method is critical, as it may be necessary to overcome
random boulders in the overburden, remove and replace weak material in cavities through
which the pile has to pass, and finally found on competent rock or form a socket in rock,
ensuring that sound rock also exists within the bearing zone. Large driven piles are not
usually feasible and the most effective method is the drilled and cast-in-place pile, usually
with permanent steel casing sealed into the rock at the top of the socket.
The removal of cavity and fissure infill debris and replacement with cement grout to
allow uncased holes to be drilled for piles is expensive and rarely achieves the desired
results. Flushing/grout holes are required at less than 1 m centres under and around the pile
group and flushing water is necessary in quantities greater than 150 l per min and pressure
greater than 10 bar – potentially causing pollution of surrounding water courses. If sufficient
grout can then be injected it may be possible to place concrete in the open pile hole, or as
temporary casing is withdrawn, without loss of fluid concrete. However, for pile diameters up
to 1200 mm rotary-percussive rigs which can simultaneously install permanent casing
(duplex drilling) are generally considered the most cost-effective installation method. For
larger-diameter piles, the use of a powerful casing oscillator and a drilling method to clean
out the pile and form the rock socket are recommended (see Section 3.3.2); above this
diameter, shaft or caisson construction techniques may be necessary. Whichever method is
used it is essential to probe below the base of the pile to check for cavities. Pile drilling may
have to be continued until a sound bearing for the rock socket is located. Jet grouting could be
used to consolidate any cavity infill within the bearing zone below the sound rock socket –
again high grout pressure and volume (450 bar and 350 l per min) will be required with
adequate venting to the surface and pollution control.
Grouting to form a mattress of sound bearing material at rockhead for driven H-piles can
be effective in karstic limestone(9.39). In order to limit the flow of grout away from closely
centred grout holes it was necessary in this case to vary the slump depending on injection
rate and pressure and to use secondary and tertiary injection holes where grout loss
occurred. Verifying the treatment is difficult and reliance has to be placed on detailed grouting
records. Specially serrated driving shoes were needed to minimize the slipping of the pile
tip along uneven bedrock surfaces to achieve full bearing capacity.
‘Micropiles’, with working capacity of 890 and 1160 kN, were used for bridge piers
by inserting 245 mm diameter thick wall steel tubes into grout-filled pre-drilled holes as
472
Miscellaneous piling problems
cost-effective alternatives for 1371 mm diameter, steel ‘caisson’ piles up to 30 m deep, in
karstic dolomite(9.40). 160No micropiles replaced forty caissons at each of three piers. Where
the conditions were highly variable with pinnacles, voids and clay-filled solution cavities,
the use of ‘Tubex’ duplex drilling was necessary to install 327 mm temporary casing to
depths up to 59 m with a 1 m deep rock socket to insert the permanent pile tube. At other
locations where the karstic conditions were less variable, a down-the-hole rotary percussive
drill was used to drill 305 mm diameter holes up to 23 m deep without casing to insert the
specified 245 mm steel tube – with the assistance of a D5 pile hammer (Figure 9.30). The
pile holes in each case were grouted using a tremie pipe, ensuring that grout level was sta-
ble at the top of the hole prior to inserting the permanent tube.
Drilling ‘slim’ holes, with or without simultaneous casing, or driving long H-piles in
karstic conditions can cause significant problems due to deviations compromising the axial
capacity of the piles. Concreting or grouting open holes or as temporary casing is withdrawn
runs a risk of loss of material into weak cavity infill or undetected voids requiring pre-grouting
using a low slump mix injected in several stages and re-drilling. Micropile test piles,
installed with open hole drilling methods, have failed in karst geology due to contamination
of the bond zone in the time between withdrawal of the drill tools and installation of the
permanent pile tube and concreting.
Natural overburden and decomposed debris overlying the karst formation can be treated by
various ground improvement techniques prior to piling – such as vibroflotation, compaction
grouting, and jet grouting. Fischer(9.41) describes the foundations for a nuclear power plant on
karst terrain which comprised tubular steel piles driven into relatively flat limestone bedrock,
Miscellaneous piling problems
473
Figure 9.30 Micropile in Karst (Uranowski et al.(9.40)).
Grout-filled drill hole
Centralizers
600 mm minimum rock socket
Top of sound rock
Ground surface
Cross section of micropile
305 mm diameter hole 
Grout placed by tremie 
to base of hole before 
inserting pile tube
245 mm OD × 12.5 mm wall high
tensile steel tube
Outside of tube greased and 
wrapped  except for bond
zone in socket
Tube topped up
with grout
Hole drilled with 'duplex'
drilling/casing up to 55m
Fully penetrating welds
to join tube sections
Unbonded zone in overburben
with a 5 m deep probe at each pile tip to locate cavities. The pile hole was extended by under-
reaming where the probes located cavities, the tube re-driven as necessary to sound rock and
filled with concrete. The overburden sand, up to 20 m deep, was treated by vibroflotation to
improve the relative density to 85% to 90% in order to reduce liquefaction potential.
9.8
Energy piles
Ground temperatures in much of Europe are reasonably constant at 10	C to 15	C (and in the
tropics as high as 20	C to 25	C), below a depth of 10 m. This near-surface geothermal energy
potential is being exploited to provide a consistent low level, but cost-effective and environ-
mentally friendly, source of heating for buildings, using the thermal properties of the building
foundations. Concrete has a high thermal storage capacity and good thermal conductivity and
heat from the ground taken up by the pile, diaphragm wall or other foundation can be trans-
ferred from the concrete to a heat exchanger coil buried within the concrete and moved by a
simple heat pump to heat the building. Conversely, in suitable soils the heat from the building
can be transferred to the concrete and ground for cooling during the summer. Brandl(9.42)
describes the heat transfer mechanisms in the ground and between the absorber fluid in the
exchanger pipework and the structural concrete and provides recommendations for the design
and operation of geothermal piles and other ‘earth-contact’ concrete elements.
The geothermal properties of the ground (thermal conductivity and capacity) and
groundwater flow and direction have to be determined for the complex heat exchange
calculations, but the pile diameter and length should be designed to resist the applied struc-
tural loads and not increased to suit the geothermal requirements. The primary circuit within
the pile comprises absorber pipes of high density polyethylene plastic, 25 mm diameter and
2–3 mm wall thickness, formed into several closed-end coils or loops and fixed evenly
around the inside of a rigid, welded reinforcement cage for the full depth. Typically loops of
eight vertical runs would be provided in a 600 mm diameter pile. The geothermal effective-
ness of piles less than 300 mm diameter is much reduced due to lower surface area and the
limited number of loops which can be fitted; the economically minimum depth of an energy
pile is about 6 m. Each loop is filled with the heat transfer fluid, water with antifreeze or
saline solution, and fitted with a locking valve and manometer at the top of the pile cage.
This may necessitate off-site fabrication. The piling method must produce a stable hole for
the careful insertion of the cage and absorber pipework. Bored piles, with or without drilling
fluid support, or a cased or withdrawable tube method, are acceptable for most schemes.
Before concreting, the absorber pipes are pressurized to around 8 bar for an integrity test
and to prevent collapse due to the head of fluid concrete. The pressure has to be maintained
until the concrete has hardened and then re-applied before the primary circuit is finally
enclosed. Concreting should be by tremie pipe placed to the base of the pile to avoid
damaging the pipework. Plunging the absorber pipes, either as separate tubes or attached to
the reinforcement cage, into fluid concrete in a CFA pile is not currently recommended.
The primary circuits in each pile are connected via header pipes to manifold blocks which in
turn are connected usually through a heat pump to the secondary circuit embedded in the floors
and walls of the building. Using a heat pump with a coefficient of performance of 4 (the ratio
of the energy downstream of the heat pump to the energy input of the pump), the ground tem-
perature can be raised from 10	C–15	C to between 25	C and 35	C at the building. Depending
on soil properties and installation depth of the absorbers, Brandl notes that 1 kW heating needs
between 20 m2 of saturated soil and 50 m2 of dry sand in contact with the pile surface.
474
Miscellaneous piling problems
The ground temperature around the pile in a heat extraction system using brine will
be lowered by around 5	C, and there is no evidence that the shaft resistance and bearing
capacity of the pile are affected by the heat transfer process in this case. Also any temperature-
induced settlement/heave is likely to be less than the displacements due to the applied loads
on the foundations. If excessive heat is extracted using a lower temperature refrigerant as the
absorber, temperature around the foundation can drop to near freezing.
The piling technique necessary for the installation of energy piles may not be the most cost-
effective for the ground conditions, but depending on energy prices, climatic conditions and
the type of building, pay-back for the higher initial cost in terms of energy saving is estimated
to be between 2 and 10 years. Development of CFA and vibro-concrete piles to accommodate
more robust heat transfer systems could provide more economical energy piles.
9.9
References
9.1
BARKAN, D. D. Dynamics of bases and foundations (Translated from the Russian), McCraw-Hill
Book Co. 1962.
9.2
HSIEH, T. K. Foundation vibrations, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 22, June
1962, pp. 211–26.
9.3
WHITMAN, R. V. and RICHART, F. E. Design procedures for dynamically loaded foundations,
Proceedings of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Vol. 93, No. SM6, November 1967,
pp. 169–93.
9.4
RICHART, F. E., HALL, F. R., and WOODS, R. D. Vibrations of Soils and Foundations, Prentice Hall,
New Jersey, 1970.
9.5
IRISH, K. and WALKER, W. P. Foundations for reciprocating machines, Concrete, October 1967,
pp. 327–37.
9.6
Foundations for Dynamic Equipment. American Concrete Institute, Report ACI351.3R-04, 2004.
9.7
LIZZI, F. Pali radice and reticulated pali radice, Micropiling, Underpinning, Thorburn, S. and
Hutchison, J. N. (eds), Surrey University Press, 1985, pp. 84–161.
9.8
PRICE, D. G., MALKIN, A. B., and KNILL, J. L. Foundations of multi-storey blocks on the Coal
Measures with special reference to old mineworkings, Quarterly Journal of Engineering
Geology, Vol. 1, No. 4, June 1969.
9.9
ANDERSON, D. M. and MORGENSTERN, N. R. Physics, chemistry and mechanics of frozen ground,
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Permafrost, National Academy of Sciences,
Washington DC, 1973.
9.10 ANDERSLAND, O. B. and LADANYI, B. Frozen Ground Engineering 2nd Edition. ACSE Press and
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2004.
9.11 TSYTOVICH, N. A. Permafrost in the USSR as foundations for structures, Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference, ISSMFE, Montreal, Vol. 3, 1965, pp. 155–67.
9.12 PENNER, E. and IRWIN, W. W. Adfreezing of Leda Clay to anchored footing columns, Canadian
Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 6, No. 3, August 1969, pp. 327–37.
9.13 PENNER, E. and GOLD, L. W. Transfer of heavy forces by adfreezing to columns and foundation
walls in frost-susceptible soils, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 8, No. 4, November 1971,
pp. 514–26.
9.14 KINOSHITA, S. and ONO, T. Heavy forces on frozen ground, Low Temperature Science Laboratory,
Teron, Kagaka, Serial A, 21, 1963, pp. 117–39. (Translated by National Science Library,
National Research Council, Ottawa, Translation No. TT 1246, 1966.)
9.15 DALMATOV, B. L. Effect of frost-heaving on foundation of structures, Gosizid literatuy po streitch
stuv i architektur, Leningrad-Moscow, 1957.
9.16 PENNER, E. Frost heaving forces in Leda Clay, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol. 7, No. 1,
February 1970, pp. 8–16.
Miscellaneous piling problems
475
9.17 FORIERO, A., St-LAURENT, N., and LADANYI, B. Laterally loaded pile study in permafrost of
Northern Quebec, Canada, American Society of Civil Engineers, Journal of Cold Regions
Engineering, Vol. 19, No. 3, 2005, pp. 61–84.
9.18 SEGO, D. C., BIGGAR, K. W., and WONG, G. Enlarged base (belled) piles for use in ice or ice-rich
permafrost, ASCE Journal of Cold Regions Engineering, Vol. 17, No. 2, 2003, pp. 68–88.
9.19 KORHONEN, C. and ORCHINO, S. Effects of low temperature on concrete strength, ASCE Proceedings
of 10th International Conference on Cold Regions Engineering, 1999, pp. 677–83.
9.20 BIGGAR, K. W. and SEGO, D. C. The curing and strength characteristics of cold setting cement fondu
grout, Proceedings of 5th Canadian Permafrost Conference, Quebec, 1990, pp. 349–56.
9.21 JOHNSON, G. H. (ed.) Permafrost: Engineering Design and Construction, Wiley, New York, 1981.
9.22 HAMBLY, E. C. Bridge Foundations and Substructures, Building Research Establishment,
HMSO, 1979.
9.23 BD 30/87. Backfilled retaining walls and bridge abutments, Highways and Traffic Departmental
Standard, Department of Transport, 1987.
9.24 SPRINGMAN, S. M. and BOLTON, M. D. The effect of surcharge loading adjacent to piles, Transport
and Road Research Laboratory, Contractor Report, 1990.
9.25 SPRINGMAN, S. M., NG, C. W. W., and ELLIS, E. A. Centrifuge and analytical studies of full height
bridge abutment on piled foundation subject to lateral loading, Transport Research Laboratory,
Project Report 98, 1995.
9.26 SPRINGMAN, S. M. Manual for the SIMPLE – for evaluating the effect of surcharge loading
adjacent to piles, Transport and Road Research Laboratory/Cambridge University, 1992.
9.27 DARLEY, P., CARDER, D. R., and RYLEY, M. D. Lateral loading on piled foundations at Wiggenhall
Overbridge (A47), Transport Research Laboratory, TRL Report 246, 1997.
9.28 RANDOLPH, M. F. and HOULSBY, G. T. The limiting pressure on a circular pile loaded laterally in
cohesive soil, Geotechnique, Vol. 34, No. 4, 1984, pp. 613–23.
9.29 DE BEER, E. and WALLAYS, M. Forces induced by unsymmetrical surcharges on the soil around the
pile, Proceedings of the 5th European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation
Engineering, Madrid, Vol. 1, 1972, pp. 325–32.
9.30 MASSARSCH, K. R. and BROMS, B. B. Pile driving in clay slopes, Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference, ISSMFE, Stockholm, Vol. 3, 1981, pp. 469–74.
9.31 REID, W. M. and BUCHANAN, N. W. Bridge approach support piling, Proceedings of the Conference
on Piling and Ground Treatment, Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1983, pp. 267–74.
9.32 BEETSTRA, G. W., VAN DEN HOONARD, J., and VOGELAAR, L. J. J. Bridges and viaducts, in The
Netherlands Commemorative Volume, E. H. de Leew (ed.), Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference, ISSMFE, San Francisco, 1985.
9.33 BITTNER, R. B., ZHANG, X., and JENSEN, O. J. Design and construction of the Sutong bridge foundations,
Deep Foundations Institute, Marine Foundations Speciality Seminar, New York, 2005, pp. 19–27.
9.34 MAY, R. W. P., ACKERS, J. C., and KIRBY, A. M. Manual on scour at bridges and other hydraulic
structures, CIRIA Report C551, Construction Industry Research and Information Association,
London, 2002.
9.35 CHIN FUNG KEE and McCABE, R. Penang Bridge Project: foundations and reclamation work,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 88, No. 1, 1990, pp. 531–49.
9.36 STANLEY, R. G. Design and construction of the Sungei Perak Bridge, Malaysia, Proceedings of the
Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 88, No. 1, 1990, pp. 571–99.
9.37 LEVESQUE, M. Les fondations du pont de Färo en Danemark, Travaux, November 1983, pp. 33–6.
9.38 WALTHAM, A. C. and FOOKES, P. G. Engineering classification of karst ground conditions. Journal
of Engineering Geology and Hydrology, Vol. 36, No. 2, Geological Society of London, 2003,
pp. 101–18.
9.39 BYLE, M. J. and MACKEY, R. Grouting karst to support driven pile foundation for a truss railway
bridge. In Geotrans 2004 – Geotechnical engineering for transportation projects, Yegian, M. K.
and Kavazanjian, E. (eds), American Society of Civil Engineers Geotechnical Special
Publication No. 126, 2004, pp. 1915–25.
476
Miscellaneous piling problems
9.40 URANOWSKI, D. D., DODDS, S., and STONECHECK, P. E. Micropiles in karstic dolomite; similarities
and differences of two case histories. In Geo-Support 2004, Drilled shafts, deep mixing, remedial
methods and speciality foundation systems, Turner, J. P. and Mayne, P. W. (eds), American
Society of Civil Engineers Geotechnical Special Publication No. 124, 2004, pp. 674–81.
9.41 FISCHER, J. A. A nuclear power plant on karst terrane? In Sinkholes and the Engineering and
Environmental Impacts of Karst, Beck B. F. (ed), American Society of Civil Engineers
Geotechnical Special Publication No. 122, 2003, pp. 485–91.
9.42 BRANDL, H. Energy foundations and other thermo-active ground structures, Geotechnique, Vol. 56,
No. 2, 2006, pp. 81–122.
9.10
Worked example
Example 9.1
An embankment 9 m high consisting of fill having a density of 2.1 Mg/m3 is placed with its
toe 1.5 m from a row of vertical piles supporting a bridge pier. The piles are driven through
8 m of soft to firm clay into a stratum of stiff clay. Calculate the lateral pressure on the piles
within the stratum of soft firm clay which has drained shearing strength parameters of c'  0
and '  28	.
From equation 9.2, Hf  9  2.1/1.8  10.5 m. From Figure 9.31,   23.3	. Therefore
from equation 9.4,
Surcharge pressure from embankment p  2.1  9  9.81  185 kN/m2
From equation 9.3, lateral pressure on piles  0. 12  185  22 kN/m2
f  23.3	  (28	  0.5)
90	  (28	  0.5)  0.12
Miscellaneous piling problems
477
1.5m
Stiff clay
Soft to firm clay
(f95 28°)
Pz
(g5 2.1 Mg/m3)
Fill
H5 9m
~5 23.3°
Hf
8.0 m
Figure 9.31
10.1
General
In all situations consideration must be given to the possibility of the deterioration of piled
foundations due to aggressive substances in soils, in rocks, in ground waters, in the sea and
in river waters. Piles in river or marine structures are also exposed to potentially aggressive
conditions in the atmosphere, and they may be subjected to abrasion from shifting sand or
shingle, or damage from floating ice or driftwood.
In considering schemes for protecting piles against deterioration due to these influences,
the main requirement is for detailed information at the site investigation stage on the
environmental conditions. In particular, adequate information is required on the range of
fluctuation of river or sea levels and of the groundwater table. In the latter case, the highest
levels are required when considering the likely severity of sulphate attack on concrete
piles or the corrosion of steel piles, and the lowest possible levels are of considerable
importance in relation to the decay of timber piles. The possibility of major changes in
groundwater levels due to, say, drainage schemes, irrigation, or the impoundment of water
must be considered.
In normal soil conditions it is usually sufficient to limit chemical analyses of soil or
groundwater samples to the determination of pH-values, water-soluble sulphate content (mg
per litre) and chloride content. Where the sulphate content exceeds 0.24% in soils it is
advisable to determine the water-soluble sulphate content, expressing this in mg of SO4 per
litre of water extracted. For brownfield sites, full chemical analyses are required to identify
potentially aggressive substances(2.6). Methods of investigating and assessing brownfield
sites are given by Harris et al.(10.1), drawing attention to the health and safety precautions
necessary, the need to employ specialist personnel, and care in selecting representative
samples.
Bacterial action can be an influence in the corrosion of steel piles. Samples of soil
and groundwater should be obtained in sterilized containers, which are then sealed for
transportation to the bacteriological laboratory for later analyses. Where steel piles are used
for foundations in disturbed soils or fill material on land, an electrical resistivity survey
is helpful in assessing the risk of corrosion and in the design of schemes for cathodic
protection (see Section 10.4.2).
Investigations for marine or river structures should include a survey of possible sources
of pollution which might encourage bacteriological corrosion, such as contaminated tidal
mud flats, discharges of untreated sewage or industrial effluents, dumping grounds for
Chapter 10
The durability of piled foundations
The durability of piled foundations
479
industrial or household refuse, and floating rubbish discharged from ships or harbour
structures. The pattern of sea or river currents should be studied and water samples taken at
various stages of spring and neap tides or at dry-weather and at flood and dry discharge
stages in rivers. Particular attention should be paid to sampling water from currents
originating at the areas of contamination previously identified. Chemical and bacteriologi-
cal analyses should be made on the full range of samples to assess the daily or seasonal
variation in potentially aggressive substances. Other items for study include the presence
and activity of organisms such as weeds and barnacles, and molluscan or crustacean borers
(see Section 10.2.2).
10.2
Durability and protection of timber piles
10.2.1
Timber piles in land structures
Timber piles permanently below groundwater level have an indefinite life. There are numer-
ous examples of stumps of timber piles that are more than 2000 years old being found in
excavations below the water table. While timber does not decay from fungal attack if the
moisture content is kept below 20% it is impossible to maintain it in this dry condition
when buried in the ground above water level. Hence damp timber which does not have nat-
ural durability is subject to decay by fungal attack, resulting in its complete disintegration.
Figure 10.1 shows an example of the decay of timber piles above the water table. Figure
10.1a shows the cavities left by the complete decay of the timber. The timber capping
beams have also decayed, allowing the stone lintels to sink down onto the ground surface.
Figure 10.1b is a view down a cavity which is partly filled by soil debris and fragments of
decayed timber. The piles were driven into clay fill in the early nineteenth century.
Preservative treatment can, however, give a useful life to timber piles in the zone above
groundwater level. If treatment is applied to properly air-seasoned wood at the correct
moisture content for the impregnation of the preservative, a life of several decades may be
achieved.
The Building Research Establishment (BRE)(10.2) has classified various grades of
durability in terms of their approximate life when in contact with the ground (Table 10.1).
Types of softwoods and tropical hardwoods suitable for timber piles as BS 5268 are listed
in Section 2.2.1 (Table 2.1). Their natural durability and ‘treatability’ is classified by BRE
Table 10.1 Natural durability classification of the heartwood of untreated timbers
Grade of durability
Approximate life in ground contact 
European Standards Class
(years)
(Resistance to fungal attack)
Very durable
More than 25
1
Durable
15 to 25
2
Moderately durable
10 to 15
3
Non-durable
5 to 10
4
Perishable
Up to 5
5
Figure 10.1 Decay of timber piles above groundwater level (Crown copyright reserved) (a) Cavities
left by complete decay of piles and timber capping sills (b) View down cavity left in clay
after complete decay of timber pile.
(a)
(b)
The durability of piled foundations
481
Precautions against fungal attack must be commenced at the time that the timber is felled.
It should be carted away from the forest as quickly as possible and then stacked on firm,
well-drained, and elevated ground from which all surface soils which might harbour organ-
isms have been stripped. The timber should be stacked clear of the ground with spaces
between the baulks to encourage the circulation of air and the drying of the timber to the
moisture content suitable for the application of the preservative treatment. Treatability,
based on the heartwood, is an assessment of the take up of the preservative and depends on
the structure of the wood and the method of treatment.
Suitable methods of preserving timber for piling work which have been on the market for
many years involved pressure impregnation with creosote, waterborne preservatives such as
copper–chrome–arsenic (CCA) (e.g. various Celcure formulations) and copper–chrome–
boron compounds (CCB). Although these products have a good safety record, European
Directives effective in 2005/6 proscribe many of these compounds. As a result, alternative,
more benign preservatives are being developed such as copper azole compounds (e.g. tebu-
conazole), Celcure P60, based on copper and chromium with phosphoric acid and light
organic solvents as a carrier for fungicides. British Standards BS 1282: 1999, BS 8417: 2003,
and the publications of the Timber Research and Development Association specify the hazard
classes, service factors for 15, 30, and 60 years service life, and ‘loadings’ of the preservative
solution which are adequate for British and other temperate climates for timber piles in fresh-
and salt-water. In the USA the specifications of the American Wood Preservers’ Institute are
followed. Biological deterioration including termite attack is much more severe in tropical
countries and the loadings or the selection of resistance species for these conditions should be
specified in consultation with a specialist authority in the country under consideration.
Softwoods such as Scots pine and southern pine can be impregnated completely with
preservative solutions, but the harder, ‘resistant’ woods, including Douglas fir, can only
be treated to a limited depth (3 to 6 mm) after the timber has first been incised and then
subjected to a long-sustained application of pressure. The ‘moderately resistant’ woods are
fairly easy to treat to depths up to 18 mm. There can be a useful advantage in using round
timber for piles, in which the outer zone of sapwood can be thoroughly impregnated to a
depth which will resist fungal decay over a long period of years. For example, the sapwood
of Scots pine or Baltic redwood can be treated to a depth of 75 mm, whereas if squared
timbers are used much of the sapwood is cut away to expose the less absorptive heartwood
which cannot be impregnated properly. Because the interior of the harder timbers remains
Species
Durability
European Standards Classes
Durability
Treatability
Treatability
Douglas fir
Non-durable
4
Resistant
3
Pitch pine (Caribbean)
Durable
2
Moderately resistant
2
Larch
Moderately durable
3
Resistant
3
Western red cedar
Durable
2
Resistant
3
Greenheart
Very durable
1
Extremely resistant
4
Jarrah
Very durable
1
Extremely resistant
4
Opepe
Very durable
1
Moderately resistant
2
Teak
Very durable
1
Extremely resistant
4
and European Standards as shown in the following table:
untreated, careful attention should be paid to bolt holes. When these are drilled after the
main impregnation treatment, preservative should be poured into the holes. Incisions made
by lifting hooks, dogs, or slings should be painted with the solution.
Similar attention should be given to the end grain after trimming the tip to receive the
shoe or preparing the butt for the driving cap or ring (Figure 2.2). The exposed end grain
should be given two heavy coats of the preservative.
Some hardwoods, for example, ekki, greenheart, jarrah, okan and opepe can be used with-
out preservative treatment, but in these cases it is essential to specify that no sapwood is left
on the prepared timber. It is difficult to distinguish between sapwood and heartwood in green-
heart and either expert advice should be sought to ensure exclusion of the former or a preser-
vative should be used to treat the sapwood as a precautionary measure. Timber used for piling
is normally required to have large cross-sectional dimensions making it impracticable to
remove the sapwood. BS 8004 strongly recommends using round logs when the preservative-
treated sapwood provides a deep uniformly treated protective zone around the pile.
The adoption of preservative treatment by using creosote or some other solution does not
give indefinite life to the timber above groundwater level, and it may be preferable to adopt
a form of composite pile having a concrete upper section and timber below the water line,
as shown in Figure 2.1a.
10.2.2
Timber piles in river and marine structures
The moisture and oxygen in the atmospheric zone of timber marine piles above the water line
creates a favourable environment for fungal growth, which usually starts in the centre portion
where preservatives have not penetrated. Fungal activity occurs in the splash zone but is lim-
ited due to poor oxygen supply. Marine borers do not attack wood in these zones. Brown rot
decay is the most common type of fungal decay in coniferous wood species, and in the early
stages of attack the wood will have lost weight and, while visually appearing sound, will have
suffered considerable loss of elasticity. Fungal attack does not occur below a maintained
water table and immersion in salt-water protects against fungal decay.
The most destructive agency which can occur in piles fully immersed in brackish or saline
waters in estuaries or in the sea is attack by molluscan or crustacean borers. Conditions in
the tidal zone are also likely to be favourable for attack by borers where adequate oxygen
and salt-water are present, but crustacean borers can often attack near an exposed mud line.
Below the mud line, adequate oxygen is not available for the survival of marine borers.
These organisms burrow into the timber, forming networks of holes that eventually result in
the complete destruction of the piles. Timber jetties in tropical waters have been destroyed
in this way in a matter of months.
The main types of marine boring organisms are
Molluscan borers
Teredo (‘shipworm’)
Bankia
Martesia (in tropical waters only)
Xylophaga dorsalis
Crustacean borers
Limnoria (‘gribble’ or ‘sealouse’)
Cheluria
Sphaeroma
482
The durability of piled foundations
The young molluscan borers enter the timber through minute holes in the surface or
through incisions. They then grow to a considerable size (bankia can grow to a diameter of
25 mm and to nearly 2 m long) and destroy the wood as they grow (Figure 10.2a). The crus-
taceans work on the surface of the timber, forming a network of branching and interlacing
holes (Figure 10.2b). Their activity depends on factors such as the salinity, temperature,
pollution level, dissolved oxygen content and current velocity of the water. A salinity of
more than 15 parts per 1000 (the normal salinity of seawater is between 30 and 35 parts
per 1000) is necessary for the survival of most species of borer, but sphaeroma have
been found in nearly fresh tropical waters in South America, South Africa, India, Srilanka
(formerly Ceylon), New Zealand and Australia. Attack by cheluria is usually dependent on
the presence of limnoria. Limnoria cannot survive in fresh water.
Chellis(10.3) states that teredo and limnoria do not attack in current velocities higher than
0.7 m/s (1.4 knots) and 0.9 m/s (1.8 knots) respectively. Although activity from some species
may be marked in tropical waters, borers have been found above the Arctic Circle. They
show cyclic activity rising to a peak in some years, and not infrequently dying away
completely. Conversely, previously trouble-free areas can become infested with borers
brought in by ships or driftwood.
It was stated in the twenty-first report of the Sea Action Committee of the Institution of
Civil Engineers(10.4) that no species of timber is absolutely free from borer attack, but certain
species are highly resistant and in many conditions of exposure they may be considered to
have practical immunity. The report lists the more-resistant species (the ‘very durable’
class), greenheart, pynkadou, turpentine, totara and jarrah, as being suitable for conditions
of heavy attack by limnoria and teredo in temperate and topical waters. ‘Moderately
durable’ woods will resist moderate attack by limnoria. In commenting on the suitability of
various types of preservative, the report concludes that ordinary coal–tar creosote is the
most satisfactory, and states that in British waters any timber which is efficiently impregnated
with creosote should be practically immune to borer attack.
A comparative study was made by the Sea Action Committee of the relative effectiveness
as preservatives of creosote, Celcure (copper sulphate–potassium dichromate), and creosote
with the addition of copper napthenate. The latter material was tried as there was evidence
that some copper salts were poisonous to borers. The treated specimens consisted of
Douglas fir and they were exposed at Singapore, where the borer attack was mainly by
The durability of piled foundations
483
Figure 10.2 Attack on timber piles by marine borers (Crown copyright reproduced with permission
of BRE) (a) Attack by Teredo (b) Attack by limnoria.
(a)
1
2
3 INS.
(b)
Figure 10.2 Continued.
martesia with some teredo, and at Colombo. The observations of the relative severity of
attack after 101⁄2 years of exposure were as shown in the following table:
Treatment
Singapore
Colombo
Coal–tar creosote to BS 144
Badly damaged
Slightly to badly damaged
5% Celcure
Very badly damaged
Very badly to badly damaged
Coal–tar creosote with 1% of
copper napthenate
Very badly to badly damaged
Slightly to badly damaged
Coal–tar creosote with 5% of
copper napthenate
Very badly damaged
Very badly to badly damaged
It was concluded from the experiments that creosote gave marginally the best treatment
and that the addition of copper napthenate gave no advantage. Limnoria tripunctata are
tolerant to creosote but the species can be effectively controlled by the addition of
copper pentachlorophenate to the creosote. Although the range of preservatives available is
much reduced under EU Marketing Directives, creosote applied by qualified personnel
is still acceptable.
The Building Research Establishment (Farmer et al.(10.5)) lists the following timbers as
having heartwood resistant to borer attack. Those marked with an asterisk are believed to be
the best for marine work and their properties, durability, preservation and uses are described
in detail in the BRE publication.
African padauk (Pterocarpus soyauxii)
Afrormosia (Pericopsis elata)
Andaman padauk (Pterocarpus dalbergioides)
*Basralocus (Angelique) (Dicorynia guianensis)
*Belian (Eusideroxylyn zwageri)
*Brush box (Tristania conferta)
*Ekki (Lophira alata)
*Greenheart (Ocotea rodiaei)
Iroko (Chlorophora excelsa)
Ironbark (Eucalyptus siderophloia)
Jarrah (Eucalyptus marginata)
Kapur (Dryobalanops spp)
*Manbarklak (Eschweilera longipes)
Muninga (Pterocarpus angolensis)
*Okan (Cyclicadiscus gabunensis)
*Opepe (Nauclea diderrichii)
*Pyinkado (Xylia xylocarpa)
*Red louro (Ocotea rubra)
*Southern blue gum (Eucalyptus globulus)
Teak (Tectona grandis)
*Turpentine (Syncarpia laurifolia).
The sapwood of these timbers is liable to be attacked by borers, and if it is impossible
to ensure the removal of all sapwood the timber should be treated with creosote as a
precautionary measure. Greenheart fenders in Milford Haven were attacked in the sapwood by
teredo, causing about 10 mm of damage in five years.
The durability of piled foundations
485
The methods of preparing, air-seasoning and preserving timber against borer attack are
the same as those described for fungal decay in Section 10.2.1 above. However, great care
is necessary to avoid making incisions through which borers can enter the untreated wood
in the interior of the pile. The timber should be handled by slings rather than hooks or dogs
after creosoting, and purpose-made devices should be used to give pressure impregnation of
the bolt holes after drilling.
Chellis(10.3) describes the following other methods of protecting timber piles against
attack by borers:
(1) Tipping stone around the piles (this protects only the length covered by the stones)
(2) Sleeving the timber with galvanized iron, copper, or aluminium sheeting
(3) Encasing the piles
(4) Jacketing the piles with precast concrete tubes and filling the space between the timber
and the tubes with cement grout and
(5) Coating the piles with cement–sand mortar, applied with a spray gun (e.g. the ‘Gunite’
process).
Reliable methods of repairing decayed marine timber piles to provide substantial recovery
of original strength are not available, not least because of the difficulty in gaining access to the
critical zones. Experimental techniques which first remove the decayed material, treat the
remaining wood with preservative, and infill the void with epoxy resin mortar followed by
wrapping with glass fibre have shown some small-scale success. Voids left by rotting timber
piles below the Royal Scottish Academy in Edinburgh were successfully treated by Keller
Ground Engineering using their ‘Soilfrac’ process. This entailed installing horizontal tubes-à-
manchette 2 m below the pile cap stonework from a trench around the building so that each
41 m long tube intersected an average of 15 piles. This allowed about 40% of the piles to be
directly injected using a low viscosity grout, with the remaining piles filled by overflow and
pressure grouting. The stability of the building was extensively monitored during the process.
In tropical and sub-tropical countries timber piles can be destroyed by termites above the
waterline unless a resistance species is used, or they are given the usual preservative treat-
ment. Also the end grain at the heads of piles is particularly susceptible to attack by fungi
or beetles when in a damp condition. The pile heads can be protected by heavy coats of
hot-applied creosote followed by capping with metal sheeting, bituminous felt or glass fibre
set in coal-tar pitch.
Some species of wood corrode iron fastenings by the secretion of organic acids. Either
non-ferrous fastenings should be used or steel components should be heavily coated with tar
or sheathed in plastics. Stainless steel fastenings can be used if the type of steel is resistant
to corrosion by seawater.
The abrasion of timber piles by shingle on the sea bed has been mentioned. While
protection by metal sleeving can be adopted, non-ferrous metal is expensive and it may be
preferable to use sacrificial timber strapped around the main bearing piles, or to accept the
cost of periodical renewal.
10.3
Durability and protection of concrete piles
10.3.1
Concrete piles in land structures
Properly mixed concrete compacted to a dense impermeable mass is one of the most permanent
of all constructional materials, and gives little cause for concern about its long-term
486
The durability of piled foundations
durability in a non-aggressive environment. However, concrete can be attacked by sulphates
and sulphuric acid occurring naturally in soils, by corrosive chemicals which may be present
in industrial waste in fill materials, and by organic acids and carbon dioxide present in
groundwater as a result of decaying vegetable matter(10.6). Attack by sulphates is a disruptive
process whereas the action of organic acids or dissolved carbon dioxide is one of leaching.
Attack by sulphuric acid combines features of both processes.
The naturally occurring sulphates in soils are those of calcium, magnesium, sodium and
potassium. The basic mechanism of attack by sulphates in the ground is a reaction with
hydrated calcium aluminate in the cement paste to form calcium sulphoaluminate. The
reaction is accompanied by an increase in molecular volume of the minerals, resulting in the
expansion and finally the disintegration of the hardened concrete. Other reactions can also
occur, and in the case of magnesium sulphate, which is one of the most aggressive of the
naturally occurring sulphates, the magnesium ions attack the silicate minerals in the cement
in addition to the sulphate reaction. Ammonium sulphate, which attacks Portland cement
very severely, does not occur naturally. However, it is used as a fertilizer and may enter
the ground in quite significant concentrations, particularly in storage areas on farms or in
the factories producing the fertilizer. Ammonium sulphate is also a by-product of coal-gas
production and it can be found on sites of abandoned gasworks. Because calcium sulphate is
relatively insoluble in water, it cannot be present in sufficiently high concentrations to cause
severe attack. However, other soluble sulphates can exist in concentrations that are much
higher than that possible with calcium sulphate. This is particularly the case where there is a
fluctuating water table or flow of groundwater across a sloping site. The flow of groundwater
brings fresh sulphates to continue and accelerate the chemical reaction. High concentrations
of sulphates can occur in some peats and within the root mass of well-grown trees and
hedgerows due to the movement and subsequent evaporation of sulphate-bearing ground-
water drawn from the surrounding ground by root-action. The severity of attack by soluble
sulphates must be assessed by determining the soluble sulphate content and the proportions
of the various cations present in an aqueous extract of the soil. These determinations must be
made in all cases where the concentration of sulphate in a soil sample exceeds 0.5%.
The thaumasite form of sulphate attack which consumes the binding calcium silicate
hydrates in Portland cement, thereby weakening the concrete, has been investigated exten-
sively in recent years(10.7). The reaction requires the presence of sulphates, calcium silicate,
carbonate, and water, and appears to be more vigorous at temperatures below 15	C.
Carbonation of concrete due to atmospheric carbon dioxide acting on the calcium hydroxide
in the concrete matrix causes a reduction in the pH rendering the concrete susceptible to
sulphate reactions forming thaumasite.
Free sulphuric acid may be formed in natural soil or groundwater as a result of the
oxidation of pyrites in some peats, or in ironstone or alum shales. Sulphuric acid can also
be present in industrial waste materials which have been contaminated by leakages from
copper and zinc smelting works, and from dyeing processes. The acid has an effect on the
cement in hardened concrete that is similar to that of sulphate attack, but the degradation
may not result in significant expansion. Figure 10.3 shows the disintegration of the concrete
in the shaft of a bored and cast-in-place pile caused by the seepage of sulphuric acid into
porous fill material.
In the UK, sulphates occurring naturally in soils are generally confined to the Keuper
Marl (Mercia Mudstone), and to the Lias, London, Oxford, Kimmeridge and Weald Clays.
They are also found in glacial drift associated with these formations. Sulphates may be
present in the form of gypsum plaster in brick rubble fill.
The durability of piled foundations
487
The sulphate content of the groundwater gives the best indication of the likely severity of
sulphate attack, particularly that resulting from soluble sulphates. Where the water samples
are taken from boreholes care should be taken to ensure that the sample is not diluted by
water added to assist the drilling. If possible the groundwater should be sampled after a long
period of dry weather. Groundwater flow across a sloping site through sulphate-bearing
ground results in the highest concentration on the downhill side of the site and the flow may
488
The durability of piled foundations
Figure 10.3 Disintegration of concrete in bored and cast-in-place pile due to attack by sulphuric acid
leaking into fill from industrial processes.
continue into permeable soil deposits which are not naturally sulphate-bearing. An account
of the distribution of sulphates in various ground conditions in Great Britain is given by
Bessey and Lea(10.8). Methods of analysis to determine the sulphate content and pH-value of
soils and ground waters are set out in BS 1377 and by Bowley(10.9) in BRE Report 279 and
are critically reviewed by Eglinton(10.6).
A dense, well-compacted concrete provides the best protection against the attack by
sulphates on concrete piles, pile caps and ground beams. The low permeability of dense
concrete prevents or greatly restricts the entry of the sulphates into the pore spaces of
the concrete. For this reason high-strength precast concrete piles are the most favourable
type to use. However, for the reasons explained in Chapter 2, precast concrete piles are not
suitable for all site conditions and the mixes used for the alternatives of bored and cast-
in-place or driven and cast-in-place piles must be designed to achieve the required degree of
impermeability and resistance to aggressive action.
In British practice recommendations for the types of cement and the mix proportions are
given in BRE Special Digest 1: 2005(2.6). There are several significant changes compared
with the previous BRE recommendations, mainly designed to harmonize with the new
British and European standards and to take account of research into combating the thaumasite
form of sulphate attack on concrete. The five classes of severity of attack (‘Design Sulphate’
classes DS1 to 5) have been retained from which are derived the new ‘Aggressive Chemical
Environment for Concrete’ (ACEC) classes (AC1 to 5) for natural ground and brownfield
sites, subject to certain conditions (e.g. pH should be greater than 2.5). The AC classes
provide for adjustment from one DS class to another depending on the conditions of
exposure, the pH and mobility of groundwater, and other environmental conditions. For a
given AC class a ‘Design Chemical’ (DC) class is derived for the intended working life,
either 50 or 100 years, together with recommended ‘additional protective measures’ specific
to highly aggressive ground types. Concrete mixes are then tabulated to suit the DC class
giving a wide selection of free-water/cement ratios and aggregate sizes down to 10 mm and
the appropriate cement and cement combinations in accordance with BS EN 197-1 and
BS 8500-2. The use of sulphate-resisting Portland cement is covered in BS 4027.
The workability of the BRE suggested cast in-situ concrete mixes may in some cases be
too low for placing for bored and driven small diameter cast-in-place piles. Slightly modi-
fied mixes are given for certain precast products, including surface-carbonated precast con-
crete, which would be suitable for precast piles. As it is not possible to cover in this text the
various comments and qualifications to the recommendations given in Special Digest 1, it is
important to follow the step by step approach to determine the appropriate concrete quality
for a particular assessment of ground conditions. It should be noted that the Digest does not
purport to assess and advise on the use of sand–cement grouts in minipiles and around
the permanent sleeves to piles.
Mixes suitable for concrete in pile caps, ground beams and blinding concrete depend on
the size shape and amount of reinforcement of the members which govern the workability
requirements. Footnotes to the Special Digest 1, Table D1, provide for modifications to the
DC class depending on the size of a structural member.
Generally, no additional protection measures (APMs) are necessary where the ground-
water is considered ‘static’, but other conditions may over-ride this (e.g. thickness of
concrete section). When in doubt the ‘mobile’ groundwater condition should be used. For
example, it would be unwise to assume a static groundwater table at a shallow depth for cast-
in-place concrete piles where the concrete may be weaker than in the body of the pile due
The durability of piled foundations
489
to accumulation of laitance. Weak concrete used as a binding layer beneath pile caps is also
vulnerable to sulphate attack when the resulting expansion of the blinding concrete could lift
the cap; hence the quality of blinding concrete should match the structural quality.
Pile caps and ground beams can be protected on the underside by a layer of heavy gauge
polyethylene sheeting (designated APM3) laid on a sand carpet or on blinding concrete.
The vertical sides can be protected after removing the formwork by applying hot bitumen spray
coats, bituminous paint, trowelled-on mastic asphalt, or adhesive plastics sheeting. The recom-
mendation for placing a membrane between floors and fill, or hardcore containing sulphates,
should be considered for the undersides of slender pile capping beams, or shallow pile caps.
Coatings of tar or bitumen on the surface of precast concrete piles do not give adequate
protection against sulphate attack since they are readily stripped off by abrasion as the piles
are driven down in all but the softer soils. Protection can be given to the pile surface by metal
sheathing or glass fibre wrapping impregnated with bitumen, but the latter is likely to be
torn when piles are driven into gravelly or stony soils. If a sacrificial layer of concrete
(APM4) is added to friction piles, consideration must be given to the effects of sulphate and
thaumasite attack causing expansion and reducing frictional resistance.
The use of high-alumina cement (BS 915 under revision as prEN 14647) or supersulphated
cement (BS 4248) for high sulphate concentrations is referred to in Special Digest 1. The
latter cement is attacked by ammonium sulphate to which high-alumina cement alone is
resistant. Also, there is some experience to indicate that supersulphated cement has less
resistant properties to attack by magnesium sulphate than those of sulphate-resisting cement.
Neither high-alumina cement nor supersulphated cement is favoured for piling work. In
any case, approval of the use in structural concrete of the former type has at present been
withdrawn from codes of practice in Britain and in some other countries. Structural concrete
is deemed to include all concrete in foundations. The withdrawal of approval has been due
to the property of the cement to ‘chemical conversion’(10.6) which results in a serious loss
of strength. While this reduction of strength may not be critical in the case of foundations
subjected to relatively low levels of stress, the conversion is accompanied by a marked
reduction in the sulphate-resisting properties of the cement. Conversion is particularly liable
to take place in warm and damp conditions. These may occur in piles above water level in
marine structures, and in large-diameter bored and cast-in-place piles where the heat of
hydration of the cement is dissipated only slowly. The use of this cement also causes serious
practical difficulties in placing the concrete in pile shafts due to its rapid setting.
Supersulphated cement is costly and difficult or impossible to obtain in many countries
including the UK. It has a low heat of hydration and is therefore rather slow to harden. This
makes it unfavourable for use in precast concrete piles because of the long period required
between casting and driving. Special care is required when using this cement in cold weather.
Table D3 in Special Digest 1 provides for the use of Portland cements incorporating ground
granular blastfurnace slag (ggbs) or pulverized fuel ash (pfa – now designated ‘flyash’ in BS
8500) and for a variety of Portland cement–pozzolanic combinations mixed on site to give
enhanced sulphate-resisting properties. Concrete containing ggbs is now recommended in
place of sulphate-resisting cement to combat thaumasite attack in the UK.
The leaching of concrete exposed to flowing river or groundwater containing organic acids
or dissolved carbon dioxide was mentioned at the beginning of this section. Organic acids are
present in run-off water from moorlands, and in groundwater in peaty and lignitic soils. The
recommendations for concrete exposed to acid attack as determined by the pH value of the soil
or groundwater are covered by the ACEC Tables in Special Digest 1. Good quality concrete,
made with any of the tabulated cements and non-degradable aggregates, is essential.
490
The durability of piled foundations
On a site where there was severe contamination with acid industrial waste the authors
advised a protective scheme for the foundation piling consisting of precast concrete shell piles
coated externally with bitumen over the portion of the shaft within the fill. As a safeguard
against partial stripping of the bitumen by bricks and concrete in the fill, the concrete shells
were regarded as sacrificial. The main load-bearing element consisted of a PVC sleeve (weight
800 gm/m3) lowered down the shells after completion of driving onto a concrete plug in
the lower part of the pile. The PVC sleeve was then filled with concrete. A flexible PVC
membrane (Bituthene sheeting) was provided beneath the pile caps. This was lapped and
bonded to the PVC pile sleeve.
10.3.2
Concrete piles in marine structures
Precautions against the aggressive action by seawater on concrete need only be considered
in respect of precast concrete piles. Cast in-situ concrete is used only as a hearting to steel
tubes or cylindrical precast concrete shell piles, where the tube or shell acts as the protective
element. A rich concrete, well-compacted to form a dense impermeable mass, is highly
resistant to aggressive action and, provided a cover of at least 50 mm is given to all
reinforcing steel, precast concrete piles should have satisfactory durability over the normal
service life of the structures they support.
When the disintegration of reinforced concrete in seawater does occur it is usually most
severe in the ‘splash zone’ and is the result of porous or cracked concrete caused by faulty
design or poor construction. Evaporation of the seawater in the porous or cracked zone is
followed by the crystallization of the salts and the resulting expansive action causes spalling
of the concrete and the consequent exposure of the reinforcing steel to corrosion by air and
water. The expansive reaction that occurs when corrosion products are formed on the steel
accelerates the disintegration of the concrete. Freezing of seawater in porous or cracked
concrete can cause similar spalling. However, where concrete piles are wholly immersed in
seawater there is no degradation of properly made and well-compacted concrete.
In an extensive review of literature and the inspection of structures which had been in the
sea for 70 years, Browne and Domone(10.10) found no disintegration in permanently immersed
reinforced concrete structures even though severe damage had occurred in the splash zone.
They concluded that corrosion of the steel cannot occur with permanent immersion because
the chloride present is restricted to a uniform low level and the availability of oxygen is low.
Although seawater typically has a sulphate content of about 230 parts per 100000, the
presence of sodium chloride has an inhibiting or retarding effect on the expansion caused
by its reaction with ordinary Portland cement. The latter material is, therefore, quite
satisfactory for the manufacture of precast concrete piles for marine conditions but to avoid
disintegration in the splash zone the concrete should have a minimum cement content of
360 kg/m3 and a maximum water/cement ratio of 0.45 by weight. Special Digest 1 does not
provide recommendations for concrete exposed to seawater, but reference should be made to
BS 6349-1: 2000 Marine Structures. Air entrainment of concrete as a safeguard against frost
attack on piles above the water line is unnecessary if the water/cement ratio is less than 0.45.
The concrete in precast piles should be moist-cured for 7 days after the removal of the form-
work (with a further 10 days exposure to air in order to be classified as ‘surface carbonated’).
Great care should be taken in handling the piles to avoid the formation of transverse cracks
which would expose the steel to corrosion in the splash zone. Coatings on precast concrete
piles to protect them against deterioration in the splash zone are of little value since they are
soon removed by the erosive action of waves, and by abrasion from floating debris or ice.
The durability of piled foundations
491
10.4
Durability and protection of steel piles
10.4.1
Steel piles for land structures
Corrosion of iron or steel in the electrolyte provided by water or moist soil is an
electro-chemical phenomenon in which some areas of the metal surface act as anodes
and other areas act as cathodes. Pitting occurs in anodic areas, with rust as the corrosion
product in cathodic areas. Air and water are normally essential to sustain corrosion but
bacterial corrosion can take place in the absence of oxygen, i.e. in anaerobic conditions.
Anaerobic corrosion is caused by the action of sulphate-reducing bacteria which thrive below
the sea or river bed in polluted waters, particularly in relatively impermeable silts and clays.
An exhaustive investigation of the corrosion rates of steel sheet piles and bearing piles in
soils was made by Romanoff(10.11) on behalf of the US National Bureau of Standards. Steel
piles which had been in the ground for periods of between 7 and 40 years were examined.
The soil types ranged from permeable sands to relatively impervious clays. Soil resistivities
ranged between 300 and 50200 ohm-cm and pH values between 2.3 and 8.6. Romanoff
concluded from observations of the condition of the piles that where they were driven into
undisturbed natural soil, the type and amount of corrosion was so small that it would not sig-
nificantly affect the strength or useful life of the piling to support structures. Some localized
pitting corrosion and loss of mill-scale were seen on steel surfaces but the loss of metal was
considered to have a negligible effect on the serviceability of the piles. Corrosion had
occurred in some instances where piles had been driven through fill above the water table,
or in the zone extending 0.6 m above and below the water table.
Romanoff pointed out that undisturbed natural soils are so deficient in oxygen that they
will not sustain the process of corrosion. Romanoff also found that determinations of soil
resistivity and pH-value had no relevance to the incidence of corrosion in the undisturbed
soil conditions covered by the Bureau of Standards research. He did not encounter any cases
of anaerobic corrosion by sulphate-reducing bacteria but the possibility of their occurrence
should not be overlooked at the site investigation stage. Undisturbed samples of the soil
should be sealed in their containers and submitted for bacteriological examination.
In a later study, Romanoff (10.12) examined steel sheet piles which had been driven through
fill material. Inspections were made at 13 locations where piles had been installed for
periods of between 11 and 30 years. With only one exception the piles showed only shallow
attack on the metal with some localized pitting corrosion. The single exception was at a site
where sheet piles had been driven through 6 m of clinker filling. Severe attack on the metal
and pitting up to 6 mm deep had occurred over large areas. However, it was pointed out that
these piles were continuing to give useful service 23 years after they had been driven.
Romanoff concluded that the relatively small amount of corrosion over the portion of the
pile in fill or in undisturbed soil above the water table is the result of the formation of a
galvanic corrosion cell between the upper part of the pile above the water table and the lower
permanently immersed part. The upper portion is small in volume compared with the
lower portion and it acts as a cathode, while the lower part in soil deficient in oxygen is
the anode. Because of the much greater mass of steel in the anodic portion only a small
proportion is sacrificed in protecting the cathodic part.
Similar corrosion rates for piling in land structures have been recorded by Morley(10.13).
British Steel Corporation investigations of piles extracted from UK sites in the 1970s showed
corrosion losses below the soil line varying from nothing to 0.03 mm per year with a mean
492
The durability of piled foundations
of 0.0l mm per year. No precautions are required for such low rates of loss of thickness.
Where piles in land structures are extended above ground, mild steel thickness losses of
0.2 mm per year were measured over a 10-year period in a marine environment. Morley
considered that a more usual figure for the UK would be less than 0.1 mm per year. For steel
bearing piles in natural soils, BS 8002 and BS 8004 advised a maximum corrosion allowance
of 0.015 mm per year per side where no other corrosion protection is required; this is
consistent with corrosion rates derived from Eurocode EC3-5 (Piling). The long-term corro-
sion rate of piles in normal atmospheres in urban conditions given in EC3–5 is 0.01 mm per
year per side and for coastal areas 0.02 mm per side per year. In areas where localized condi-
tions give rise to more aggressive microclimates the greater allowances in BS 8004 may be
needed. Paint treatment(10.14) would be a suitable precautionary measure for the exposed steel
provided that it is accessible for maintenance. If the aesthetic appearance of the steel is impor-
tant, Arcelor(10.15) suggest application of coating systems using zinc silicate epoxy primer and
aliphatic polyurethane topcoat. Where the water table is shallow the pile cap can be extended
down to a depth of 0.6 m below water level to protect the steel of the piles.
Morley(I0.13) reported a corrosion rate of 0.05 mm per year for steel piling immersed in
fresh water except at the waterline in canals where the rate was as high as 0.34 mm per year.
This locally higher corrosion zone may be due to abrasion by floating debris or to cell action
between parts of the structure in different conditions of oxygen availability. The pH range
of fresh water has little effect on corrosion, but to reflect the variability due to potential
pollution, the corrosion rate allowances derived from EC3-5 are approximately 0.02 to
0.05 mm per year per side. Corus suggest(2.4) that glass flake epoxy coating with nominal
dry film thickness of 400 m be used for piers and jetties to extend the time to the first
maintenance period to beyond 20 years. An alternative for shorter maintenance periods, in
both immersed and atmospheric exposures(10.15), is a polyamine-cured epoxy with dry film
thickness of 300 m. The coatings must be applied over blast-cleaned steel. Isocynate-cured
pitch epoxy and cheap coal tar coatings are no longer recommended and are being phased
out for health and safety reasons.
Paint coatings are not generally satisfactory for protection against bacterial corrosion.
Any pinholes in the coating or areas removed by abrasion serve as points of attack by the
organisms. Cathodic protection (see Section 10.4.2) is effective but higher current densities
are required than those needed to combat normal corrosion in aerobic conditions.
Where steel piles are buried in fill or disturbed natural soil, the thickness of metal in a
bearing pile should be such that the steel section will not be overstressed due to wastage
of the metal by corrosion over the period of useful life of the structure. Taking a figure of
0.08 mm per year as a maximum in the range established by the US Bureau of Standards for
disturbed ground, a steel H-pile with web and flange thicknesses of 15.5 mm exposed to the
soil on both sides will lose 50% of its thickness in a period of 48 years, although there may
be localized areas of deeper pitting. Long-term corrosion allowances for service periods up
to 100 years provided in EC3-5 for non-aggressive and aggressive non-compacted fills are
approximately 0.02 mm per year per side and 0.06 mm per year per side respectively.
In compacted fills these figures may be halved. Marsh and Chao(10.16) have refined the
contamination guidelines so that more accurate long-term corrosion allowances can be made.
Protection coating of piles in severely contaminated ground should resist abrasion, impact,
and acidic attack using, for example,(10.15) a polyamide-cured epoxy system with increased
chemical resistance and a nominal dry film thickness of 480 m onto blast-cleaned
surfaces. Protection should extend to around 0.6 m below water table.
The durability of piled foundations
493
Other protective measures in contaminated disturbed ground include jacketting the pile
with concrete or filling the shafts of hollow piles with concrete capable of carrying the
full load.
10.4.2
Steel piles for marine structures
Steel piles supporting jetties, offshore platforms and other river or marine structures must
be considered for protection against corrosion in five separate zones. These are as follows:
(1) Atmospheric zone: exposed to the damp conditions of the atmosphere above highest
water levels or to airborne spray.
(2) Splash zone: above mean high water level and exposed to waves and spray and wash
from ships.
(3) Intertidal zone: between mean high and mean low water levels.
(4) Continuous immersion zone: below lowest water level.
(5) Underground zone: below the soil line.
Morley and Bruce(10.17) made an extensive survey of the extent of corrosion on steel piling
in marine structures at various sites in the UK, Cyprus and the United Arab Emirates.
Average and probable maximum corrosion loss rates for the five zones are shown diagram-
matically in Figure 10.4. The EC3-5 guidance on corrosion rates, which apply to seawater
and fresh water, is not as detailed as these survey values. Design thicknesses to allow for
corrosion loss and methods of protection should take into account the variation in corrosion
494
The durability of piled foundations
Figure 10.4 Loss of thickness by corrosion for steel piles in seawater (after Morley and Bruce (10.17)).
HWL
LWL
Steel pile
0.09 mm/year
(0.18)
0.04 mm/year
(0.11)
0.09 mm/year
(0.18)
Abrasion damage may
locally increase losses
to 0.41 mm/year
0.05 mm/year
(0.14)
0.02 mm/year
(0.05)
Average marine corrosion
rates in mm/year (figures in
brackets are 95% maximum
probable rates)
Buried zone
Sea bed
Immersion zone
Low water zone
Inter-tidal zone
Splash zone
over these zones, particularly in the low-water and splash zones (see BS 6349(8.1)). The
development of ‘macro-cells’ in the steel at the junction of the tidal and low water zones can
limit the corrosion rate to that in the immersed zone. As in the case of canals, abrasion from
fenders and floating debris also causes increased corrosion in the low-water zone.
The presence of marine growth also has a considerable influence on protective measures.
There is no growth within the atmospheric and splash zones, but in the intertidal and
continuously immersed zones heavy growths of barnacles and weeds can develop, which
damage the paint treatment and prevent its renewal. However, the growth can shield the steel
from exposure to oxygen and in this way reduce the rate of corrosion, counter-balanced by
the removal of the growth by abrasion and wash from ships, particularly those with bow
thrust propellers. Evidence for bacterial corrosion is limited and it is generally concluded
that, although bacterial activity occurs to some extent on most marine structures, it does not
cause a significant amount of corrosion damage.
In discussing protective measures Morley and Bruce noted that it is improbable that the life
of paint coatings from application to first maintenance will exceed 12 to 15 years, although
recent improvements in glass flake epoxy and polyester coatings can extend the maintenance
period to over 25 years. However, the cost of painting should be balanced against the alter-
native of increasing steel thickness, or the use of high tensile steel at mild steel stresses (e.g.
grade S355GP steel at S270GP steel stresses, see Section 2.2.6). This provides an additional
corrosion loss of 30% without loss of load-bearing capacity at an additional steel cost of
about 7%. It should also be noted that steel thicknesses may be determined by the stresses
caused during driving (see Section 2.2.6) giving a reserve available for the lower stresses
under service conditions. Also, maximum stresses for working conditions in marine
structures may be at or near the soil line where corrosion losses are at the minimum rate.
Corus(2.4) recommend the following protective measures for marine structures:
Atmospheric zone and splash zone
Organic coatings or high-quality concrete encase-
ment, well compacted with appropriate cover,
extending 1m below mean high water level. Care
is needed to ensure that the splash zone, and pos-
sibly the tidal zone, is fully encased, otherwise
increased electro-chemical corrosion can occur at
the steel-concrete junction. Coatings should have
a 400 m dry film thickness to give estimated
20-year life.
Intertidal zone
Bare steel to nominal or increased thickness to allow
for corrosion loss (because of uncertainty in driving
depths, it may be necessary to extend the coating
from the splash zone into the intertidal zone).
Continuously immersed zone
Bare steel or cathodic protection.
Underground zone
No protection necessary.
Piles forming the main supporting structures in important jetties or in offshore platforms
exposed to a marine environment require elaborate and relatively expensive treatment to
ensure a long life. The steel in the atmospheric zone is protected by paint and the first essential
is to obtain thorough cleaning of the metal. This is achieved by the application of sand or
grit blasting to obtain a white metal or near white metal condition. Coating systems using
The durability of piled foundations
495
zinc silicate epoxy primer and aliphatic polyurethane or epoxy topcoats at a total dry film
thickness of 240 m would be suitable for 10- to 15-year maintenance periods.
The most severe conditions of corrosion are experienced in the splash zone where
Hedborg(10.18) quotes corrosion rates of 0.13 to 0.25 mm per year in the Canal Zone of the
USA and the Hawaiian Islands, and a rate of 0.88 mm per year which has been observed on
a platform at Cook Inlet, Alaska. Paint coatings used in the past comprised a zinc silicate
primer followed by three or more coats of epoxy coal-tar paint to obtain an overall dry
film thickness of 400 m. However, such coatings had a life of only a few years, after
which wastage on the exposed steel continued at the rates quoted above and are no longer
recommended. Alternative high-build, shop-applied, organic coatings, such as glass flake
epoxy(2.5), are more durable. These have been subjected to bioreactor tests and have shown
good protection against localized corrosion due to bacteria at the low water level. The
problem of pinholes and abrasion allowing potential bacterial attack remains. Cathodic
protection is ineffective in the splash zone and the thickness of metal should be such as to
ensure that wastage due to corrosion will not curtail the design life of the structure. This is
achieved over the length in the splash zone, either by increasing the thickness of the steel,
or by providing cover plates of steel to the same specification as the piles, bracings, or jacket
members or of a corrosion-resistant material such as Monel metal. Above the splash zone
continual maintenance by periodic cleaning and painting is needed on exposed steelwork.
Below the splash zone the bare or painted steel is protected by cathodic means or a
compatible combination of coating and cathodic measures. Cathodic protection utilizes the
characteristic electrochemical potential possessed by all metals (see BS 7361-1:1991
Cathodic Protection–except for offshore applications). The metals which are higher in the
electromotive series act as anodes to the metals lower in the series which form the cathodes.
Thus if a steel structure is connected electrically to a zinc anode the current escapes to the
soil or water through the anode, and the structure thus forms the cathode, so preventing the
escape of metallic ions from the structure. The two methods of cathodic protection used in
marine structures are the sacrificial anode system and the power-supplied (or impressed-
current) system. In the former, large masses of metal such as magnesium, aluminium, or
zinc, which are higher in the electromotive series than steel, are used as the anodes. In the
power-supplied system the anodes are non-wasting and consist of graphite, lead-silver, or
other noble metals. They supply direct current from a generator or transformer rectifier to
the structure acting as the cathode. The anodes are not welded directly to the piles as they
would become detached when driving through guides or jacket members. Instead they are
electrically bonded to the jacket or to bracing members. Appropriate coating can reduce the
direct current requirements.
The sacrificial anode system is generally preferred for marine structures since it does not
require the use of cables which are liable to be damaged by vessels or objects dropped or
lowered into the water from the structures. However, Hedborg(10.18) points out that divers are
required to replace sacrificial anodes which are designed to have, for example, a 10-year
life. In depths of water of up to 60 m the anodes can be replaced by divers at a reasonable
cost, but in deep-water platform structures, the diving costs increase steeply with increasing
depths. Sacrificial systems can be designed to be replaced without using divers, and the life
of the anodes can be extended by reducing the area of steel requiring protection, i.e.
by painting the steel. While a long life cannot be achieved by painting, marine growth will
replace the paint and hence maintain the protection. The choice between sacrificial anode
systems, with or without a coated structure, and power-supplied systems is a matter of
496
The durability of piled foundations
economics, taking into account the capital costs of installation, the current consumption, the
costs of maintenance, and the intended life of the structure.
Where hollow steel piles are plugged at their base with concrete or impervious soil it is
sometimes the practice to pump out the seawater and replace it with fresh water containing
a corrosion-inhibiting compound. The addition of sodium nitrite and sodium carbonate to
form a 2% solution can be used for this purpose. However, the need for this has been
questioned because an empty or seawater-filled pile contains little oxygen which is quickly
used up in the early corrosion process, leaving none to maintain the corrosion.
10.5
References
10.1
HARRIS, M. R., HERBERT, S. M., and SMITH, M. A. Remedial treatment for contaminated land,
Vol. 111: Site investigation and assessment, CIRIA Report SP103, Construction Industry
Research and Information Association, London, 1995.
10.2
British Research Establishment. Timbers: the natural durability and resistance to preservative
treatment, BRE Digest 429, Construction Research Communications Ltd, Watford, 1998.
10.3
CHELLIS, R. D. Pile foundations, Foundation Engineering, G. A. Leonards (ed.), McGraw-Hill,
New York, 1962, pp. 723–31.
10.4
Deterioration of structures of timber, metal, and concrete exposed to the action of seawater, 21st
Report of the Sea Action Committee of the Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1965.
10.5
FARMER, R. H., MAUN, K. W., and CODAY, A. E. Handbook of hardwoods. BR400, Building
Research Establishment, Construction Research Communications Ltd, Watford, 2000.
10.6
EGLINTON, M. S. Concrete and its Chemical Behaviour, Thomas Telford, London, 1987.
10.7
Thaumasite in Cementitious Materials. Proceedings of First International Conference. AP147,
Building Research Establishment, Construction Research Communications Ltd, Watford, 2002.
10.8
BESSEY, G. E. and LEA, F. M. The distribution of sulphates in clay soils and groundwater,
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 2, Part 1, No. 2, March 1953, pp. 159–81.
10.9
BOWLEY, M. J. Sulphate and acid attack in the ground: recommended procedures for analysis,
BRE Report BR279, Building Research Establishment, Construction Research Communications
Ltd, Watford, 1995.
10.10 BROWNE, R. D. and DOMONE, P. L. J. The long term performance of concrete in the marine
environment, Proceedings of the Conference on Offshore Structures, Institution of Civil
Engineers, London, 1974, pp. 31–41.
10.11 ROMANOFF, M. Corrosion of steel pilings in soils, National Bureau of Standards, NBS
Monograph 58, US Department of Commerce, Washington, DC, October 1962.
10.12 ROMANOFF, M. Performance of steel pilings in soils, Proceedings of the 25th Conference of
National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston, Texas, 1969, pp. 14–22.
10.13 MORLEY, J. The Corrosion and Protection of Steel Piling, British Steel Corporation, Teesside
Laboratories, 1979.
10.14 A corrosion protection guide – For steelwork exposed to atmospheric environments. Corus
Construction and Industrial, Scunthorpe, 2004.
10.15 Piling Handbook. Arcelor RPS, Luxembourg and Scunthorpe, 2005.
10.16 MARSH, E. and CHAO, W. T. The durability of steel in fill soils and contaminated land, Corus
Research, Development and Technology, Swindon, 2004.
10.17 MORLEY, J. and BRUCE, D. W. Survey of steel piling performance in marine environments, final
report, Commission of the European Communities, Document EUR 8492 EN, 1983.
10.18 HEDBORG, C. E. Corrosion in the offshore environment, Proceedings of the Offshore Technology
Conference, Houston, Texas, 1974, Paper No. OTC 1949, pp. 155–68.
The durability of piled foundations
497
The importance of a thorough ground investigation as an essential preliminary to piling
operations cannot be over-emphasized. Accurate and detailed descriptions of soil and rock
strata and an adequate programme of field and laboratory tests are necessary for the
engineer to design the piling system in the most favourable conditions.
Detailed descriptions of the ground conditions are also essential if the piling contractor is
to select the most appropriate equipment for pile installation, while giving prior warning of
possible difficulties when driving or drilling through obstructions in the ground.
The engineer must have assurance that the piles have been correctly designed and
installed in a sound manner without defects which might impair their bearing capacity. To
this end piling contracts must define clearly the responsibilities of the various parties, and
the installation of piles must be controlled at all stages of the operations. It will have become
evident from the earlier chapters of this book that load testing cannot be dispensed with as
a means of checking that the correct assumptions have been made in design and that the
deflections under the working load conform, within tolerable limits, to those predicted.
Load testing is also one of the most effective means of checking that the piles have been
soundly constructed.
The various aspects of ground investigations, piling contracts and specifications, control
of installation, load testing and other forms of test are discussed in the following sections of
this chapter.
11.1
Ground investigations
11.1.1
Planning the investigation
At the time when a ground investigation is planned it is not always certain that piled
foundations will be necessary. Therefore, the programme for the site work should follow the
usual pattern for a foundation investigation with boreholes that are sufficient in number to
give proper coverage of the site both laterally and in depth. If it becomes evident from the
initial boreholes that piling is required, or is an economical alternative to the use of shallow
spread foundations, then special attention should be given to ascertaining the level and
characteristics of a suitable stratum in which the piles can take their bearing. Where loaded
areas are large in extent, thus requiring piles to be arranged in large groups rather than in
isolated small clusters, the borings should be drilled to a depth of 1.5 times the width of the
group below the intended base level of the piles, or 1.5 times the width of the equivalent raft
below the base of the raft (Figure 11.1). This depth of exploration is necessary to obtain
Chapter 11
Ground investigations, piling
contracts, pile testing
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
499
information on the compressibility of the soil or rock strata with depth, thus enabling
calculations to be made of the settlement of the pile groups in the manner described in
Sections 5.2 and 5.3. If the piles can be founded on a strong and relatively incompressible
rock formation the drilling need not be taken deeper than a few metres below ‘rockhead’(the
buried interface between overburden or superficial sediments and rock), to check that there
are no layers or lenses of weak weathered rock which might impair the base resistance of
individual piles. However, before permission is given for the drilling depth to be curtailed
in this manner there must be reliable geological evidence that the bearing stratum is not
underlain by weak compressible rocks which might deform under pressures transmitted
from heavily loaded pile groups, and that large boulders have not been mistaken for bedrock.
Rockhead contours formed due to erosion prior to the deposition of the overburden may be
unrelated to current topographical surface. It is sometimes the practice, when preparing
borehole records, to define rockhead or bedrock as the level at which auger or cable per-
cussion boring in weak rock is terminated and core drilling in the stronger rock commences.
This practice is quite wrong. The decision to change to core drilling may have nothing to do
with the perceived strength of the rock. It may be no more than a routine changeover of
equipment at the end of a working shift.
Particular care is necessary in interpreting borehole information where the site is underlain
by weathered rocks or by alternating strong and weak rock formations dipping across the site.
Without an adequate number of cored boreholes and their interpretation by a geologist,
wrong assumptions may be made concerning the required penetration depth of end-bearing
piles. Two typical cases of misinterpretation are shown in Figure 11.2.
Where piles are end bearing on a rock formation it may be desirable, for economic
reasons, to obtain a detailed profile of the interface between the bearing stratum and the
overburden, so enabling reliable predictions to be made of the required pile lengths over
the site. Cased light cable percussive rig (‘shell and auger’) borings followed by rotary core
drilling to prove the rock conditions can be costly when drilled in large numbers at the close
spacing required to establish a detailed profile. Geophysical exploration by seismic refraction
on land and by continuous seismic profiling at sea are economical methods of establishing
bedrock profiles over large site areas. However, the success of these indirect methods
depends on there being a sufficient contrast in seismic velocity between the rock stratum
Pile depth assumed from
preliminary investigation
D
2/3D
B
1 in 4
Depth of borehole
1.5 B
Figure 11.1 Required depth of boreholes for pile groups in compressible soils.
500
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
(or other strong relatively incompressible material) and the overburden. Also there must be
adequate correlation with the control boreholes.
Geophysical methods are not usually economical for small site areas, but where the
overburden is soft or loose, either uncased wash probings or continuous dynamic cone
penetration tests (see Section 11.1.4) are cheap and reliable methods of interpolating ground
conditions between widely spaced cable percussion boreholes.
Information on groundwater conditions is vital to the successful installation of driven and
cast-in-place and bored and cast-in-place piles. The problems of installing these pile types in
water-bearing soils and rocks are discussed in Sections 3.4.8 and 3.4.9. Standpipes or piezo-
meters should be installed in selected boreholes for long-term observations of the fluctuation in
groundwater levels. Simple forms of in-situ permeability tests are described in Section 11.1.4.
Levels conjectured
from bore holes
A & B
Hard rock
Pile base level
as installed
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
A
A
B
B
A
B
A
B
Weak
rock
Decomposed rock
Planned base
level of piles
Level of hard rock
conjectured from
bore holes A and B
Hard rock
Actual level of
hard rock
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Hard rock
Weak rock
Figure 11.2 Misinterpretation of borehole information (a) Horizontal stratification interpreted by
interpolation between boreholes A and B. Piles 1 to 4 planned to have uniform base level
(b) Actual stratification revealed by drilling boreholes for piles 1, 3, and 4, showing base
level required by dipping strata (c) Uniform level of interface between decomposed rock
and hard rock interpreted by interpolation between boreholes A and B.Piles 1 to 4 planned
to have uniform base level (d) Actual profile of hard rock surface.
Trial pits are often a useful adjunct to borehole exploration for a piling project. Shallow
trial pits are excavated in filled ground to locate obstructions to piling such as buried timber
or blocks of concrete (note that by statute all excavations deeper than 1.2 m must be
supported). Deep trial pits, properly shored, may be required for the direct inspection of a
rock formation by a geologist, or to conduct plate-bearing tests to determine the modulus of
deformation of the ground at the intended pile base level (see Sections 4.7 and 5.5). It may
be more convenient and economical to make these tests at the preliminary test piling stage.
It is not the intention to describe ground investigation techniques in detail in the following
section of this chapter. Details of drilling and sampling methods, geophysical surveying, and
the various forms of in-situ tests are given in BS 5930. Detailed information on soil testing pro-
cedure is given in BS 1377 (methods of test for soils for civil engineering purposes). Eurocode
EC7-Part 2: 2007, Ground investigation and testing, gives ‘guidance for planning and inter-
pretation of geotechnical laboratory and field tests’. However, it is not as comprehensive as
code of practice BS 5930 and does not provide the detail in testing methods given in BS 1377;
reference has to be made to this standard and various other procedural documents such as
ISRM ‘suggested methods’. The UK National Annex to EC7-2 has not yet been published.
11.1.2
Boring in soil
Cable percussion borings give the most reliable information for piling work. Operation of
the boring tools from the winch rope gives a good indication of the state of compaction
of the soil strata. If the casing is allowed to follow down with the boring and drilling, and
water to aid drilling is used sparingly, reliable information can be obtained on groundwater
conditions, but where groundwater fluctuates seasonally and tidally, standpipe readings over
a period are essential. Such information cannot be obtained from wash borings or by drilling
in uncased holes supported by bentonite slurry. Borings by continuous flight auger are
satisfactory provided that there is a hollow drill stem down which sample tubes can be
driven below the bottom of the boring and measurements of the groundwater level obtained.
Information on the size of boulders is essential for a proper assessment of the difficulties
of driving piles past these obstructions or of drilling through boulder deposits for bored
piles. Light cable percussion tools or flight auger drilling cannot penetrate large and hard
boulders, and it is the usual practice to bring a rotary drill over the hole to core through the
boulder, so obtaining information on its size and hardness. To avoid delays and standing
time of the two types of drilling equipment it is more economical to continue rotary drilling
past the boulder down through the remaining soil overburden to bedrock while the percussion
rig is moved to an adjacent hole. It is usually possible to obtain information on the soil
conditions below the level of the boulder from these adjacent boreholes.
Investigation of glacial tills for piled foundations presents particular problems in addition to
the potential for random boulders, for example, identification of mixed sequence of strata, lam-
inations of silty clay, perched water tables, infilled buried channels and samples for testing. Care
is needed to ensure that compressible clays are identified below the anticipated pile tip so they
are not overloaded, also soft clays which may be subjected to lateral loads from the pile shaft.
In UK practice ‘undisturbed’ samples of fine-grained soils are obtained from cable
percussion boreholes by means of 100 mm open-drive thick-wall sample tubes. Recent
developments in ground investigation techniques include the use of thin-wall sample tubes
pushed into the soil and core drilling using triple core barrels to obtain continuous samples
in over-consolidated clay and some coarser soils.(11.1) The samples from these techniques are
of high quality with very little disturbance of the fabric of the material.
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
501
11.1.3
Drilling in rock
Weak rocks can be drilled by percussion equipment, but this technique is useful only to
determine the level of the interface between the rock formation and the soil overburden.
Little useful information is given on the characteristics and structure of the rock layers
because they are reduced to a gritty slurry by the drilling tools and drilling should be stopped
as soon as it is evident that a rock formation has been reached. Some indication of the strength
of weak rocks can be obtained from standard penetration tests (see Section 11.1.4). Percussion
boring can provide reliable information from rocks which have been weathered to a stiff or
hard clayey consistency such as weathered chalk, marl or shale. Open drive tubes, or preferably
the thin-wall pushed-in tubes, can be used in these weathered rocks to obtain undisturbed
samples for laboratory testing. The improved core drilling equipment described by Binns(11.1)
is now the preferred method of sampling weak and weathered rock. Hammering sample
tubes into shattered rock will not produce useable samples and frequently leads to confusion
and error in determination of rockhead.
The most reliable information on the strength and compressibility of rocks is obtained by
rotary core drilling, supplemented as necessary by in-situ tests. The core diameter must be
large enough to ensure complete or virtually complete recovery of weak or heavily jointed
rocks to allow reliable assessment to be made of bearing capacity. The percentage core recov-
ery achieved and the Rock Quality Designation (RQD) should be recorded. All cores should
be stored in secure, correctly sized core boxes and selected cores should be coated in wax or
wrapped in aluminium foil to preserve in-situ moisture content. Generally, the larger the core
size the better will be the core recovery. Drilling to recover large diameter cores, say up to the
ZF size (165 mm core diameter), can be expensive, but the costs are amply repaid if claims
by contractors for the extra costs of installing piles in ‘unforeseen’ rock conditions can be
avoided. Also, by a careful inspection and testing of the cores to assess the effects of the joint
pattern on deformability, and to observe the thickness of any pockets or layers of weathered
material, the required depth of the rock socket (see Section 4.7.3) can be reliably determined.
It must be remembered that drilling for piles in rock by chiselling and baling or by the
operation of a rotary rock bucket (Figure 3.28) will form a weak slurry at the base of the
pile borehole which may make it impossible to ascertain the depth to a sound stratum for
end-bearing piles. Whereas if there has been full recovery of the cores from an adequate
number of boreholes together with sufficient testing of core specimens the required base level
of the piles can be determined in advance of the piling operations.
Investigation of chalk for piled foundations requires attention to defining the ‘marker beds’
(marl and flints), variability of the chalk with depth, possible fissures and dissolution cavities,
leading to determination of the ‘grades’ as given in the revised engineering classification of
chalk(4.43) (also see Appendix). Exploration should continue for at least 5 m below the tip of
the longest pile anticipated. Percussion boring can cause disturbance, and is best used in low
and medium-density chalks. Rotary drilling in most grades will produce cores, but even with
high-quality large-diameter cores identification of the fracture size is difficult.
11.1.4
In-situ and laboratory testing in soils and rocks
Vane tests to determine the undrained shearing strength of soft silts and clays have little
application to piling operations. Shaft friction in these soils contributes only a small
proportion of the total pile resistance and it is of no great significance if laboratory tests
502
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
503
for shearing strength on conventional ‘undisturbed’ soil samples indicate shearing values
that are somewhat lower than the true in-situ strengths. The lateral resistance of piles is
particularly sensitive to the shearing strength of clays at shallow depths, and if the calcula-
tion methods can be refined to a greater degree of certainty than that exists at present then
the vane test may have a useful application.
The most useful all-round test for piling investigations is the standard penetration test
(SPT), which in clays, silts, and sands is performed with an open-ended tube and in gravels
and weak rocks is made by plugging the standard tube with a cone end, when the test is
sometimes known as the dynamic cone penetration test (CPT). The blow counts (blows per
300 mm of penetration desegnated the ‘N-value’) for the SPT and CPT have been correlated
with the angle of shearing resistance of coarse-grained soils (Figure 4.10) by Peck et al.(4.18).
Terzaghi and Peck(11.2) have given the following approximate correlation with the consistency
of fine-grained soils:
N-value (blows/300 mm)
Consistency
Approx. unconfined compressive
strength kN/m2
Below 2
Very soft
Below 25
2–4
Soft
25–50
4–8
Medium
50–100
8–15
Stiff
100–200
15–30
Very stiff
200–400
Over 30
Hard
Over 400
Stroud(5.7) has established a relationship between the standard penetration test and
the undrained shear strength of stiff over-consolidated clays as shown in Figure 5.22. The
cone-ended standard penetration test can also be made in weak rocks and hard clays. Useful
correlations have been established between the blow-count values of stiff to hard clays and
the modulus of volume compressibility (see Figure 5.22). The test should also be made if
percussion borings are carried down below rockhead.
The standard penetration test is liable to give erroneous results if the drilling operations
cause loosening of the soil below the base of the borehole. This can occur if the borehole is
not kept filled with water up to ground level, or above ground level, to overcome the head
of groundwater causing ‘blowing’ of a granular soil. Careful manipulation of the ‘shell’ or
baler is also necessary to avoid loosening the soil by sucking or surging it through the clack
valve on the baler. It is particularly necessary to avoid misinterpretation of SPT data on piling
investigations since denser conditions than indicated by the test may make it impossible to
drive piles to the required penetration level.
The standard penetration test cannot be performed satisfactorily at deep-sea locations,
say, for example, in ground investigations for piled foundations for offshore oil production
platforms. This is because the hammer is operated at the surface and the inertia of 100 m or
more of drill rods from the hammer to the SPT sampler would make it impossible to achieve
anything like the standard blow as performed at normal drilling depths on land investiga-
tions. Underwater hammers operating in air in sealed containers are available for deep-water
ground investigations.
The application of the static cone penetration test to the design of individual piles is
described in Section 4.3.6 and to the design of pile groups in Section 5.3. Because of the
504
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
experience gained in these applications the test is particularly useful for piling investigations.
A correlation has been established between the static cone resistance and the angle of shearing
resistance of coarse-grained soils (see Figure 4.11). It also gives information on the resist-
ance to the driving of piles over the full depth to the design penetration level. The standard
mechanical (‘Dutch’) cone as developed by the Soil Mechanics Laboratory at Delft is shown
in Figure 11.3a. This cone is generally used in conjunction with mechanically operated
penetration devices which measure the thrust on the cone and on the sleeve separately by
means of hydraulic cylinders mounted on the machines. The electric cone developed
by Fugro shown in Figure 11.3b has electrical-resistance strain gauges mounted behind the
cone and inside the sleeve, giving continuous readings of penetration resistance by means
of electrical signals recorded on data loggers at the surface. Research by Meigh(5.20), and
modified by Fugro Engineering Services Ltd for UK soils, shows that the ratio of the local
side friction to cone-end resistance qc (the ‘friction ratio’) can be useful in identifying the
soil type. The cone shown in Figure 11.3b can be used in deep-sea ground investigations. In
this case, the cone together with rods and a drive unit are lowered together to the bottom of
the borehole and take the reaction from the drill string through latches bearing against the
core barrel. The signals from the electrical strain gauges are transmitted by cable to the
recording unit on the drilling vessel. In a comparison of the penetration resistance readings
reported by Joustra(11.3) the cone resistance by the electric cone was 3.3% less than that of
the mechanical cone in sands in Amsterdam.
The continuous dynamic cone penetration test is a useful and much neglected method of
logging the stratification of layered soils such as interbedded sands, silts, and clays. The
Borros penetrometer employs a 63 kg hammer impacting on a 50.5 mm cone at a rate of
20 blows per minute. The number of blows required for a penetration of 100 mm is denoted
as n. The torque on the cone is measured to provide an additional means of interpreting the
data. There is very little published information in the UK on correlation between n values
and the SPT N-value or qc values from static cone penetration tests. Cearns and
McKenzie(11.4) have published relationships between n and the SPT N for sands, gravels, and
chalk as shown in Figure 11.4.
Approximate determinations of the deformation modulus of soil and rocks can be made by
expanding a cylindrical rubber membrane against the walls of the borehole and measuring
Figure 11.3 Types of cone for static cone penetration test (a) Mechanical cone (b) Electric cone.
Sleeve
containing
strain  
gauges
Mantle
Cone with
base area
of 1000 mm2
60°
35.7mm
35.7 mm
(a)
(b)
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
505
the increase in diameter of the cylinder over an increasing range of cell pressures. Apparatus
developed for this purpose includes the Ménard pressuremeter(6.22), the Camkometer(11.5), or
Cambridge Self-boring pressuremeter (SBP), and the High Pressure Dilatometer (HPD)(11.6).
The Ménard pressuremeter is operated in boreholes ranging in diameter from 34 to 80 mm.
Three independent rubber cells are mounted, one above the other, in the probe to apply a
uniform pressure to the soil. The central cell is filled with water pressurized pneumatically,
and the upper and lower cells are expanded by air. The measured co-ordinates of pressure
and displacement can be inserted directly into design equations using empirical correlations
based on a large data bank from standard tests. The Cambridge Insitu SBP, developed from
the simpler Camkometer, is a self-boring pressuremeter with a rotating drilling bit mounted
at the base of the probe so that a plug of soil is removed and replaced with the instrument
in order to preserve the state of stress in the soil. The cell is expanded by compressed air and
the radial deformation is measured by electrical gauges attached to feelers within the probe.
The device is particularly useful in a very soft or loose soil where disturbance of the soil
around a pre-drilled hole could be detrimental to accurate measurements. The Cambridge
Insitu HPD, 73/75 or 93/95 mm diameter, for use in stiff soils or weak rocks is placed in a
good quality pre-drilled cored borehole and inflated using either hydraulic oil or compressed
gas to a maximum pressure of 300 bar. Displacement is measured on three axes by six full
Figure 11.4 Relationship between Dynamic Cone Penetration Tests n and Standard Penetration
Test N (after Cearns and McKenzie(11.4)) (a) in sands and gravels (b) in chalk.
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
3
6
9
12
SPT N (blows/300 mm)
15
18
20
0
5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40
SPT N (blows/300 mm)
45 50 55 60 65 70 75
DCP n (blows/100 mm)
DCP n (blows/100 mm)
n 5 0.31 N
n 5 0.25N
(a)
(b)
bridge strain gauged cantilever springs with a maximum capacity of 20 MN/m2. Two hundred
and forty pressuremeter tests using the HPD to determine in-situ deformation properties
in Trias and Carboniferous strata were carried out to depths up to 50 m for the piling to
the viaduct piers on the Second Severn Crossing(11.7). The Marchetti dilatometer(11.8) is a
spade-shaped device which is pushed or hammered into the soil. A load-cell is mounted on
the vertical face of the spade and pushed against the soil or rock. The pressuremeter should
be distinguished from a borehole jack which applies forces to the sides of boreholes by
forcing apart circular plates, imposing different boundary conditions on the test.
The cone pressuremeter, developed by Fugro and Cambridge Insitu (Whittle(11.9)) initially
for offshore site investigations, is a self-boring device which incorporates a 1500 mm2 cone
below the friction sleeve of the pressuremeter module and is pushed into the soil using
standard cone rods. A piezo-cone may replace the cone to assist in identifying soil for
pressuremeter testing.
As noted in Section 6.3.7, the pressuremeter has useful applications to determinations of
the ultimate resistance to lateral loads on piles and the calculation of deflections for a given
load. Because the pressuremeter only shears a soil or rock (there is no compression of the
elastic soil or rock) the slope of the pressure/volume change curve in Figure 6.34 gives
the shear modulus G. This can be converted to the Young’s modulus from equation 6.49. In
recently developed instrumentation, the data points on the load/unload loop are now very
frequent so that the change in strain can be accurately measured for each successive point from
a selected zero – with the smallest increment being around 0.01% radial strain. G calculated
in this way more accurately reflects actual strain produced in the ground by structures, and is
greater than G obtained from slopes of lines through the loops. When using the pressuremeter
to obtain E values for pile group settlements using the methods described in Chapter 5, it is
necessary to take into account the drainage conditions in the period of loading.
Plate-bearing tests can be used to obtain both the ultimate resistance and deformation
characteristics of soils and rocks. When used for piling investigations these tests are
generally made at an appreciable depth below the ground surface, and rather than adopting
costly methods of excavating and timbering pits down to the required level it is usually more
economical to drill holes 1 to 1.5 m in diameter by power auger or grabbing rig. The holes
are lined with casing and the soil at the base is carefully trimmed by hand and the plate
accurately levelled on a bed of cement or plaster of Paris(11.10). The deformation of the soil
or rock below the test plate can be measured at various depths by lowering a probe down a
tube inserted in a drill hole beneath the centre of the plate. This device(11.11) is helpful in
obtaining the modulus of deformation of layered soils and rocks. The load is transmitted to
the plate through a tubular or box-section strut and is applied by a hydraulic jack bearing
against a reaction girder as described for pile loading tests (see Section 11.4.1). Loading
tests on 500 mm diameter plates were carried out in 600 mm holes 20 m deep drilled
offshore from a jack-up platform to determine deformation properties in Trias rocks for the
main span foundations for the Second Severn River crossing(11.7).
Small-diameter plate loading tests can be made using a 143 mm plate in a 150 mm
borehole, but it is, of course, impossible to trim the bottom of the hole or to ensure even
bedding of the plate. However, these tests can be useful means of obtaining the ultimate
resistance of stiff to hard stony soils(11.12) or weak rocks(11.13). They do not give reliable
values of the deformation modulus.
Simple forms of in-situ permeability test can give useful information for assessing
problems of placing concrete in bored and cast-in-place piles in water-bearing ground.
506
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
507
The falling-head test consists of filling the borehole with water and measuring the time
required for the level to drop over a prescribed distance. In the constant-head test water is
poured or pumped into the borehole and the quantity required to maintain the head at a con-
stant level above standing groundwater level is recorded. The procedure for obtaining the
coefficient of permeability is described in BS 5930. Pumping-in tests made through packers
in a borehole, or pumping-out tests with observations of the surrounding drawdown are too
elaborate for most piling investigations. Sufficient information to evaluate groundwater
problems can often be obtained by baling the borehole dry and observing the rate at which
the water rises to its standing level. Such simple tests provide useful background information
for contractors tendering for bored piling work and it is false economy to neglect them.
It was noted in Section 11.1.2 that high-quality undisturbed samples of soil can be obtained
by means of pushed-in samples in thin-walled tubes. Equipment has also been developed for
measuring very small strains in samples undergoing triaxial compression tests. Thus reliable
Young’s modulus values can be obtained from samples of soil or weak rock without the need
for employing special in-situ testing equipment or making plate-bearing tests in deep boreholes.
Small-strain Young’s modulus values are useful for calculating consolidation settlements in the
mass of ground beneath pile groups rather than the base settlement of individual piles. They are
also applicable to the determination of the deflection of laterally loaded piles. The adoption of
improved sampling and triaxial compression testing techniques will result in undisturbed shear
strength values higher than those obtained in earlier practice, particularly in very stiff to hard
clays. These higher values may require modification of correlations established between the
shear strength of clays and shaft friction and end-bearing resistance of piles.
Laboratory tests on rock cores should include the determination of the unconfined
compression strength of the material, either directly in the laboratory or indirectly in the
field or laboratory by means of point load strength tests. Young’s modulus values of rock
cores can be obtained by triaxial compression testing using the transducer equipment for
small strain measurements.
The point load test(11.14) is a quick and cheap method of obtaining an indirect measurement
of the compression strength of a rock core specimen. It is particularly useful in closely
jointed rocks where the core is not long enough to perform uniaxial compression tests in the
laboratory. The equipment is easily portable and suitable for use in the field. The tests are
made in the axial and diametrical directions on cores or block samples. The failure load to
break the specimen is designated as the point load strength (Is) which is then corrected
to the value of point load strength which would have been measured by a diametral test on
a 50 mm diameter core using a standard correction (Table 11.1) to obtain Is(50).
Table 11.1 Relationship between uniaxial compression strength (qcomp) and point load
strength (Is(50)) of some weak rocks
Rock description
Average qcomp MN/m2
qcomp/Is (50)
Jurassic limestone
58
22
Magnesium limestone
37
25
Upper Chalk (Humberside)
3–8
18
Carbonate siltstone/sandstone (UAE)
2–5
12
Mudstone/siltstone (Coal Measures)
11
23
Tuffaceous rhyolite (Korea)
15–90
8
Tuffaceous andesite (Korea)
40–160
10
11.1.5
Offshore investigations
Offshore investigations for deep-water structures and oil production platforms are highly
specialized and, although the basic procedures contained in the British Standards and
Eurocodes for geotechnical investigations should be adhered to for UK waters, there are
many additional Statutes and Regulations which apply to such work and are outside the
scope of this text. Draft Guidance Notes on Site Investigations(11.15) have been prepared by
the Society for Underwater Technology to provide a basic framework for offshore investi-
gations, particularly for renewable energy projects, citing practices and regulations for
the UK, other European regulatory bodies and under API regulations. Foundation design
considerations include driven piles, driven and drilled piles, suction piles, and gravity bases.
11.2
Piling contracts and specifications
11.2.1
Contract procedure
In Britain it is the usual practice for the piling works for foundations on land to be executed
as a sub-contract to the main general contract. Foundation piling rarely forms a high
proportion of the total cost of a project on land, and the administrative arrangements and
preliminary works required for carrying out the piling as a separate advance contract are
unjustified in most cases. Works which are required in advance of a piling contract include
such items as demolition, fencing, levelling and grading, the construction of site roads,
the erection of site offices, and the supply of electrical power and water. On some large
contracts it is the practice to let a separate contract for these advance works, in which case
it may be feasible also to let a separate contract for the piled foundations. Piling contractors
prefer to do the work in this way rather than as sub-contractors. The responsibilities of each
party are defined more clearly and, from the piling contractor’s point of view, a directly
employed contractor has the advantage that he is paid retention money after the usual period
following the completion of his work. Where a piling contractor works as a sub-contractor
it is usual for part of his retention money to be withheld until the main contractor’s retention
is released, which may be several years after the completion of the piling work.
Piling normally forms a high proportion of the cost of marine construction and it is
usually undertaken directly by the main contractor. Any sub-contracting is limited to
specialist services such as grouting or the construction of anchorages to tension piles, and
to the supply of prefabricated components.
Piling carried out as sub-contract work may be done by a nominated contractor, i.e. a
specialist piling contractor, who has submitted a tender to the Employer/Engineer in advance
of the main contract and is then selected for nomination in the main contract documents.
Alternatively, the main contractor can, after appointment, invite tenders from selected
specialist contractors, or from an open tender list, to be employed as sub-contractor.
The Civil Engineering Contractors Association has prepared a form of sub-contract (the
CECA ‘Blue Form’) which can be used with the addition of a suitable clause to cover piling
work. On building contracts under the control of an architect, the contract conditions are set
out in the Standard Forms of Building Contract prepared by the Joint Contracts Tribunal
(the ‘JCT’ forms), with various provisions for ‘domestic’ and nominated sub-contractors. In a
similar manner the National Federation of Building Trades Employers has prepared standard
forms of contract for nominated or non-nominated sub-contractors. In addition, ad hoc and
bespoke forms of sub-contract prepared by main contractors are increasingly used to change
the liabilities and risk-sharing obligations given in standard forms. Collateral warranties,
508
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
509
which are separate from, but operate alongside, the works contract, are now frequently
requested by the Employer, developer or project funders. They provide for liability to a
beneficiary (who may not be the same person as the principal works owner) in respect of
defective performance over a period of time, possibly longer than the statutory defects
period, and must be treated with caution by specialist contractors.
Model procedures for piling contracts and specifications are given in a publication of the
Institution of Civil Engineers(2.5) for use with the Institution’s standard forms of contract, but
with provisions for drafting to conform to other forms. Account should also be taken of the
BS EN Standards for execution of special geotechnical works (see Section 2.1).
Building and construction works on behalf of government departments are usually carried out
under a form of contract designated GC/WORKS/1, similar to the ICE form. Here the Employer,
advisers and designers are termed the ‘Authority’and the supervisory duties of the Engineer are
delegated to the ‘Superintending Officer’. As with the other forms, responsibility for design of
piles may be placed on an independent engineer, the contractor or piling sub-contractor.
There is a growing requirement, particularly for large public sector works, for ‘best value’
procurement, based on ‘partnering’ and co-operation using specially prepared documents or
‘charters’. These documents may be based on the standard forms, particularly the new
Engineering and Construction Contract(11.16) (part of the Institution of Civil Engineers’
NEC3 suite of contracts) which sets out various standard options for the Employer and
Contractor to select: for example, ‘design and build’, ‘build-own-operate-transfer’ schemes
or ‘management contract’ forms. One of the main benefits claimed for partnering is that it
provides for a limited list of proven or preferred suppliers and sub-contractors who ‘negotiate’
rather than tender competitively to produce the perceived best value for the project
owner/funder. Under these arrangements the specialist sub-contractors are required to enter
into back-to-back agreements with the Employer and the other parties which frequently
place additional risk-taking burdens on the specialist. Complex partnering, funding and
project management arrangements are features of the ‘private finance initiative’ for major
public policy works – for example, hospitals, new rail and roadworks.
In the following comments on the responsibilities for piling work it must be understood
that the Engineer is not a party to the contract but acts as the agent for an Employer and
accepts certain responsibilities on behalf of the Employer under, say, an ICE form of
contract. The Architect or Contracts Administrator acts in a similar way for the Employer in
the JCT form of contract. The term ‘Contractor’ refers to the piling contractor whether as
the main contractor or a nominated or non-nominated sub-contractor.
The Institution of Civil Engineers’ publication provides for four basic types of traditional
contractual arrangement under which piling may be undertaken. These are as follows:
(a) Civil engineering works with an Engineer responsible to an Employer for design and
supervision
(b) Building works with an Architect responsible to Employer for design and supervision
and advised by an Engineer
(c) Building or civil engineering works with a Contractor responsible to an Employer (who
has in-house expertise) for design and construction and
(d) Building works with an Architect responsible to an Employer for design and supervision
but having no engineering adviser.
The need for the Engineer to define the respective status and responsibilities is discussed
below in relation to procedures (b) and (c), but it should be noted that an Architect may not
510
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
have supervisory responsibilities (only co-ordination authority) under a JCT contract with
the Employer.
Irrespective of whether piling work is executed as a main contract or by sub-contract, in
traditional British practice tenders are invited by one of three principal methods. These are
as follows:
Method 1:
The Engineer is responsible for deciding the type or alternative type of
pile, the working loads, and the allowable settlement under test load. The
Engineer specifies the material to be used, the working stresses, fabrica-
tion methods and penetration depths. Tenders are invited on the basis of
a detailed specification and drawings, which should be accompanied by a
ground investigation report, and a site plan for contract works showing
existing structures and surface levels, proposed re-grading levels, and the
operating levels for the piling rigs.
Method 2:
The Engineer invites tenders for one or an alternative system of piling
from specialist contractors. The invitation to tender is accompanied by a
pile layout showing individual pile loads or column and wall loadings, and
by a detailed specification including such items as materials, working
stresses, performance under load test, and other criteria of acceptability.
The Contractor decides on the required type (or alternative type) of pile,
the diameter and the penetration depth for the specified working loads, and
bases a tender on in-house estimates of performance. Site information as
described for Method 1 should also be supplied.
Method 3:
The Engineer supplies a drawing to the tendering Contractor showing the
wall and column layout of the structure together with the loadings; the site
information as described for Method 1 is also supplied. No specification is
issued and the Contractor is expected to submit a specification with his
tender, and to guarantee the successful performance of the piles. Because
an increasing number of piling contractors are offering new types of piles,
particularly displacement piles which are designed to optimize bearing
capacity and minimize concrete usage and spoil disposal, this procurement
method can give best value to the Employer in these circumstances.
Method 1 has the advantage that the responsibility of each party is clearly defined. The
Contractor has the responsibility only of selecting the most efficient type of plant to do the
job and to install the piles in a sound manner complying with the specification. The method
has the disadvantage that the knowledge and experience of the Contractor may not be fully
utilized, since the Engineer may not always select the most suitable pile for the job. In exer-
cising responsibility for deciding on the pile diameters and penetration depths, the Engineer
may instruct the Contractor to install preliminary test piles before making final decisions on
the dimensions of the working piles. The liability for unforeseen adverse ground conditions
generally falls to the Employer on the advice of the Engineer.
Method 2 provides the widest choice of piling systems and utilizes the experience
of the Contractor to the fullest extent, but greater care is needed in defining responsibility.
In particular, the Engineer must specify precisely the requirements for performance under
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
511
loading tests, both on preliminary and working piles. While the Contractor is responsible for
selecting the type, diameter and penetration depth of the piles, calculations to justify these selec-
tions are required to be submitted for the approval of the Engineer. The statement concerning
working loads on columns, walls or individual piles should make it clear as to whether or not
the loads have been factored in compliance with Eurocodes or other structural codes of practice.
Method 3 is satisfactory in most respects provided that tenders are invited only from those
firms that have the necessary experience. It is usually stated in the tender invitation or it is
implied that the Contractor assumes responsibility for all aspects of the piling work. This
would include accepting liability for unforeseen variations in the ground conditions and the
possibility of having to increase substantially the penetration depth, or increase the number
of piles or even to abandon a particular system. The Contractor is usually responsible for
deciding whether or not load testing is required and the criteria for deciding successful
performance under test loading. However, the insurers providing the Contractor with the
essential warranty for his work and the Employer with cover for the structure may need to
be involved in the decision. As the design and construction rules in EC7 are adopted, the
Employer and Contractor will have to demonstrate that the pile design is related to static
load tests and, as noted in Section 11.4, testing will be mandatory in certain conditions. The
intention of Method 3 contract arrangements is to prevent unforeseen ground conditions
leading to claims by the Contractor, but it is incumbent on the Employer to ensure that all
information available at tender stage is passed to the Contractor, including any expert inter-
pretations of ground conditions obtained. It is in the interest of all parties that the Contractor
be allowed access to the site to carry out any additional investigations deemed necessary.
The Engineering and Construction Contract(11.16) aims to be simpler and more flexible
than other standard forms mentioned. For example, it gives more than 20 options for the
Employer to build up a contract to suit individual requirements; it allows for design respon-
sibility to be carried by either the Employer or Contractor depending on which party has the
competency. The traditional Engineer’s role has been removed and replaced with a ‘Project
Manager’ having defined duties including acting as the Employer’s agent, issuing instructions
and certifying payments, and a separate ‘Supervisor’with duties for testing and inspecting the
works. Disputes are referred directly to a nominated Adjudicator.
The responsibility for providing information should be clearly defined in all the forms of
contract mentioned. However, the provision by the Employer through the Project Manager
of ‘additional information’, not in the contract Works Information but necessary for the
Contractor to complete the works, is only an implied term under NEC3 forms of contract. It
may therefore fall to the Contractor to fill in gaps in this case. Some items of information
and responsibility which should be clarified in the contract are as follows:
All relevant details of ground investigations undertaken on behalf of the Employer before
inviting tenders for the piling. Geological data and interpretations may be excluded by
the Employer from the main contract Site Information under a NEC3 contract and only be
available as ‘reference’ data – with implications for contractual Compensation Events. The
piling contractor should be aware of the need for additional ground information either prior
to tendering or following award of a contract in such circumstances.
The facilities provided by the main contractor, or those to be included in the piling contract,
should be stated. These include such items as access roads, hardstandings for piling plant,
storage areas, fencing, watching, lighting, and the supply of electrical power and water.
Hardstandings (working platforms)(3.20) for large piling plant may need to be of substantial
512
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
construction and the Engineer/Designer should state the form in which they will be provided
including the level of the platform in relation to the pile commencing surface and cut-off level.
Underground services and obstructions can be a contentious item. Under traditional ICE
contracts it is normally the Engineer’s responsibility to locate all known buried services and
other obstructions to pile installation. It is unfair to the Contractor for the Engineer to disclaim
all responsibility for the accuracy of the location plan, and to expect the Contractor to accept
the consequences of damage to services. However, the Engineer has the right to expect that
the Contractor will not push on blindly with the piling work with complete disregard for the
safety of the operatives or the consequences of damage. The Contractor is expected to keep a
close watch on the conditions as the piling progresses and make enquiries as to the likely pres-
ence of further underground obstructions. The consequential damages can be very severe if,
for example, a water main is broken which floods the running lines of an underground
railway. Hence, the clause in the conditions of contract covering underground obstructions
needs to be carefully worded to be fair to the interests of all parties. For example, it may be
an express condition of the contract for piling in an urban environment for the Contractor to
provide a consultant services engineer to carry out investigations prior to piling.
Compliance with the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 1994 (CDM),
the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and the Environment Protection Acts (EPA) involves
all parties to the contract even if not expressly stated. The piling contractor may be the first
and only party on the site initially, requiring him under the CDM regulations to undertake
the statutory duties of the ‘principal contractor’, and possibly the ‘planning supervisor’ and
‘designer’ all as defined. The statutory regulations under the EPA control the disposal of
arisings from bored piles and waste drilling fluids, and the Health and Safety regulations
cover all aspects of construction from protective clothing, lifting and hoisting appliances to
access into excavations and welfare facilities.
There is usually an obligation for the Contractor to operate a Quality Management System
(conforming to BS 5750/ISO9001) within the company and to produce a Project Quality Plan
as a means of assuring the Employer that the required standards for the works have been met
through traceable documentation. The System and the Plan will be subject to certification
and audit either by an independent third party or by the Employer, but self-certification by
the Contractor to assure compliance with the specification may be acceptable – except for
laboratory testing. Surveillance and intervention by the Engineer or the Supervisor will be in
addition to the Contractor’s demonstration of conformance under his plan.
Responsibility for risk assessments to identify the hazards (risk events), probability of a
risk event occurring, ensuing injury, damage and loss, and any general uncertainties will ini-
tially fall to the Employer’s team as part of the project feasibility study. The piling contrac-
tor will have to advise the Employer of potential hazards involved in the particular method
proposed. In the NEC3 contract a ‘risk register’, which contains descriptions of the risks and
the actions to be taken to avoid or reduce the risks, is included in the Contract Data.
11.2.2
Piling specifications
The Institution of Civil Engineers’ Specification(2.5) details items which should be included
in the ‘Particular Specification’ for a piling contract. These include stating responsibility for
design, performance criteria to be applied, requirement for additional ground investigation
as well as routine matters on site location, personnel, and so on. It also states that all
materials and workmanship ‘shall be in accordance with the appropriate British Standards,
Codes of Practice and other specified standards’ and specifications should quote the relevant
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
513
standard under the various work classifications. BS 8004 can be quoted for working stresses
on the various types of pile, but this is not provided for in limit-state design to Eurocode EC7.
It is not the intention in this chapter to give model clauses for piling work. These can be
drafted with the guidance of the ICE model specifications, BS 8004 or other codes, particu-
larly EC7, BS EN 1536 for bored pile execution, BS EN 12699 for displacement piles and
BS EN 14199 for minipiles. Some matters which require particular attention are listed below:
Setting out. The responsibility for setting out is clear if the piling contractor is the main
contractor. The Engineer has no responsibility in the matter but should check the positions of
the piles from time to time, since if these are inaccurately placed the remedial work can be very
costly. Problems arise when a piling sub-contractor does the setting-out from a main contrac-
tor’s grid-lines. If these are inaccurate or if, as sometimes happens, the numbering is obscured
(or level pegs are confused with line pegs) then there can be major errors in pile positions and
the main contractor may decline to accept responsibility for the cost of the replacement piling.
If the specification does not define the responsibility for setting out, the piling sub-contractor
must have a clear understanding with the main contractor on this matter.
Ground heave. In the case of the Method 1 type of contract the Engineer, in specifying
the type and principal dimensions of the pile, must accept responsibility for the effects of
ground heave, as described in Section 5.7. However, if the contract is of the Method 2 category
the matter is not so clear, and piling contractors are reluctant to accept responsibility for
ground heave, either for remedial work to risen piles, or for repairing damage to surrounding
structures. In the case of both Method 2 and Method 3, the authors are of the opinion that
as it is the Contractor who decides on the type and dimensions of the pile, and therefore
should have experience of ground heave effects, the Contractor should accept full responsi-
bility for the site operations. If pre-boring or other measures are insufficient to prevent
ground heave, the Contractor would be well advised to decline to tender.
Loss of ground due to boring. The consequences of a loss of ground while boring for
piles were described in Section 5.7. The responsibilities for these are similar to those
for ground heave.
Noise and vibration. The Contractor is responsible for selecting the plant for installing
piles and is therefore responsible for the effects of noise and vibration (see Section 3.1.7).
The current statutory and local authority regulations limiting noise emissions should be
stated in the specification (or conditions of contract).
Piling programme. If the Engineer wishes to install the piles for the various foundations
in a particular sequence to suit the main construction programme the sequence should be
stated in the specification, since it may not be the most economical one for the piling
contractor to follow.
‘Set’of driven piles. This should not be stated in precise terms in specifications for driven,
or driven and cast-in-place piles. The ‘set’ for a particular site and working load cannot be
established until preliminary piles have been driven and the driving records checked against
the ground conditions assumed in design. The set may have to be modified as a result of
loading tests.
Tolerances. Tolerances in plan position, vertical deviation from the required rake, and
deviation in level of the pile head should be specified. Suitable values for tolerances are
given in Section 3.4.12.
Monitoring of piling is mandatory under EC7-1 Clause 7.9 and the BS EN standards for
execution of special geotechnical works, in accordance with a method statement and ‘pile
installation plan’ which are consistent with the design.
514
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Piling records. The Engineer and the Contractor should agree to the form in which
records should be submitted (see Section 11.3).
Cutting down pile heads. The specification should define whether it is the main contractor’s
or the piling contractor’s responsibility to remove excess lengths of pile projecting above the
nominal cut-off level. The responsibility for cutting away concrete to expose reinforcement,
and trimming and preparing the heads of steel piles should also be stated.
Method of measurement. The method of measuring pile lengths as installed should be
based on an appropriate standard, for example, as given in Civil Engineering Standard
Method of Measurement(11.17) or in the ICE Specification, modified as necessary to meet
particular contract circumstances, structures and sites. Care is needed to define the length
of pile to be measured (i.e. from cut-off level to pile toe or ground level to toe) and to state
that it is the total length of a particular type and diameter of pile is to be measured. Credits
for short piles installed and extra payment for additional lengths of individual piles are
generally excluded from the standard methods.
Removal of spoil. The respective responsibilities for the removal of spoil from bored piles,
the removal of cut-off lengths of pile, trimming off laitance and ground raised by ground
heave, and the disposal of used bentonite slurry should be covered in the specification and con-
form with the statutory regulations for waste disposal currently in force (see Section 11.2.1).
11.3
Control of pile installation
11.3.1
Driven piles
Control of driven pile operations commences with the inspection and testing of the
prefabricated piles before they are driven. Thus timber piles should be inspected for quality,
straightness and the application of preservative. The operations of casting precast concrete
piles on site or in the factory should be inspected regularly and cubes or cylinders of the
concrete should be made daily for compression testing at the appropriate age. Materials used
for concrete production should be tested for compliance with the relevant standards. In the
case of steel piles, tests should be made for dimensional tolerances and full documentation
of the quality of the steel in the form of manufacturers’ test certificates should be supplied
with each consignment. Welding tests should be made for piles fabricated in the factory or
on site. Full radiographic inspection of welds may be necessary only for marine piles, where
the exposure conditions are severe (see Section 10.4.2). The coating treatments should be
checked for film thickness, continuity, and adhesion. Degaussing may be needed to counter
magnetization of the pile heads caused by driving. This can be detrimental to the quality of
welds made for pile extensions. BS EN 288 covers degaussing steel by generating a counter-
active magnetic field when welding is in progress.
The ICE Specification lists the information which should be recorded for each type of
pile; Table 11.2 is a typical compliant form. A separate record should be provided for each
pile and records should be signed by the Contractor’s and Employer’s representatives and
submitted daily. Records to comply with EC7, Clause 7.9, are similar to Table 11.2, but
should be provided in two parts according to BS EN 12699 for each displacement pile driven.
Part 1 should give general information on the contract and type of pile, methods and quality
of materials; Part 2 ‘particular information’ as tabulated in Clause 10 of this standard for
each pile. ‘As built’ records of piles have to be submitted to the Employer. It is advisable to
keep all records for a period of 5 years after completing the works.
Table 11.2 Daily pile record for driven pile
516
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
While it is essential for the toe level and final set of every pile to be recorded, BS EN
12699 does not mandate a full record of sets during driving. There are, however, advantages
in providing a log of the blow count against penetration over the full depth for every pile
driven. If, for example, piles are to be driven to end bearing on a hard stratum it may be
sufficient to record the sets in blows for each 25 mm of penetration after the pile has reached
the hard stratum. On the other hand, where piles are supported by shaft friction, say in a
stratum of firm to stiff clay, or in a granular soil overlain by weak soils, it is essential
to record for every pile the level at which the bearing stratum is encountered and hence to
check that the required length of shaft to be supported is obtained. For this purpose, the blows
required for each 500 mm or each 250 mm of penetration must be recorded over the full
depth of driving of each pile, until the final metre or so when the sets are recorded in blows
for each 25 mm. Sometimes final sets are recorded as penetration depths for 10 to 25 blows
of the hammer. The advantage of recording the full driving log for piles of every category is
that if troubles arise, such as pile breakage, the records of each pile can be scrutinized, and
any which show peculiarities can be singled out for special examination or testing.
At the preliminary piling stage the driving records are compared with the ground investiga-
tion data, the static design criteria and with the results of loading tests, and suitable criteria
regarding final sets for terminating driving are established. If the methods of Chapter 4 have
been used for calculating the penetration depth of friction piles, the depth into the bearing
stratum should, theoretically, be the only criterion, and final sets should be irrelevant.
However, because of natural variations in soil properties piles with identical lengths in the
bearing stratum will not necessarily have identical ultimate loads. By driving to a minimum
depth into the bearing stratum and to a constant final set (or to within a specified range
of set) the variations in the soil properties can be accommodated.
A minimum penetration is necessary because random compact layers in the soil may
result in localized areas of high driving resistance. The driving records within these layers
should be compared with the ground investigation data, so that suitable termination levels can
be established. The establishment of criteria for controlling the termination of piles driven
into layered soils is described in Section 4.5.
It is advisable to conduct re-driving tests on preliminary piles, and on random working
piles. These tests are a check on the effects of heave and on possible weakening in resistance
due to pore pressure changes. Re-driving can commence within a few hours in the case of
granular soils, after 12 hours for silts, and after 24 hours or more for clays. If the re-driving
shows a reduction in resistance after about 20 blows, driving should continue until the
original final set is regained.
Diagrams of the driving and re-driving tests should be made for the preliminary piles, and
compared with the borehole records and with in-situ and laboratory test data.
The temporary compression at various intervals of pile driving is irrelevant if working
loads have been obtained by the methods described in Chapter 4. However, if dynamic
formulae are adopted the temporary compression values must be taken at intervals after the
pile enters the bearing stratum. The values are obtained by securing a sheet of graph paper
to the pile by adhesive tape. A straight-edge is held horizontally close to the pile and using
the straight-edge a pencil line is drawn across the paper during the impact of the hammer
(Figure 11.5a). The pattern of the pencil line is shown in Figure 11.5b from which the
temporary compression is measured.
Other items to be recorded include any obstructions to driving or damage to the pile
and deviations in alignment which might indicate breakage below the ground surface.
Methods of checking the alignment of steel tubular and H-piles are described in Section 2.2.4.
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
517
Hollow precast concrete piles can be checked for alignment in a similar way to steel tubes.
It would be advantageous if manufacturers of jointed precast concrete piles were to provide
a central hole in each unit, or in a proportion of the piles cast, down which an inclinometer
could be lowered on the completion of driving.
The use of accelerometers and strain transducers to measure stresses in piles at the time
of driving has been described in Section 7.3. This equipment gives a useful check on
workmanship at the construction stage.
11.3.2
Driven and cast-in-place piles
Table 11.2 is a suitable form of record. Generally the procedure for recording driving
resistances and sets is similar to that described in the preceding section, but in the case of
proprietary piles the piling contractor decides the criteria for the final set.
The concrete should be tested for compliance with the specification for materials and mix-
ing and cubes or cylinders taken daily for compression tests. The quantity of concrete placed
in the shaft of each pile should be recorded as a check against the possible collapse of the soil
during the withdrawal of the tube. By checking the level of the concrete as each batch is
placed an indication is given of possible ‘necking’ of the shaft. The volume of concrete in an
enlarged base should be recorded as a check on the design assumptions for the diameter of
base. A check should be made on the level of the reinforcing cage after withdrawing the drive
tube on every pile driven. This is a safeguard against the concrete being lifted with the tube.
Thin shell piles should be inspected before placing the concrete by shining a light down
the hole. This reveals any torn or buckled shells.
11.3.3
Bored and cast-in-place piles
The Table 11.3 record gives information required in the ICE Specification and complies
generally with EC7, Clause 7.9, but as for displacement piles, records have to be provided
Figure 11.5 Measuring set and temporary compression on driven pile (a) Arrangement of straight-edge
and paper card (b) Pencil trace showing set and temporary compression.
Paper fixed to
pile by adhesive
tape
Pencil
Fixed support
Straight-edge
held against face
of pile
Temporary
compression
Set per blow
(a)
(b)
Table 11.3 Record for bored pile
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
519
in two parts according to BS EN 1536 Annex B for each bored pile. Records for CFA piles
should include the pitch of the screw and the factors included on data loggers used to
monitor construction, for example, the penetration per revolution, torque of drilling motor
and pumping pressure of grout or concrete (Figure 2.32). Clause 9.2.5 of BS EN 1536 states
that ‘ground behaviour’ during excavation shall be observed and any changes which may be
important shall be communicated to the supervisor and designer. Reference should be made
Figure 11.6 Safety cage used for inspection of pile boreholes.
520
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
to the comprehensive set of tables which detail the information and frequencies required
under this Standard.
If the boreholes are free of water, the conditions at the base of small-diameter piles in dry
boreholes can be checked by shining a light down to the bottom before placing the concrete.
In the case of large-diameter piles the base of all piles should be inspected from a safety cage
of the type shown in Figure 11.6 or by lowering the inspector in an approved chair or harness
(see BS EN 813). The safety precautions should follow the procedure described in BS 8008
(safety precautions and procedures for the construction and descent of machine-bored shafts
for piling and other purposes). The procedures and problems in placing concrete in pile
boreholes are described in Sections 3.4.5 and 3.4.6. An essential factor in controlling these
operations is the maintenance of records of the quantity of concrete placed in each pile, and
preferably in addition, the level of the concrete in the shaft as each batch is placed. Tests to
control the quality of materials and mixing of concrete are, of course, required and must
be specified.
11.4
Load testing of piles
EC7-1 Clause 7.5 defines when pile tests are to be considered mandatory, in summary:
G
when using a type of pile or installation method for which there is no comparable
experience
G
where piles have not been tested under similar conditions
G
where theory and practice are insufficient to give confidence in the design and
G
when observations during installation indicate behaviour which deviates from
anticipated behaviour.
General requirements are given for static and dynamic tests, trial piles, and tests on
working piles.
11.4.1
Compression tests
Two principal types of test are used for compressive loading on piles. The first of these is
the constant rate of penetration (CRP) test developed by the Building Research
Establishment,(11.18) in which the compressive force is progressively increased to cause the
pile to penetrate the soil at a constant rate until failure occurs. The second type of test is
the maintained load (ML) test in which the load is increased in stages to some multiple, say
1.5 times or twice the working load with the time/settlement curve recorded at each stage
of loading and unloading. The ML test may also be taken to failure by progressively
increasing the load in stages.
The CRP method is essentially a test to determine the ultimate load on a pile and is
therefore applied only to preliminary test piles or research-type investigations. The method
has the advantage of speed in execution and because there is no time for consolidation or
creep settlement of the ground the load/settlement curve is easy to interpret. BS 8004 states
that penetration rates of 0.75 mm per minute are suitable for friction piles in clay and
1.55 mm per minute for piles end bearing in a granular soil. The CRP test is not suitable
for checking the compliance with the specification requirements for the maximum settle-
ment at given stages of loading. There is also the difficulty of pricing tenders for this form
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
521
of load testing since the failure load on the pile is not known with any certainty until the
test is made.
The ML test is best suited for contract work, particularly for proof loading tests on working
piles. It is also suitable for use where empirical methods are employed to predict the ultimate
load from measurement of residual deflections after returning the test load to zero at four or
five stages up to the maximum (see below). The load at each stage is held until the rate of
settlement has decreased to less than 0.25 mm/hour and is still decreasing.
EC7-1 Clause 7.5 deals with pile load tests in general and outlines procedures for static
and dynamic load tests, trial piles and testing working piles. BS EN 1536 refers to EC7
requirements giving recommendations for ML, CRP, dynamic and integrity testing which
are slightly different from the BS 8004 procedures. For example, in ML tests the loads should
be constant at each of at least six stages for a specified duration and unless otherwise stated
the displacement rate should be less than 0.1 mm/20 minutes at the end of each stage. For
CRP tests the rate of displacement should be constant at approximately 1 mm per minute,
unless otherwise agreed. BS EN 12699 is less prescriptive for displacement piles, but
requires testing to be in accordance with the relevant parts of EC7 and the specifications.
The section of the ICE Specification dealing with static load tests defines the Specified
Working Load (SWL) as ‘the specified load on the head of a pile as stated in the relevant
Particular Specification’ or in provided schedules. This is differentiated from the Design
Verification Load (DVL) which is defined as ‘a load which will be substituted for the spec-
ified working load for the purpose of a test and which may be applied to an isolated or singly
loaded pile at the time of testing the given conditions of the Site’. The DVL takes into
account special conditions which may not apply to all piles on the site such as negative shaft
friction, or variations in pile head casting level.
The ICE recommends that a proof load test should normally be the sum of the DVL plus
50% of the SWL applied in the sequence shown in Table 11.4 for multi-cyclic pile tests
(reproduced with permission of Thomas Telford Limited).
Table 11.4 Loading sequence for proof load test to a
maximum of 100% DVL plus 50% SWL
Load
Minimum time of holding load
25% DVL
30 minutes
50% DVL
30 minutes
75% DVL
30 minutes
100% DVL
6 hours
75% DVL
10 minutes
50% DVL
10 minutes
25% DVL
10 minutes
0
1 hour
100% DVL
1 hour
100% DVL  25% SWL
1 hour
100% DVL  50% SWL
6 hours
100% DVL  25% SWL
10 minutes
100% DVL
10 minutes
75% DVL
10 minutes
50% DVL
10 minutes
25% DVL
10 minutes
0
1 hour
522
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
With regard to loading procedures, EC7 Clause 7.5.2.1 only refers in a note to the
recommended procedure ‘Axial Pile Loading Test, Suggested Method’as published in the ASTM
Geotechnical Testing Journal, June 1985, pp. 79–90. This is generally followed in current
European practice. However, ISSMGE has produced a recommendation document(11.19) for the
execution and interpretation of axial static pile load tests which is consistent with EC7 philos-
ophy and is likely to form the basis of a new European standard. A note in Clause 7.5.3
refers to the procedures for dynamic tests in ASTM Designation D4945, ‘Standard Test
Method for High-Strain Dynamic Testing of Piles’.
The ASTM axial load procedure can be used for a test to twice the working load. If it is
desired to obtain the ultimate load on a preliminary test pile it is useful to adopt the ML
method for up to twice the working load, and then to continue loading to failure at a constant
rate of penetration. A further modification of the ML test consists of returning the load to
zero after each increment. This form of test is necessary if the net settlement curve is used
as the basis of defining the failure load (see Section 11.4.2). It is essential to maintain a
constant rate of load application as specified in EC7. It has been found that the slower the
rate the smaller is the ultimate failure load. Hence the need for standardization both for ML
and CRP testing.
CRP and ML tests use the same type of loading arrangements and pile preparation.
A square cap is cast onto the head of a concrete pile with its underside clear of the ground
surface. Steel piles are trimmed square to their axis and a steel plate is welded to the head,
stiffened as necessary by gussets. Suitable loading arrangements for applying the load to the
pile by a hydraulic jack using as the reaction either kentledge, tension piles or cable anchors
are shown in Figures 11.7, 11.8 and 11.9 respectively. The clearances between the pile and
the reaction support systems are noted in each case. These are necessary to avoid the
induced horizontal pressures from the supports having an appreciable effect on the shaft
friction and base load of the test pile. It is uneconomical to space the supports so widely
apart that all effects are eliminated, and if necessary the contribution of these surcharge
effects should be calculated and allowed for in the interpretation of the test results.
Kentledge blocks
Timber spacers
Angle lacing and
tie bolt
Stiffeners
Universal
beams
Load cell
Dial gauge
1.3m minimum
Clear space
Cap cast on to
head of test pile
Hydraulic jack
Timber 
crib
Test pile
Supports
for four dial
gauges
Bracing
Clamp
U.B.
Universal beams
Figure 11.7 Testing rig for compressive test on pile using kentledge for reaction.
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
523
Where piles are installed through fill or soft clay these materials give positive support in
shaft friction to the test pile, whereas they may add to the working load in negative shaft
friction on the permanent piles. It may therefore be desirable to sleeve the pile through these
layers by using a double sleeve arrangement. Alternatively, the outer casing can be with-
drawn, after filling the annular space between it and the steel tube encasing the test pile with
a bentonite slurry.
It is inadvisable to test raking piles by a reaction from kentledge or tension piles since the
horizontal component of the jacking force cannot be satisfactorily restrained by the jacking
system. Cable anchors inclined in the same direction as the raking piles can be used but it
is preferable to determine the ultimate or allowable loads on raking piles by installing
special vertical piles for loading tests.
Yoke
Universal beams
Bracing
'Load cell
Hydraulic jack
Test pile
3B
(not less than 2.0 m)
B
Cap cast
on to head
of test pile
Anchor piles
Four dial gauges
Dial gauge
supports
Tension
members
Figure 11.8 Testing rig for compressive test on pile using tension piles for reaction.
Saddles
Four dial
gauges
Universal beams
Load cell
Hydraulic jack
Dial gauge supports
Cap cast on
to head of
test pile
Test pile
B
3B
(not less than 2 m)
Cable anchors
Figure 11.9 Testing rig for compressive test on pile using cable anchors for reaction.
BS EN 1536 advises that the supports or anchorages of a reaction system for pile loading
tests should observe minimum clearances from the test pile (diameter D) as follows:
(a) Kentledge supports:
clearance  3  D
(b) Bond lengths of vertical anchorages:
clearance  3  D and 3 m
(c) Bond lengths of inclined anchorages:
clearance  5  D and  5 m
BS EN 12699 for tests on displacement piles and EC7-1 are silent on support spacing.
The combined weight of the kentledge and reaction girders, or the calculated resistance
capacity of tension piles or cables, must be greater than the maximum jacking force
required. In the case of kentledge loading the combined weight should be about 20% greater
than this force. Cable anchorages or tension piles should have an ample safety factor against
uplift. The former can be tested by stressing the anchors after grouting them in. If there is
any doubt about the uplift capacity of tension piles a test should be made to check the design
assumptions. Increased capacity of tension piles in clays can be obtained by under-reaming
them (see Section 6.2).
The reaction girders and load-spreading members should be so arranged that eccentric
loads caused by any lateral movement of the pile head will not cause dangerous sidesway, or
buckling of the girders. Connections should be bolted so that they will not become dislodged
if there is a sudden rebound of load due to the failure of the pile shaft or of the jack.
Similarly the kentledge stack should not be arranged in such a way that it may topple over.
Restraint by a pair of anchors from a single pile to each end of the reaction girder is not
a good practice as it can cause dangerous sidesway of a deep girder. The piles or anchor
cables should be placed in pairs at each end of the girders, as shown in Figures 11.8 and
11.9. Permanent piles can be used as anchorages for ML tests on working piles but it is
unwise to use end-bearing piles for this purpose when the shaft friction will be low and the
pile may be lifted off its seating. When using tension piles special threaded anchor bars
extending above the pile head should be cast into the piles for attachment to the reaction
girders. It is inadvisable to weld such bars to the projecting reinforcing bars because of the
difficulty in forming satisfactory welds to resist the high tensile forces involved.
The hydraulic jack should have a nominal capacity which exceeds by 20% or more the
maximum test load to be applied to the pile. This is necessary in order to avoid heavy man-
ual pumping effort when nearing maximum load and to minimize the risks of any leakage
of oil through the seals. The jacking force on the pile head should be measured by a load
cell or pressure capsule since the pressure gauge fitted to most jacks is not sufficiently accu-
rate, particularly when working towards the maximum capacity of the jack. However, the
jack should have a pressure gauge mounted on the pumping unit which is calibrated to read
in terms of the force on the ram. This gauge is necessary since the load cell mounted on the
pile head may not be visible from the pumping position. For high-capacity piling tests, much
heavy manual effort is saved by providing a mechanical pumping unit, and where CRP tests
are being made a load pacer is a useful addition. The ram of the jack should have a long
travel where piles are being loaded near to the failure condition. This avoids the necessity of
releasing oil pressure and repacking with steel plates above the ram as the pile is pushed into
the ground. Equipment is available for monitoring and restoring jacking loads at intervals of
only a few seconds(11.20).
The reaction girders, anchorages and jacking arrangements for a 5800 tonne static load
test in Taipei are shown in Figure 11.10.
524
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
525
The settlement of the pile head under load can be measured optically by means of a
surveyor’s level reading onto graduated scales fixed to the pile in four positions or by laser
beam producing an image on a photo-electric detector. Using a digital optical theodolite set
up 3 to 10 m from the pile and a suitable target the movement of the pile can be measured to
an accuracy of 0.5 mm which is more than adequate for most piling tests. An alternative
method is to set a dial gauge on each of four reference points on the pile head. The dial
gauges are clamped to a datum frame securely mounted well clear of the ground around the
pile or the reaction support system, and the gauges are calibrated to read to 0.1 mm. This
order of accuracy is not realized in practice since wind, temperature effects, and ground
vibrations can cause the datum frame to move by much more than 0.l mm. However, it is
helpful to be able to read to such an accuracy when making each increment of jacking force
since the time/settlement curve can then be plotted accurately and the rate of decrease of
movement is readily obtained. Levels should be taken on the datum frame before and after
the loading test to check that the frame has not been displaced during the test. A linear
potentiometer can be used to obtain the pile movements, which are read on a dial or print-out
mechanism at an instrument station well clear of the pile. The kentledge support system
must be carefully designed to give technicians safe access into the confined space under the
kentledge to install and read the dial gauges.
As reported by Fleming(11.20), it is now usual practice to record pile head loads and
settlements directly on a portable computer to plot load/settlement and time/settlement
curves as the test is in progress. The data can be reproduced in the format of the test report
and used to analyse the pile behaviour throughout the whole range of loading.
Figure 11.10 Patented arrangement for a 5800 tonne static load test.
526
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Where piles have been designed by the methods described in Chapter 4 it is very helpful
to provide devices whereby the shaft and base loads can be evaluated separately. The load
on the base of the pile can be measured by inserting load measuring devices in a cylindrical
unit interposed between the pile base and the shaft. A typical installation consists of a ring
of pillar-type load cells around the periphery of the unit recording to a data logger at the
ground surface(11.21). The distribution of shaft friction on the pile shaft can be measured by
fixing electrical-resistance strain gauges onto the interior surface of a hollow steel pile, or
to a steel pipe embedded in a precast or cast-in-place concrete pile. Gauges of this type can
withstand the impact of pile driving and have given satisfactory service on piles which have
remained in the ground for a year or more.
A simple method described by Hanna(11.22) for obtaining the distribution of shaft friction
on the shaft of long hollow-section piles consists of installing metal rods down the interior
of the pile. The rods are terminated at various levels as shown in Figure 11.11 and are free
to move in guides as the pile settles under load. By means of dial gauges mounted on the
heads of the rods the elastic shortening of each length of pile between the toes of the rods
can be measured. Thus the load reaching the pile shaft at the toe of each rod is given by the
Figure 11.11 Use of rod strain gauges to measure load transfer from pile to soil at various levels
down pile shaft.
Load
Dial gauges
to measure
settlement
at toes of rods
relative to
pile head
Hollow tubular
or box pile
Rod 1
Rod 2
Rod 3
P3
P2
P1
l3
l2
l1
P
following expressions:
(11.1)
(11.2)
where P3 and P2 are the loads reaching the pile at the level of the toe of the rod considered,
A is the cross-sectional area of the pile shaft, E is the elastic modulus of the material forming
the pile, 3 and 2 are the elastic shortenings of the pile between the pile head and rod 3,
and the pile head and rod 2, respectively, l3 and l2 are the lengths of the rods, and P is the
load on the pile head.
The load at the toe of rod 1 is obtained in a similar manner.
Where the rod strain gauges are used in the interior of a steel tubular pile filled with con-
crete the elastic shortening between each length of pile is that due to the elastic modulus of
the composite section. Thus
(11.3)
where l is the elastic shortening over length l, P is the load on length l, As is the area of
steel, Ac is the area of concrete, Es is the elastic modulus of the steel, and Ec is the elastic
modulus of the concrete.
While these forms of instrumentation are used mainly for research-type investigations
they can be adopted for the preliminary test piling to give useful design information at a
relatively small additional cost.
Further guidance on the procedure for pile load testing is given by Weltman(11.23).
Dynamic load tests and high strain integrity testing have developed from the need to deter-
mine the static load capacity of driven piles (designed using empirical dynamic formulae as
Section 7.3) at the time of driving. The analyses provide the soil resistance mobilized at the time
of test and may therefore not show time-dependent effects of consolidation on settlement, par-
ticularly when working load is near to ultimate pile capacity. EC7 Clause 7.6.2 sets stringent
criteria for the use of dynamic load tests for assessing the compressive resistance of piles:
G
an adequate ground investigation has been carried out and
G
the method has been calibrated against static load tests on the same type of pile, of
similar length and cross-section and in comparable ground conditions.
If more than one type of dynamic test is performed then cross-checking of results is
mandatory.
The SIMBAT(11.24) technique for bored cast-in-place piles applies a series of blows to the
pile and measures the set at each blow as in the static tests. Extensions of the stress wave
analytical methods are then used, which, under EC7 Clause 7.6.2.6, must also be calibrated
against static load tests. BS EN 1536 requires any rapid loading tests to be correlated with
maintained static load tests in similar ground. Clearly, cast-in-place piles should not be
tested until they have gained sufficient strength.
The Statnamic test developed jointly by the Berminghammer Corporation in Canada and
TNO-IBBC in the Netherlands(11.25) is now widely used. The load is applied to the pile head
l 
P  l
AsEs1  Ac
As
· Ec
Es
Load on pile at toe of rod 2 P2  2AE2
l2
P
Load at pile P3  2AE3
l3
P
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
527
528
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
by the reaction of an explosive force designed to raise weights mounted on the pile head to
a height of about 2.5 m at accelerations of up to 20 g. It is claimed that over 10 MN of force
is generated by the explosion of fuel in a combustion chamber beneath the stack of
cylindrical weights. It is also claimed that the duration of the explosive reaction of about
100 milliseconds can reproduce the effect of static loading up to the working load, with little
divergence at twice the working load; thus simulating a static rather than a dynamic load test
of the type described in Section 7.3. The force on the pile is measured by a load cell and the
deflections of the pile by a laser beam and light-sensitive sensor.
11.4.2
Interpretation of compression test records
A typical load/settlement curve for the CRP test and a load/time/settlement curve for the ML
test are shown in Figure 11.12. The ultimate or failure load condition can be interpreted in
several different ways. While there is no doubt that failure in the soil mechanics sense occurs
when the pile plunges down into the ground without any further increase in load, from the
point of view of the structural designer the pile has failed when its settlement has reached
the stage when unacceptable distortion and cracking is caused to the structure which it sup-
ports. The latter movement can be much less than that resulting from ultimate failure in
shear of the supporting soil.
With reference to Figure 11.12, some of the recognized criteria for defining failure loads
are listed as follows:
(1) The load at which settlement continues to increase without any further increase of load
(Point A)
(2) The load causing a gross settlement of 10% of the least pile width (Point B)
(3) The load beyond which there is an increase in gross settlement disproportionate to the
increase in load (Point C)
(4) The load beyond which there is an increase in net settlement disproportionate to the
increase of load (Point D)
(5) The load that produces a plastic yielding or net settlement of 6 mm (Point E)
(6) The load indicated by the intersection of tangent lines drawn through the initial, flatter
portion of the gross settlement curve and the steeper portion of the same curve
(Point F) and
(7) The load at which the slope of the net settlement is equal to 0.25 mm per MN of
test load.
EC7, Clause 7.6.2.2, prescribes a method for assessing design pile loads from the
load/settlement curves obtained from a series of static load tests as described in Section 4.1.4.
With experience the load/settlement curve from a compression test can be used to
interpret the mode of failure of a pile. A defective pile shaft is also indicated by the shape
of the curve. Some typical load/settlement curves and their interpretation are shown in
Figure 11.13.
A method of analysing the results of either CRP or ML tests to obtain an indication of the
ultimate load is described by Chin(11.26). The settlement  at each loading stage P is divided
by the load P at that stage and plotted against /P as shown in Figure 11.14. For an undam-
aged pile a straight line plot is produced. For an end-bearing pile the plot is a single line
(Figure 11.14a). A combined friction and end-bearing pile produces two straight lines which
Figure 11.12 Compression load tests on 305  305 mm pile (a) Load/settlement curve for CRP test for
pile on dense gravel (b) Load/settlement and time/settlement curves for pile on stiff clay.
0
0
10
20
30
Settlement of pile head in mm
Settlement of pile head in mm
Settlement of pile head in mm
40
0
200
400
Load on pile head in kN
600
800
1000
5
10
15
20
25
30
C
B
A
D
Extra- 
polated
Gross
settlement curve
400
600
0
0
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
200
800
820
Total elapsed time in hours
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
F
E
C
B
F
1.0
2.0
Load on pile head in MN
3.0
4.0
(a)
(b)
10% of pile width
Net settlement curve
10% of pile width
0
Figures denote
increment of load
on pile
530
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
intersect (Figure 11.14b). The inverse slope of the line gives the ultimate load in each case.
Chin describes how a broken pile is detected by a curved plot (Figure 11.14c).
11.4.3
Uplift tests
Uplift or tension tests on piles can be made at a continuous rate of uplift (CRU), or an
incremental loading basis (ML). Where uplift loads are intermittent or cyclic in character,
as in wave loading on a marine structure, it is good practice to adopt repetitive loading on
Figure 11.13 Typical load/settlement curves for compressive load tests (a) Friction pile in
soft-firm clay or loose sand (b) Friction pile in stiff clay (c) Pile bearing on weak
porous rock (d) Pile lifted off seating on hard rock due to soil heave and pushed
down by test load to new bearing on rock (e) Gap in pile shaft closed up by test
load (f) Weak concrete in pile shaft sheared completely through by test load.
Load
Load
Load
Breakdown
of rock structure
below pile toe
General shear
failure of rock mass
Load
Load
Normal
curve
Normal
curve
Load
Settlement
Settlement
Settlement
Settlement
Settlement
Settlement
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
531
the test pile. The desirable maximum load for repeated application cannot be readily deter-
mined in advance of the load testing programme since the relationship between the ultimate
load for a single application and that for repeated application is not known. Ideally a single
pile should be subjected to a CRU test to obtain the ultimate load for a single application.
Then two further piles should be tested; one cycled at an uplift load of, say, 50% of the
single-application ultimate load, and the second at 75% of this value. At least 25 load
repetitions should be applied. If the uplift continues to increase at an increasing rate after
each repetition, the cycling should be continued without increasing the load until failure in
uplift occurs. Alternatively, an incremental uplift test can be made with say 10 repetitions of
the load at each increment.
A typical load/time/uplift curve for an ML test is shown in Figure 11.15. The criteria for
evaluating the failure load are similar to those described in Section 11.4.2.
EC7, Clause 7.6.3.2, prescribes a method of deriving the design tensile capacity, Rtd, of a
single pile from tension tests as described in Section 6.2.2.
A loading rig for an uplift test is shown by Figure 11.16. This utilizes the same compo-
nents as the compressive load testing rig shown in Figure 11.8. The methods used for
measuring the jacking force and the movement of the pile head are the same as those used
for compressive tests. It is particularly important to space the ground beams or bearers at an
Figure 11.14 Analysis of load/settlement curves from pile loading test (after Chin(11.26)) (a) End-bearing
pile (b) Friction and end-bearing pile (c) Broken pile.
Settlement/load
× 103
/p
Settlement/load
Ultimate base resistance
14.3
14.3
0.0175
820 kN
5
5
Settlement  (mm)
Settlement  (mm)
0
(a)
(c)
(b)
0
4
2.5
8
12
16
20
Settlement  (mm)
0
2
1.3
Ultimate shaft friction
Total pile resistance
2.2
4.2
5.0
5.6
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
4
8
12
16
20
4
8
12
16
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
× 103
/p
Settlement/load
× 103
/p
10
0.0034
2 940 kN
5
5
5
0.0029
1 720 kN
5
5
Figure 11.16 Testing rig for uplift on H-section pile using ground reaction.
Bracket welded
to test pile
Load cell
Hydraulic jack
Angle bracing
Universal beams
Stiffeners
Timber crib
Dial gauge
Dial gauge
Supports
Test pile
(Min2 m)
3B
B
Figure 11.15 Uplift load on test pile (ML test) (a) Load/uplift curve (b) Time/uplift curve.
25
(a)
Uplift of pile head in mm
Uplift load on pile head in MN
Uplift of pile head in mm
20
15
10
5
0
25
(b)
20
15
10
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0
0.3
0.6
1.0
1.3
1.6
1.85
0
Total elapsed time in hours
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0.8
Figures denote
increment of load
on pile
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
533
Figure 11.17 Lateral loading test on two steel tubular piles forming part of a breasting dolphin.
Figure 11.18 Testing rig for push and pull lateral loading test on a pair of piles.
Sleeve
Four tie rods
Bearing pad
Load
c
Hydraulic jack
Hydraulic
jack
Test piles
Dial gauge
Dial gauge
support
Tubular strut
ample distance from the test pile. If they are too close the lateral pressure on the pile induced
by the load on the ground surface will increase the shaft friction on the pile shaft.
11.4.4
Lateral loading tests
Lateral loading tests are made by pulling a pair of piles together, or jacking them apart. If
the expected movements are large, for example, when obtaining the load/deflection charac-
teristics of breasting dolphin piles, a ‘Tirfor’ or block and tackle can be employed to pull the
piles together and a graduated staff used to measure the horizontal movement, as shown
in Figure 11.17. Where the lateral loads on piles are of a repetitive character, as in wave
loading or traffic loads on a bridge, it is desirable to make cyclic loading tests. This involves
alternately pushing and pulling of a pair of piles, using a rig of the type shown in Figure
534
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
11.18. Instead of a pair of piles a single pile can be pushed or pulled against a thrust block
(Figure 11.19). Where pushing methods are used restraining devices should be provided to
ensure that the jack and strut assembly does not buckle during the application of load.
Where possible the lateral movement of the pile heads should be measured by dial gauges
mounted on a frame supported independently of the test piles, as shown in Figure 11.19.
This may not be feasible in marine piles since the oscillation of the piles and the structure
supporting the frame in waves and currents may make it impossible to obtain readings with
sufficient accuracy. Measurements made of the curvature of a pile by lowering an incli-
nometer down a tube fixed to the wall of a hollow pile or cast centrally in a solid pile are
helpful in checking the assumptions made on the point of fixity as described in Chapter 6.
Highly accurate electro-levels can be mounted in a probe and lowered down a sleeve cast
into the pile. The slope of the pile at the head can be measured by extending the pile above
ground level by a stiff indicator rod. Dial gauge readings are made at the top and bottom of
this rod. It is also helpful when testing piles in marine structures to make two sets of tests,
applying the load at two different levels, say at the head and just above low water of spring
tides. This provides two sets of curves relating deflections to bending moments.
Figure 11.20 Load–deflection curve for cyclic horizontal loading test on pile (some load cycles
omitted for clarity).
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
20
30
Horizontal movement of pile head in mm
Horizontal load on pile head mm
40
50
Figure 11.19 Testing rig for lateral loading test on single pile.
Test pile
Dial gauge
Support
Load cell
Hydraulic jack
Strut
Concrete
thrust block
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
535
Typical load–deflection curves for cyclic tests are shown in Figure 11.20.
EC7, Clause 7.7, does not prescribe a method of deriving the ultimate limit state design
transverse load, Ftrd, as is the case for compression and uplift loading. As for all ultimate
limit state pile design EC7 does require the transverse ground resistance to be equal to or
greater than the transverse load.
11.5
Tests for the structural integrity of piles
From time to time doubts are thrown on the soundness of pile shafts. Excavations for pile
caps may show defective conditions of the type illustrated in Figures 3.40 and 3.41, and
questions are immediately asked about the likelihood of similar defects at greater depths and
in other piles on the site. Where preformed piles such as precast concrete or steel tubular
sections are used, defects can readily be explored by lowering inclinometers down guides
fixed to the interior (see Section 2.2.4) or by inserting a light or TV camera down the interior
of a hollow pile. In the Netherlands it is the practice to check the soundness of precast
prestressed concrete piles by embedding a thin electric cable down the shaft. After driving,
a test for electrical continuity is made quite simply by incorporating a light bulb in the
circuit. If the pile shaft is broken it shows as a break in the circuit. Such explorations cannot
readily be made with cast-in-place concrete piles.
Turner(11.27) has classified and described integrity testing techniques under two main heads:
Direct examination
(1) Visual, during and after installation, including excavation and extraction of the pile
(2) Load testing, static, dynamic and internal compression
(3) Drilling, coring or probing, alongside the pile or into the pile.
Indirect examination
(4) Internal, using the drill holes or preformed ducts for sonic logging and nuclear
backscatter and gamma-ray techniques, CCTV inspection, water or air pressure testing
and calliper dimensional logging
(5) External from the top or side of an exposed pile using low strain acoustic integrity tests,
dynamic load measurements for high strain integrity tests, ultrasonic pulses and
electrical resistivity tests
(6) Remote, in a borehole alongside the pile and installation of sonic probe for ‘parallel
seismic’ techniques.
Satisfactory evidence should be provided by the specialist that a particular method of
non-destructive testing or integrity testing will be appropriate to the site and type of pile.
A complete pile can rarely be examined economically by excavation or extraction. Piles
are frequently installed in soft or loose ground, making excavation difficult and costly
particularly below the water table. It would be unthinkable to examine all piles on a site by
excavation down the shaft.
Test loading is a positive method and its value in detecting defects in a shaft is illustrated
in Figure 11.13e and f. However, test loading all the piles on a site is a costly operation,
particularly if heavy kentledge loads are required (Figure 11.10). Figure 11.21 shows the
much simpler arrangements required for the SIMBAT dynamic load test on small-diameter
piles. The method of shaft compression has been described by Moon(11.28). A rod or cable is
anchored at the base of the pile in a sleeve, and by jacking the tension member against the
pile head the ability of the pile shaft to carry the design compressive load can be checked.
It is possible to recover the tension members after each test.
Drilling, either by open hole methods using a percussion drill or rotary rock roller bit, or
by rotary coring, can be used in piles of medium to large diameter, but it is difficult to keep
the drill hole within the confines of the shaft of a small-diameter pile. If it is possible to
flush an open hole clear of dirty water an inspection can be made by TV camera to look for
cavities or honeycombed concrete. Heavy water losses when the drill hole is filled with
water also indicate defective concrete. A cored hole provides a better indication of sound-
ness, and compression tests can be made on the cores, but the method is more costly than
open hole drilling. It should be noted that cores are only likely to be obtained from sound
concrete and any defective zones may not be recovered for testing. Calliper logging down a
drill hole gives an indication of overbreak caused by weak concrete or cavities.
Sonic pulse equipment can also be lowered down drill holes, when irregularities in the
trace of the sonic log indicate a defective shaft. Pairs of ducts can be formed down a
pile shaft at the time of placing the concrete and various logging devices used to scan the
concrete between the ducts. These include sonic pulse measurements, gamma-ray logging
and neutron emissions. The latter methods are believed to be reliable indicators of density
changes and water content respectively, but are costly since they involve the use of skilled
technicians and the transportation to site and operation of nuclear testing devices with
their elaborate safety precautions. The seismic method consists of dropping a weight
on the pile head and observing the time of return of the seismic wave reflected from the
toe or anomaly in the pile. This method is quite widely used and has been shown by
536
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
Figure 11.21 SIMBAT test using a mini rig for small diameter dynamic tests (courtesy Test Consult).
experience to give reasonably reliable results when operated and interpreted by specialists.
The method does not give reliable results in jointed precast concrete piles, however.
The dynamic response method consists of mounting a vibrating unit on the pile head and
interpreting the oscillograph of the response from the pile. This method is again quite
widely used.
Ground-probing radar techniques are being developed to assist in locating existing
foundations and piles for potential reuse(2.21).
The main advantage of specifying integrity testing of all or randomly selected piles while
pile installation is underway is that it encourages the piling contractor to keep a careful
check on all the site operations. However, the methods do not replace the need for full-time
supervision of the piling work by an experienced engineer or inspector.
Integrity testing will indicate if a pile is badly broken but not hair cracks; the anomalies
shown up may need to be checked by another method. The limitations of integrity testing
were demonstrated by experiences of a field trial competition in The Netherlands(7.5). Ten
different precast concrete pile shapes with different forms of defect were installed in drilled
holes. The average score from 12 specialist firms competing in the trials was four correct
identifications out of the 10 shapes, but the suitability of the test conditions has been criticized.
Somewhat better results from a comparative blind testing are reported by Iskander et al.(11.29)
for pulse echo and impulse response methods. Defects as small as 6% of the cross-sectional
area of bored piles in varved clay were correctly identified. Cross-hole tomography was not
as effective but was able to identify the pile lengths and lateral locations of the defects.
11.6
References
11.1
BINNS, A. Rotary coring in soils and soft rock for geotechnical engineering, Geotechnical
Engineering, Vol. 131, No. 2, Institution of Civil Engineers, London, 1998, pp. 63–74.
11.2
TERZAGHI, K. and PECK, R. B. Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice, 2nd edn, John Wiley,
New York, 1974, p. 114.
11.3
JOUSTRA, K. Comparative measurements on the influence of the cone shape on results of soundings,
Proceedings of the European Symposium on Penetration Testing, Stockholm, 1974.
11.4
CEARNS, P. J. and McKENZIE, A. Application of dynamic cone penetrometer testing in East Anglia,
Symposium or Penetration Testing in U.K., Thomas Telford, London, 1988, pp. 123–7.
11.5
WROTH, C. P. and HUGHES, J. M. O. An instrument for the in-situ measurement of the properties of
soft clays, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference, ISSMFE, Moscow, 1973, 1.2,
pp. 487–94.
11.6
HUGHES J. M. O. and ERVIN, M. C. Development of a high pressure pressuremeter for determining
the engineering properties of soft to medium strength rocks, Proceedings of 3rd Australian –
New Zealand Conference on Geomechanics, Wellington, Vol. 1, 1980, pp. 243–7.
11.7
MADDISON, J. D., CHAMBERS, S., THOMAS, A., and JONES, D. B. The determination of deformation
and shear strength characteristics of Trias and Carboniferous strata from in situ and laboratory
testing for the Second Severn Crossing, Advances in Site Investigation Practice, C. Craig (ed.),
Institution of Civil Engineers, Thomas Telford, London, 1996, pp. 598–609.
11.8
MARCHETTI, S. In situ tests by Flat Dilatometer, Proceedings of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, Vol. 106, No. GT3, 1980, pp. 299–321.
11.9
WHITTLE, R. W. Recent developments in the cone pressuremeter, Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advances in Site Investigation Practice, Thomas Telford, London,
1996, pp. 533–54.
11.10 MARSLAND, A. Large in-situ tests to measure the properties of stiff fissured clays, Building
Research Establishment, Current Paper CP1/73, Department of the Environment, January 1973.
Ground investigations, contracts and testing
537
11.11 MARSLAND, A. and EASTON, B. J. Measurements of the displacement in the ground below loaded
plates in deep boreholes, Proceedings of the Symposium on Field Instrumentation, British
Geotechnical Society, London, 1973, pp. 304–17.
11.12 MCKINLAY, D. G., TOMLINSON, M. J., and ANDERSON, W. F. Observations on the undrained strength
of a glacial till, Geotechnique, Vol. 24, No. 4, December 1974, pp. 503–16.
11.13 BUTLER, F. G. and LORD, J. A. Discussion, Proceedings of the Conference on In-Situ Investigations
in Soils and Rocks, British Geotechnical Society, London, 1970, pp. 51–3.
11.14 Point load test – suggested method for determining point load strengths, International Journal
of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, Vol. 22, No. 2, 1985, pp. 53–60.
11.15 Guidance Notes for Site Investigations for Offshore Renewable Energy Projects, Society for
Underwater Technology, 2005.
11.16 New Engineering Contract (NEC3). The Engineering and Construction Contract, 3rd edn,
Institution of Civil Engineers, Thomas Telford, London, 2005.
11.17 Civil Engineering Standard Method of Measurement, 3rd edn, Institution of Civil Engineers,
Thomas Telford, London, 1991.
11.18 WHITAKER, T. The constant rate of penetration test for the determination of the ultimate bearing
capacity of a pile, Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Vol. 26, September 1963,
pp. 119–23.
11.19 DE COCK F., LEGRAND C., and HUYBRECHTS N. Axial static pile test in compression or in tension –
Recommendations from ERTC – Piles, ISSMGE Subcommittee, Proceedings of the 13th
European Conference on Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering, Prague, Vol. 3, 2003,
pp. 717–41.
11.20 FLEMING, W. G. K. Static load tests of piles and their application, Institution of Civil Engineers,
Ground Engineering Board, Notes for meeting on 22 May 1991.
11.21 HANNA, T. H. Foundation Instrumentation, Transtech Publications, Aedermansdorff,
Switzerland, 1973, pp. 35–66.
11.22 HANNA, T. H. Personal communication to the authors.
11.23 WELTMAN, A. J. Pile load testing procedures. Construction Industry Research and Information
Association (CIRIA), Report PG7, 1980.
11.24 LONG, M. Assessment of SIMBAT dynamic pile tests, ASCE Special Publication, Vol. 113, 2002,
pp. 539–53.
11.25 BERMINGHAM, P. and JANES, M. An innovative approach to load testing of high capacity piles,
Proceedings of the International Conference on Piling and Deep Foundations, London,
Balkema, Rotterdam, 1989.
11.26 CHIN, FUNG KEE. Diagnosis of pile condition, Geotechnical Engineering, Vol. 9, 1978, pp.
85–104.
11.27 TURNER, M. J. Integrity testing in piling practice, Construction Industry Research and
Information Association (CIRIA), Report 144, 1997.
11.28 MOON, R. A. Test method for the structural integrity of bored piles, Civil Engineering and Public
Works Review, Vol. 67, No. 790, May 1972, pp. 476–80.
11.29 ISKANDER, M., ROY, D., SHELLY, S., and EALY, C. Drilled shaft defects: detection, and effects on
capacity in varved clay, ASCE Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering,
December 2003, pp. 1128–37.
538
Ground investigations, contracts and pile testing
A.1
Coarse-grained soils
Appendix
Properties of materials
Density when
Density when
Angle of
drained above
submerged below
shearing 
groundwater level
groundwater level
resistance
 (Mg/m3)
sat (Mg/m3)
 (degrees)
Loose gravel with low sand content
1.6–1.9
0.9
28–30
Medium dense gravel with low sand content
1.8–2.0
1.0
30–36
Dense to very dense gravel with low sand content
1.9–2.1
1.1
36–45
Loose well-graded sandy gravel
1.8–2.0
1.0
28–30
Medium-dense well-graded sandy gravel
1.9–2.1
1.1
30–36
Dense well-graded sandy gravel
2.0–2.2
1.2
36–45
Loose clayey sandy gravel
1.8–2.0
1.0
28–30
Medium-dense clayey sandy gravel
1.9–2.1
1.1
30–35
Dense to very dense clayey sandy gravel
2.1–2.2
1.2
35–40
Loose coarse to fine sand
1.7–2.0
1.0
28–30
Medium-dense coarse to fine sand
2.0–2.1
1.1
30–35
Dense to very dense coarse to fine sand
2.1–2.2
1,2
35–40
Loose fine and silty sand
1.5–1.7
0.7
28–30
Medium-dense fine and silty sand
1.7–1.9
0.9
30–35
Dense to very dense fine and silty sand
1.9–2.1
1.1
35–40
A.2
Fine-grained and organic soils
Density when drained
Density when submerged
Undrained shear
above groundwater
below groundwater
strength (kN/m2)
level  (Mg/m3)
level sat (Mg/m3)
Soft plastic clay
1.6–1.9
0.6–0.9
20–40
Firm plastic clay
1.75–2.0
0.75–1.1
40–75
Stiff plastic clay
1.8–2.1
0.8–1.1
75–150
Soft slightly plastic clay
1.7–2.0
0.7–1.0
20–40
Firm slightly plastic clay
1.8–2.1
0.8–1.1
40–75
Stiff slightly plastic clay
2.1–2.2
1.1–1.2
75–150
Stiff to very stiff clay
2.0–2.3
1.0–1.3
150–300
Organic clay
1.4–1.7
0.4–0.7
—
Peat
1.05–1.40
0.05–0.40
—
540
Appendix
A.3 Rocks and other materials
Material
Density (mg/m3)
Granite
2.50
Sandstone
2.20
Basalts and dolerites
1.75–2.85
Shale
2.15–2.30
Stiff to hard mudstone
1.90–2.30
Limestone
2.0–2.70
Chalk
0.95–2.00
Broken brick
1.10–1.75
Solid brickwork
1.60–2.10
Ash and Clinker
0.65–1.00
Pulverized fuel ash
1.20–1.50
Loose coal
0.80
Compact stacked coal
1.20
Mass concrete
2.20
Reinforced concrete
2.40
Iron and steel
7.20–7.85
A.4
Engineering classification of chalk (Lord et al.(4.43))
Intact dry density scales of chalk
Density scale
Intact dry density
Porosity n a
Saturation
(Mg/m3)
moisture contenta (%)
Low density
1.55
0.43
27.5
Medium density
1.55–1.70
0.43–0.37
27.5–21.8
High density
1.70–1.95
0.37–0.28
21.8–14.3
Very high density
1.95
0.28
14.3
Note
a Based on the specific gravity of calcite of 2.70.
Classification of chalk by discontinuity aperture
Grade A
Discontinuities closed
Grade B
Typical discontinuity aperture 
3 mm
Grade C
Typical discontinuity aperture 3 mm
Grade D
Structureless or remoulded mélange
Appendix
541
Subdivisions of Grade D Chalk by engineering behaviour
Suffix
Typical discontinuity spacing (mm)
1
t  600
2
200 
 t 
 600
3
60 
 t 
 200
4
20 
 t 
 60
5
t 
 20
Suffix
Engineering behaviour
Dominant element
Comminuted chalk
Coarser fragments (%)
matrix (%)
m
fine soil
matrix
approx 35
approx 
65
c
coarse soil
clasts
approx 
35
approx 65
Subdivisions of Grades A to C chalk by discontinuity spacing

Ackers, J. C. 476
Adams, J. L. 278, 308, 313, 356
Andersland, O. B. 449–51
Anderson, D. M. 449
Anderson, W. F. 538
Aydinoglu, N. 222
Baguelin, F. 346–9
Baldi, G. 268
Ballisager, C. G. 164
Barkan, D. D. 435
Baudin, C. 9
Beake, R. H. 202
Beattie, D. 392
Beebe, K. E. 424
Beetstra, G. W. 476
Bekaroglu, 222
Belloti, R. 289
Berezantsev, V. G. 165, 167, 168, 230
Bermingham, P. 538
Bessey, G. E. 489
Biddle, A. R. 70
Biggar, K. W. 453, 476
Binns, A. 502
Bittner, R. B. 476
Bjerrum, L. 42, 164, 218, 223, 259, 278
Black, D. R. 58
Bolognesi, A. J. L. 121–2
Bolton, M. D. 187, 458–61
Bond, A. J. 155
Bonnett, D. 418
Bowley, M. J. 489
Brandl, H. 474
Brassinga, H. E. 180
Bretschneider, C. L. 409
Britt, G. B. 70
Broadhead, A. 406
Broms, B. B. 289, 462
Broug, N. W. A. 180
Brown, P. R. 290
Brown, P. T. 256
Brown, T. G. 415
Browne, R. D. 491
Bruce, D. W. 494, 495
Bryden-Smith, D. W. 290
Brzezinski, L. S. 279–81
Buchanan, N. W. 462
Burbidge, M. C. 266
Burland, J. B. 243–4, 263, 265–7, 287, 289,
193–5
Bustamante, M. 58, 63
Butler. F. G. 222, 242, 256, 262, 274, 538
Byle, M. J. 476
Campanella, R. G. 267
Carder, D. R. 476
Carrier, W. D. 258, 268
Cearns, P. J. 504–5
Chambers, S. 537
Chandler, F. W. 274
Chandler, R. J. 222
Chao, W. T. 69, 493
Charue, N. 70
Chellis, R. D. 483, 486
Chin, Fung, Kee, 528–30
Chow, F. C. 181, 185, 221
Chow, Y. K. 278, 280
Christian, J. T. 258, 268
Christoffersen, H. P. 268
Churcher, D. W. 137
Claessen, A. J. M. 220
Clayton, C. R. I. 70, 222, 223
Coday, A. E. 497
Cole, K. W. 280, 281
Cooke, R. W. 161, 287
Cox, W. R. 357
Croasdale, K. R. 414–15
Curtis, R. L. 135, 281
Dailey, J. W. 409
Dalmatov, B. L. 450
Darley, P. 476
Davies, W. W. 396
Davis, A. G. 274
Name index
544
Name index
Davis, E. H. 354
Davisson, M. T. 340–2, 351–2
De Beer, E. 461–2
De Cock, F. 538
de Gijt, J. G. 180
De Mello, V. 289
Dodds, S. 477
Domone, P. L. J. 491
Driscoll, R. 9
Dunican, P. T. 222
Durgonoglu, H. T. 165
Dutt, R. N. 173
Ealy, C. 538
Easton, B. J. 538
Eglinton, M. S. 489
Ellis, E. A. 476
Ervin, M. C. 537
Farmer, R. H. 485
Farquhar, G. B. 221
Fawcett, A. 137
Fellenius, B. 217
ffrench, R. 418
Fischer, J. A. 473
Fleming, W. G. K. 63, 130, 162, 175, 
283, 383, 525
Fookes, P. G. 472
Foriero, A. 454
Forster, A. 222
Fourie, A. 289
Fox, E. N. 259, 261
Frank, R. 144, 149, 219
Free, M. W. 138
Freeman, C. F. 321
Gannon, J. A. 222
Garassino, A. 331
Geddes, W. G. N. 137
George, A. B. 222
Gerwick, B. C. 102, 418, 419
Ghionna, V. 289
Gianeselli, L. 58
Gibson, R. E. 256
Gill, H. L. 340, 342
Gill, S. A. 205
Glanville, W. H. 379
Goble, G. G. 381, 396
Gold, L. W. 450, 451
Gooch, M. N. 290
Goodman, R. E. 199
Grabham, F. R. 70
Grime, G. 398
Hagerty, A. 278
Hall, F. R. 475
Hambly, E. C. 454–6
Hanna, T. H. 43, 278, 526
Hansen, J. B. 165–8, 173, 181, 244–9, 330–5,
346, 356, 358, 363–4, 371
Hanson, W. E. 221
Haque, M. 138, 221
Harris, M. R. 478
Hassam, T. 70
Hawkins, A. B. 397
Hayward, T. 70, 223
Healy, P. R. 138, 160, 195
Hedborg, C. E. 496
Heijnen, W. J. 180
Herbert, S. M. 497
Hight, D. W. 174
Hobbs, N. B. 206, 208
Holeyman, A. 70
Holt, D. A. 61
Hooper, J. A. 286–7
Horvat, E. 220
Horvath, R. G. 206–7, 211
Houlsby, G. T. 460
Hsieh, T. K. 435
Hughes, J. M. 537
Hutchinson, J. N. 321
Huybrechts, N. 538
Irish, K. 435
Irwin, W. W. 450
Jamiolkowski, M. 253–4, 289, 357
Janes, M. 538
Jardine, R. J. ix, 155, 181, 184–5, 187–8, 
220, 254–5, 309
Jensen, O. J. 476
Jezequel, J. F. 357
Johannessen, I. J. 218
Johnson, G. H. 453
Johnson, J. W. 424
Jones, A. E. K. 61
Jones, D. A. 164
Jones, D. B. 537
Journeaux, N. L. 206–7
Joustra, K. 504
Kalra, J. C. 263, 287
Kavvadas, M. 9
Kenney, T. C. 222
Kinder, G. 137
Kinoshita, S. 450
Kirby, A. M. 476
Klajnerman, D. 357
Knill, J. L. 475
Koop, F. B. 357
Korhonen, C. 453
Korzhavin, K. N. 415
Kozicki, P. 222
Kraft, L. M. 163
Name index
545
Krebbs Ovesen, N. 9
Kulhawy, F. H. 167–9, 171, 199, 262
Ladanyi, B. 449–51, 476
Lane, P. F. 130, 383
Lawrence, D. M. 221
Lea, F. M. 489
Leach, B. A. 222
Legrand, C. 538
Levesque, M. 471
Littlechild, B. D. 124
Littlejohn, G. A. 92
Littlejohn, G. S. 321
Lizzi, F. 441
Lord, J. A. 63, 274, 538, 540
Love, J. P. 10
Lumb, P. 222
Lunne, T. 268–9
Lyons, G. G. 163
McCabe, R. 476
McKenzie, A. 504–5
Mackey, R. 476
McKinlay, D. G. 538
Macphie, H. L. 290
Maddison, J. D. 537
Malkin, A. B. 475
Mallard, D. J. 222
Marchetti, H. 537
Marsh, E. 69, 493
Marsland, A. 255, 537, 538
Massarsch, K. R. 462
Masterton, G. G. T. 222
Maswose, J. 289
Matlock, H. 335–9, 341–4, 349, 406
Maun, K. W. 497
May, R. W. P. 466
Meigh, A. C. 176–8, 268, 274–6, 504
Menzies, B. A. 223
Meyerhof, G. G. 161, 190, 214–15, 238, 248,
313–14
Mitchell, J. K. 165–6
Mitchell, J. M. 138
Moon, J. 424
Moon, R. 535
Moore, J. E. 221
Moretto, O. 121–2
Morison, J. R. 410
Morley, L. 492–5
Mortimore, R. N. 222
Muir-Wood, D. 222
Murdock, L. J. 161, 164
Newmark, N. 410–11, 433
Ng, C. W. W. 211, 346, 476
Nip, D. C. N. 346
North-Lewis, J. P. 120
O’Brien, M. P. 424
O’Neill, M. W. 138
Ono, T. 450
Orchino, S. 453
O’Riordan, N. J. 122–3
Orr, N. 9
Osterberg, J. O. 205
Overy, R. 221
Pack, J. S. 58
Padfield, C. J. 287
Parmentier, D. 70
Pasqualini, E. 357
Peck, R. B. 165–6, 188, 265, 278, 
290, 503
Pells, P. J. N. 200, 206–7, 212–13
Penner, E. 450–1
Pettit, J. J. 220
Pinches, G. M. 397
Plumbridge, G. D. 138
Poskitt, T. J. 220
Potts, D. M. 221
Poulos, H. G. 242, 262, 354–5
Powderham, A. J. 283
Prakash, S. 355–6
Prasad, G. D. 357
Price, D. G. 475
Radhakrishna, H. S. 308
Raison, C. A. 12
Randolph, M. F. 3, 155, 288, 350–1, 
354, 430, 460
Rausche, F. 398
Rees, T. C. 221
Reese, L. C. 121, 161, 330–1, 335–9, 341–2,
344–5, 349, 406
Reid, G. O. 409
Reid, W. M. 462–3
Richart, F. E. 435
Rigden, W. J. 155–6, 181
Rital, S. 70
Rizkalla, S. 70
Roberts, W. K. 70
Robertson, P. K. 268
Robinson, K. E. 351–2
Rodger, A. A. 92
Romanoff, M. 492
Rosenberg, P. 206–7
Roy, D. 538
Ryley, M. D. 476
St. John, H. D. 220
St Laurent, N. 476
Salvador, H. 70
Samuel, R. H. 138
Sancters, R. V. 210
Sandon, J. 424
546
Name index
Schaaf, S. A. 424
Schmertmann, J. H. 269–71, 296
Schultze, E. 264
Schuppener, B. 9
Scott, I. D. 120
Seedhouse, R. L. 210
Sego, D. C. 452–3
Semple, R. M. 155–7, 181
Sharrock, M. J. 287
Shector, L. 290
Shelbourne, H. 99
Shelly, S. 538
Sherif, G. 264
Sherrell, F. W. 222
Sherwood, D. E. 138
Shields, D. G. 357
Shimoni, J. 425
Sillett, D. F. 290
Simms, L. G. 397
Simons, N. 223
Skempton, A. W. 161, 259
Skinner, H. 138
Sliwinski, Z. 162, 175
Smith, D. W. 290
Smith, E. A. L. 96, 380–1
Smith, M. A. 497
Springman, S. M. 458–61
Standing, J. 221
Stanley, R. G. 470
Steinbrenner, W. 255, 268
Stephen, S. G. 409
Stonecheck, P. E. 477
Stroud, M. A. 259–60, 503
Sturrock, K. R. 137
Sutcliffe, G. 202
Tappin, R. G. R. 138, 221, 467
Taylor, P. T. 221
te Kamp, W. C. 179
Teh, C. L. 278, 280
Terzaghi, K. 200, 255, 265, 329–31, 340, 
365, 503
Thomas, A. 537
Thorburn, J. Q. 138
Thorburn, S. 138
Thornburn, T. H. 221
Togrol, E. 222
Tomlinson, M. J. 164, 220, 221, 222, 538
Trenter, N. A. 160
Tryde, P. 415
Tsytovich, N. A. 449–50
Tugcu, E. K. 222
Turner, M. J. 221, 535
Turner, R. M. 163, 200, 212–13
Uranowski, D. D. 473
Van den Hoonard, J. 476
Van der Noot, H. J. 290
Van Duivenijk, J. 138
Vesic, A. S. 165, 169
Viking, K. 137
Vogelaar, L. J. J. 476
Walker, W. P. 435
Wallace, W. A. 222
Wallays, M. 461–2
Waltham, A. C. 472
Welch, R. C. 345
Weltman, A. J. 137, 138, 160, 195, 527
Wheeler, P. 382
Whitaker, T. 161, 538
White, D. J. 187
Whitman, R. V. 435
Whittle, R. T. 392
Whittle, R. W. 506
Wiegel, L. 409
Williams, A. F. 206–7
Williams, N. S. 100
Willis, A. J. 137
Wong, G. 476
Wood, R. H. 397
Wroth, C. P. 155, 243, 537
Wyllie, D. C. 199, 204, 206, 211, 321–2
Wynne, C. P. 70
Yaron, S. L. 425
Yeats, J. A. 122–3
Zhang, X. 476
abutments, bridge 454–63
acid attack 490
actions 6–7, 143–7
adfreezing 449–52
adhesion see shaft friction
adhesion factor 154–5
allowable load 142–3, 211
American Petroleum Institute 167, 319, 418
anchors 308, 315–27
Arbed piles 38
Atlas piles 56
attrition 309
auger 57, 106–11
auger-injected piles 61
barges 419
barrettes 61
base grouting 121–3
base resistance: bored and cast-in-place piles
161, 175, 205; in coarse-grained soils 165,
171, 175; continuous flight auger piles 210;
driven and cast-in-place piles 159, 174, 204;
driven piles 171; in fine-grained soils 151,
159, 161, 183; in layered soils 189–91;
observations of 526; related to static cone
tests 176; in rocks 198, 209; using ICP
method 181–7
basements 282–5
belling bucket 111
bentonite slurry: concreting under 121; 
drilling with 120–1, 134; effects on shaft
friction 161, 163, 206; reducing negative 
skin friction 219
berthing structures see marine structures
bitumen coating 220, 490
block failure 264, 272
bored and cast-in-place piles: base resistance of
161, 175, 205; in coarse-grained soils 175;
continuous flight auger 61–3, 114, 132;
description of 59–61; durability of 488–9;
enlarged bases for 58–60, 111, 128, 162,
312–13; in fine-grained soils 161–3;
installation of 106–21; lateral loads on 345;
in mining subsidence areas 446; in rocks
204–8; reinforcement of 59–61; shaft friction
on 160–3; underpinning with 437–42;
working stresses on 23, 63
box piles 38
bridge loading 466
Brinch Hanson method 165
brownfield sites see contaminated land
caisson pile see drilled-in tubular piles
calcareous soils 171, 185
Camkometer 264, 505
cap block 100
caps and capping beams: for over-water 
bridges 469; protection of 490; structural
design of 388, 393–5
cased piles 38
cathodic protection 495–6
CEM1 see Portland cement
Centrum pile 32
chalk 201–3, 274; grades 541
characteristic strength 5, 143; of concrete 21
characteristic values 5, 145, 149
coarse-grained soils: bored and cast-in-place
piles in 165, 171, 175; driven and cast-
in-place piles in 173–6; driven piles in
171–3; loss of ground in 280–1, 284; pile
groups in 263–71; shaft friction on piles in
169, 171–5
composite piles 65
computer programs 242, 255, 345, 355, 
380–1, 460
concreting piles: generally 127–36; in
permafrost 452; in water-bearing ground
133–4; under bentonite 61, 121, 133
cone test see dynamic cone test; static cone
penetration test
constant rate of penetration 520–2
Construction (Design and Management)
Regulations 512
contaminated land 12, 58, 493
Subject index
548
Subject index
contiguous piles 444
continuous dynamic cone test 504
continuous flight auger 61, 114, 132
continuous rate of uplift 530
contracts for piling 508–12
control of installation 514–20
corrosion of steel piles 492–4
current forces 411–12
cyclic loading 309, 343–5
defects in pile shafts 131–2, 535–7
deflection: due to surcharge loading 458–9; 
p–y curves 342–6; under lateral loads 327–9,
334–7, 507, 534
deformation modulus: of chalk, 212, 274; of
rocks 273–5; of soils 257, 268, 270;
relationship with cu 254
degaussing 514
depth factor 148, 260, 341
design: approach 7, 143, 147; by calculation
145, 175; by observational method 14, 145;
by prescription 144
design verification load 521
diaphragm wall grabs 117
diaphragms 404, 423
diesel pile hammers 88
differential-acting hammer 86, 89
dilatometer 505, 506
dolly 100
double-acting pile hammer 86
drag-down see negative skin friction
drilled-in tubular piles: description 63–5; for
marine structures 406
drilling equipment: bucket auger 112; grabbing
112, 117; for ground investigations 499,
501–2; kelly 114; oscillators 114; pile top
118; reverse circulation 116; rotary power
auger 106; tripod 118; under-reamers 113
driven and cast-in-place piles: advantages of 50;
base resistance of 159, 174, 204; in coarse-
grained soils 173–6; equipment for installing
104–6; in fine-grained soils 159; Franki pile
104; Fundex pile 54; installation of 127;
lateral loads on 345; in rocks 204; shaft
friction 159–60, 174; shell types 54, 56;
Vibrex pile 53; Vibro pile 54; working
stresses on 23
driven displacement piles: in coarse-grained soils
171–3; in fine-grained soils 151–9; in rocks
196–204; shaft friction on 151–2, 156–8
driving cap 102
driving stresses 379–81
driving tests 379–81
drop hammers 80
duplex drilling 114
Dutch cone tests see static cone 
penetration test
dynamic cone test 503; see also continuous
dynamic cone test
dynamic pile formulae 4, 17, 96, 380–2
earthquake resistance 12
eccentric loading on piles 246, 248
effective stress (pressure) 152–3, 214
efficiency formulae 240; of piling hammers 96
elastic continuum 350–1
elastic modulus see deformation modulus
end bearing resistance see base resistance
energy piles 474
Engineering and Construction Contract 509
enlarged bases: for bored and cast-in-place piles
59–60, 111, 128, 161–2; for driven and cast-
in-place piles 159, 174, 180, 190, 517; for
marine structures 421; in permafrost 452; for
precast concrete piles 177, 179
equivalent raft 241–3
Eurocode EC7, requirements: actions 6–7,
143–7; anchorages 324–7; characteristic
values 145; compression loads 3, 145, 150;
correlation factors 149; design approach 7,
143, 147; dynamic load tests 527; group
analysis 272; negative skin friction 218–19;
partial factors 7, 143–8; pile loading tests 6,
150, 310, 520; structural design 7, 145;
tension loading 310, 356; transverse loading
356; ultimate limit state 6, 143, 160, 196,
212, 309, 312, 535
expander body piles 44
failure load 142
fender piles 399–403, 469
filled ground: pile groups in 276–8; single piles
in 212–19
fine-grained soils: bored and cast-in-place piles
in 161–3; driven and cast-in-place piles in
151–9; driven piles in 151–9; heave in
278–80; pile groups in 243–63; shaft friction
on piles in 151–64
Fondedile piles 440
frames, for piling 72
Franki piles 104
Frank’s connector 37
friction, shaft see shaft friction
frozen ground, piling in 449–53
Fundex piles 54
gamma ray logging 535–6
geophysical surveys 499–501
geothermal piles 474
glacial till: investigations in 501; piles in
156–60
grabbing rigs 112, 117
ground beams 386–7, 393–6
ground heave 276–80, 513
Subject index
549
ground investigation 498
ground investigations for piling 512; 
offshore 508
groundwater: concreting under 62, 121, 133;
observations of 480, 500, 507
groups of piles: block failure of 264, 272;
eccentric loading on 284, 353–6; in filled
ground 276–8; heave effects on 278–80;
lateral loads on 353–6; negative skin friction
on 276–8; optimization of settlements in
287; in rock 272–6; settlement of 250–71; in
soils 240–71; ultimate resistance of 243–50
grouting: base 121; shaft 121
guides, for piling 79, 419
H-section piles: advantages of 39; curvature of
43; for machinery foundations 436; Peine
38, 43; in permafrost 452; shaft friction on
158, 172; strengthening toes of 47; for
underpinning 438–9, 443; wings for 41 
hammers: piling 80; vibrators 92–5
heave, ground 276–80, 513
helical piles 445
helmets 100
Hercules piles 32
high-alumina cement 452, 490
Hoesch piles 38, 43
horizontal load see lateral loads
hush piling 99
hydraulic hammers 82–7
ice forces 414–16
ICP method 181–6
impact forces 400, 411
inclination factor 247
inclined loading 248, 355
integrity, structural 535
integrity tests 63, 535
interaction analysis 217, 278
interface friction 139, 169, 184
jacket structures 37, 71, 341, 411, 421
jacking piles 33, 66, 441
jetties see marine structures
jetting piles 101, 125
karst 272
kelly 114
Krupp piles 38
laboratory testing 302
landfill 62
lateral load tests 533–5
lateral loads: from bridge abutments 354–6; on
pile groups 353–6; on raking piles 352–3; on
single piles 327–52
leaders 72–6; spotter 76
limit states 5, 143
load/settlement curves 520, 528
load transfer: in pile groups 9, 241; on pile
shafts 141, 196, 287
load/uplift curves 532
loading tests: compression 520, 529; constant
rate of penetration 520; continuous rate of
uplift 530; dynamic 527; lateral 533;
maintained load 520; SIMBAT 527;
Statnamic 527; uplift 530
loss of ground due to piling 9, 280, 444, 
454, 513
machinery foundations 434–6
made ground see filled ground
maintained load test 520
marine structures: current forces on 411–12;
durability of piles in 482–6; ice forces on
414–15; impact forces on 400–7; mooring
forces on 407; wave forces on 408–11; wind
forces on 411
mass factor 206–8
Ménard pressuremeter 346, 505
micropiles 55
mining subsidence 445–9
minipiles see micropiles
model factor 149
model pile 146, 310
modulus: deformation, of coarse-grained soils
183, 270; deformation, of rocks 273–5;
pressuremeter 346, 348; of subgrade reaction
329, 340, 345, 347; of subgrade variation
341–5 
Monopile 82, 418
Monotube piles 43
mooring dolphins 407, 420
mooring forces 407
MV piles 39
NEC3 see Engineering and Construction
Contract
negative skin friction 212–19, 276–8
noise control 97–9, 326, 513
observational method 14, 144–5
open-end piles, resistance of 156, 167–9, 
174, 183
organic acids 486–7, 490
organic coatings 495–6
oscillation of piles 37, 412, 466, 534
oscillators, casing 111–14
Oslo point 27, 45
over-consolidated soils 170, 260–2, 265
p–y curves 342–5
packing 18, 96, 100–1, 125, 380–1
painting 495–6
550
Subject index
Pali Radice piles 66, 440
partial factors 7, 143, 145–50, 192, 219, 
272, 310–2
partial resistance factors 148
Peine piles 38, 43
Penpile 58
permafrost 449–53
permeability tests 506–7
plate bearing tests 194, 211, 252–3, 506–7
platforms, petroleum production see marine
structures
plugging: with concrete 52, 127, 156, 159, 422;
with soil 158, 172–3, 183, 422
point load test 507
Poisson’s ratio 196, 255–8, 274–5
Portland cement 27, 318, 487, 489–91
positional tolerance 136, 284, 377, 391
power augers 106, 126, 135
precast concrete piles: breakage of 31, 34;
concreting of 20, 28–31; cracks in 21, 25,
29, 31; driving of 125; driving stresses on
379–82; Hercules pile 32; jointed types
31–4; lengthening of 385–6; lifting of
376–8; prestressed 19–21, 25; reinforcement
of 19, 21–5; shoes for 27; structural design
of 375–86; working stresses on 19–21, 172
Prescore pile 33
press-in drivers 100, 125
pressure distribution: beneath pile groups 3,
246; lateral 458–9
pressuremeter 146, 170, 185, 211, 253, 264,
346–50, 505; cone 506
prestressed concrete piles: advantages of 25;
casting of 25, 28–9; cylindrical 31, 33; 
for marine structures 416; structural design
of 376
pretest piles 442
Pruyn point 45
pyrites 487
radial stress 159, 182, 184, 187
raking piles: bending of 353; for bridges
456–7; calculating loading on 353–6;
installation of 135–6; for marine structures
398–9, 403; resistance to lateral loads of
306–8
Raymond piles (obsolete) see TaperTube pile 
RB pile 32
redistribution of load: on pile shafts 244; in
piles group 244
regulations: Construction (Design and
Management) 512; Health and Safety 59,
512; noise control 80, 97, 454; pollution
control 121, 514
reinforcement: for bored and cast-in-place piles
59–61; for driven and cast-in-place piles 52–6;
for micropiles 66; for precast concrete piles
19, 21–5, 376–8
replacement piles see Bored and cast-in-place
piles
responsibilities, contractual 7, 9, 498, 508–9
reuse of piles 69, 537
reverse circulation drilling 116–18, 120, 126,
134, 175, 453
rock: anchoring piles to 315–27; base resistance
in 196–211; deformation moduli of 273–5;
drilled piles in 65; ground investigations in
502; quality designation (RQD) 199–201,
206, 502; settlement of piles in 211–12,
273–6; shaft friction on piles in 198–211
Rockwell connector see Frank’s connector
rotary auger 12, 106, 111, 207, 439
rotary core drilling 499, 501–2
rotary displacement piles: Atlas piles 56; screw
piles 56, 58, 132, 445
rotary table 65, 106–9, 114–16
roughness factor 208, 276
safety factors 3, 140, 164, 177, 192–5, 218,
311, 335, 418
sampling soils 501, 507
sand see coarse-grained soils
scour, effects of 180, 418, 463–8
screw piles 58; Atlas 56; ScrewSol 56
secant piles 137, 443
seismic logging 499, 535
selection: of pile type 11–13; of piling 
hammer 95–7
serviceability limit state 6, 144, 151, 192, 326
set of piles 4, 17, 379–80, 456, 513–17
setting out 513
settlement: of pile groups 250–63; of single
piles 192–6
shaft friction: on bored and cast-in-place piles
160–3; in coarse-grained soils 169, 171–5;
on driven and cast-in-place piles 159–60,
174; on driven piles 151–2, 156–8; in fine-
grained soils 151–64; on grouted piles 124;
in layered soils 190–1; negative (skin)
212–20; observations of 526–7; in rock
198–211
shape factor 165, 173, 246, 267, 313–14, 
319, 415
shear connectors 318–19
sheathing 320, 490
shell piles: description of 54–6; installation of
127; tapered 44
shoes: for casing 113; for concrete piles 27; for
steel piles 45–7; for timber piles 16
single-acting hammers 81–9, 104, 124–5
small displacement piles 10, 34, 92, 158, 
203, 281
Subject index
551
Soilex pile 44
sonic logging 535–6
spacing of piles 44, 249, 264
specifications: anchorages 318; piling 512;
timber preservation 481
spiral welding 38
splicing piles 20, 37, 385
standard penetration tests: related to values
165; related to deformation modulus 263;
techniques for 503
static cone penetration test: related to values
165; related to base resistance 176–80,
183–6; related to compressibility of soils
268–72; related to shaft friction 177;
techniques for 503
Statnamic tests 527
steel: for anchors 318–20, 325; designations
47–9; for piles 48–9; reinforcing see
reinforcement
steel piles: advantages of 69; Arbed 38; box
38; cathodic protection of 495–6; concrete
filling of 35, 54–6; connectors for 37, 43;
corrosion of 492–4; Corus 48; driving of
125–6; Frodingham (obsolete) 38; Hoesch
38, 43; H-section 39; Krupp 38; Larssen
(obsolete) 38; for marine structures 48, 416,
495; monopile 82; Monotube 43; MV 39;
painting of 495–6; Peine 38, 43; shoes for
45–7; splicing of 385; TaperTube 54; tubular
36–45; Union 44; welding of 36–42, 386–7,
419, 443; withdrawable tube see driven and
cast-in-place piles; working stresses on
47–8, 56–7
stress grades: steel 49; timber 16–17
stress wave theory 370–80
sulphate (and sulphuric acid) attack 478,
487–90
sulphate resisting cement 27, 489–90
supersulphated cement 490
surcharge loading on pile groups 454–8, 460–2
tapered piles, description of 44
TaperTube pile 54
temporary compression 516
thermal piles 453
timber piles: damage to 17–19; driving of
15–17, 124; durability of 479–86; for fenders
415–16, 469; preservation of 14, 479–86,
514; shoes for 16; splicing of 18–19;
working stresses on 16
time effects: in clays 163–4; in coarse-grained
soils 188; on soil plugging 183
tolerances, positional 136, 284, 377, 391
tremie concreting 60, 133
trestle guides 78, 454
tripod rigs 134
Tubex piles 54, 473
tubular piles: descriptions of 36–8; driving 
caps for 102; for marine structures 406, 413,
419–22; plugging of 155–8, 173–4; steel,
cleaning out 126–7
ultimate limit state 6, 143, 160, 196, 212, 309,
312, 535
ultimate resistance: to compressive loads 140;
to lateral loads 329–34; of piles in groups
243, 311; to uplift loads 308–11
underpinning with piles 437; with jacked 
piers 441
under-reamed piles 59, 111, 163, 193
underwater concreting 62, 121, 133
underwater hammers 85, 421
unconfined compression strength 503
unloading effects 141, 179–80, 520
uplift on piles: due to frost action 305, 
449–52; due to swelling clays 305–6, 
394–5; on pile groups 310; resistance to
308–27
vane tests 502
vibratory pile hammers 92–5
Vibrex pile 53
Vibro pile 54
vibro-concrete column 95
vibro-replacement 93
void index 182
wave forces 407–11
weathering grades 209–10
welding 36–8, 386; tests 514
winches, piling 72, 108
wind forces 307, 413–14
wind turbines 82, 417
winged piles 41, 250
working load, specified 510, 521
working stresses: on bored and cast-in-place
piles 23, 63; on driven and cast-in-place 
piles 23, 56, 172; on shell piles 54; on 
steel piles 47–8; specified 510; on timber
piles 16
