Response of stone column-improved ground under c-/
soil embankment
Amit Kumar Das a,b, Kousik Deb b
a Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology Silchar, Silchar 788010, Assam, India
b Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India
Received 18 August 2017; received in revised form 3 January 2019; accepted 22 January 2019
Available online 13 March 2019
Abstract
Problems with stone column-supported embankments are often addressed considering the pure granular soil properties of the
embankment material. In practice, however, the embankment material may contain a certain percentage of ﬁnes which makes the mate-
rial c-/ in nature. In the present paper, experimental and 3D numerical studies are conducted to investigate the eﬀect of the ﬁnes content
present in the embankment soil on the response of a stone column-improved ground. The numerical study is carried out using the ﬁnite
diﬀerence software package FLAC3D. The time-dependent behavior of the improved soil is modeled. It is observed that an increase in the
ﬁnes content in the embankment soil brings about a decrease in the stress concentration ratio and an increase in the vertical displacement
and the pore pressure in the soft soil. However, the vertical displacement of the soft soil does not change signiﬁcantly above a ﬁnes con-
tent of 20%. The lateral displacement of the stone column increases at the top with an increase in the ﬁnes content and the point of the
maximum lateral displacement shifts in the downward direction. It is also observed that the diﬀerential settlement increases at the ground
level as well as at the embankment top with an increase in the quantity of ﬁnes in the embankment soil. Thus, the critical height of the
embankment (a height where no diﬀerential settlement occurs on the embankment surface) increases due to the increase in the ﬁnes
content.
 2019 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
Keywords: Fines content; FLAC3D; Laboratory experiments; Numerical modeling; Soft soil; Stone column-supported c-/ embankment; Time-dependent
response
1. Introduction
Embankments required for road and railways experi-
ence very high settlement when they are constructed on
highly compressible clay. Therefore, ground improvement
is an obvious choice to increase the strength of the founda-
tion soil. The installation of stone columns is a well-
practiced method for constructing embankments on weak
soil deposits. Surcharge loads can be allowed immediately
over embankments that rest on stone column-improved
soft soil. In addition, the stress on the soft soil is reduced
by transferring it from the soft soil to the columns due to
the diﬀerence in stiﬀness between them (Han and Ye,
2001; Deb, 2010). The installation of stone columns in soft
soil also expedites the consolidation process, reduces the
settlement and increases the bearing capacity of the com-
posite ground (Mitchell and Huber, 1985; Priebe, 1995;
Shahu et al., 2000; Deb and Dhar, 2011; Das and Deb,
2014; Ng and Tan, 2014; Das and Deb, 2017a, b;
Bhattacharya and Kumar, 2017). Oh et al. (2007) reported
a case study of a trial embankment constructed on estuar-
ine clay in South-east Queensland, Australia. The authors
presented
measurements
of
the
vertical
and
lateral
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sandf.2019.01.003
0038-0806/ 2019 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
Peer review under responsibility of The Japanese Geotechnical Society.
E-mail address: kousik@civil.iitkgp.ac.in (K. Deb)
www.elsevier.com/locate/sandf
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
H O S T E D  B Y
 
This is an open access article under CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
 
This is an open access article under CC BY-NC-ND license. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Technical Paper
settlements below the embankment. Tan et al. (2008)
selected a case study of an embankment resting on stone
column-improved soil to check the accuracy of two simpli-
ﬁed methods for converting the unit cell model to the
equivalent
plane-strain
model
for
a
stone
column-
improved ground. In the ﬁrst method, the width of the
stone columns was kept equal to the original column diam-
eter and the soil permeability was modiﬁed, whereas in the
second method, the total cross-sectional area of the stone
columns and the soil permeability were kept unchanged.
It is observed that the second conversion method predicts
better results than the ﬁrst method. Borges et al. (2009)
conducted a ﬁnite element analysis of an embankment rest-
ing on stone column-improved soft soil. They proposed a
new design method based on the improvement factor calcu-
lated from the area replacement ratio and the deformability
ratio. Yoo and Kim (2009) selected three types of modeling
approaches
to
analyze
a
geo-synthetic-encased
stone
column-supported embankment. The authors developed
an axi-symmetric unit cell model, single column 3D model
and full 3D model for the embankment-foundation system
to ﬁnd the diﬀerences among the results in terms of diﬀer-
ent aspects. The ﬁnite element package ABAQUS was used
to carry out the numerical simulations. It was observed
that the single column 3D model could predict exactly
the same results as the full 3D model, but that the axi-
symmetric unit cell model predicted 10–20% higher values.
Yoo (2010) conducted a numerical study on embankments
resting on geo-synthetic-encased stone column-improved
soft soil. Numerical models of a single 3D column under
the center of the embankment and a 3D strip model of
the embankment were developed with the ﬁnite element
package ABAQUS. The diﬀerence in performance between
conventional stone columns and encased stone columns
was also investigated. Indraratna et al. (2013) conducted
a numerical analysis of a stone column-supported embank-
ment assuming the free strain condition. The study was car-
ried out with the unit cell concept and by incorporating the
eﬀects of soil arching as well as clogging in the stone col-
umns and the smear zone. It was observed that the vertical
stress distribution and the settlement were greatly inﬂu-
enced by the relative stiﬀness of the columns and the soil,
the radius of the stone columns and the spacing between
them. Ng and Tan (2015) compared the response of an
embankment resting on ﬂoating stone columns by using
diﬀerent constitutive models. Advanced soil models were
suggested for the analysis as the results obtained with such
models show a better agreement with the ﬁeld results.
Fattah et al. (2016) conducted an experimental study on
a stone column-supported embankment to quantify the
improvement with encased stone columns over ordinary
stone columns. Basack et al. (2016) studied the eﬀect of
the cyclic load on a stone column-supported embankment.
They observed that the excess pore pressure increases with
the increase in the number of cycles and gradually becomes
stable. Borges and Gonc¸alves (2016) conducted a ﬁnite ele-
ment analysis on geo-synthetic-reinforced load transfer
platforms over column-reinforced soft soil. Das and Deb
(2017b) proposed an elastic model for a stone column-
supported circular embankment. Basack et al. (2017)
conducted a numerical study to show the time-dependent
column deformation of a stone column-supported embank-
ment. Nonaka et al. (2017) presented a case study on a
liquefaction countermeasure with vertical drains under an
embankment. Studies have also been conducted on stone
column-supported embankments with basal reinforcement
placed at the base of the embankments or within the gran-
ular layer for a better load transfer from the soft soil to the
stone columns (Munfakh et al., 1983; Deb, 2010; Deb and
Mohapatra, 2013).
It is seen that many studies are available on stone
column-supported embankments resting on soft soil. How-
ever, the eﬀect of the ﬁnes present in the embankment soil
on the response of these stone column-supported embank-
ments has not been addressed in the available studies. In
practice, the soil used in the ﬁeld as embankment material
may contain a signiﬁcant amount of ﬁnes (e.g., clay).
Chowdhury et al. (2016) showed that the presence of ﬁnes
in the backﬁll of a braced excavation inﬂuences the design
parameters signiﬁcantly. Therefore, a systematic study is
required to show the eﬀect of diﬀerent amounts of ﬁnes
contents present in the embankment soil on the response
of stone column-supported c-/ embankments. In the pre-
sent study, laboratory experiments and a 3D numerical
modeling
have
been
conducted
to
show
the
time-
dependent response of a stone column-improved ground
due to the presence of the ﬁnes content in the embankment
soil.
2. Experimental program
Laboratory model tests were performed on stone
column-supported
embankments.
In
the
experimental
study, a clay bed, with a thickness of 600 mm, was rein-
forced with nine end-bearing stone columns having a diam-
eter of 75 mm and arranged in a square pattern. Sand with
or without a ﬁnes content was laid over the stone column-
improved clay bed as the embankment. The models were
prepared in a prefabricated steel tank. Table 1 presents a
summary of the performed laboratory model experiments.
2.1. Setup
Each experiment was conducted in the prefabricated
steel tank with a square cross section having the dimensions
of 3S  3S (where S is the spacing between the stone col-
umns). In the present model test, the spacing between the
stone columns was taken as 225 mm. The tank had a height
of 1200 mm and consisted of two detachable halves. The
lower half of the tank was used to prepare the stone
column-improved clay bed, while the upper half was ﬁlled
with sand mixed with or without ﬁnes as the embankment.
The lower half of the tank was made of steel plates, whereas
the upper half was an assembly of three plate segments on
618
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
three sides and a Perspex sheet on one side. Once the stone
column-improved clay bed was prepared in the lower half,
the upper half of the tank was ﬁxed to the lower half before
starting the sand ﬁlling. Both the thickness of the clay bed
(Hc) and the height of the embankment (He) were
600 mm. Fig. 1 shows the typical experimental setup with
the general arrangement and instrumentation.
2.2. Materials
Three diﬀerent materials were used in the model tests,
namely, clay, stone aggregates and sand. The clay used in
the model tests is classiﬁed as CH as per IS: 1498 (BIS
(Bureau of Indian Standards), (1970)). The physical prop-
erties of the clay obtained from the laboratory experiments
are summarized in Table 2. Poorly graded stones passing
through a 10-mm sieve, but retained in an 8-mm sieve, were
ﬁlled in the boreholes to construct the stone columns. The
unit weight of the stone aggregates was 18 kN/m3. The
material properties of the stone aggregates obtained from
the consolidated drained triaxial tests (with a sample diam-
eter of 75 mm and a height of 150 mm) are presented in
Table 3. Kansai River sand, mixed with or without a cer-
tain percentage of clay, was used as the embankment mate-
rial. As per IS: 1498 (1970), the stone aggregates (Cu = 1.1,
Cc = 1) and the sand (Cu = 2.5, Cc = 0.9) are categorized as
GP and SP, respectively. The required percentage (by
weight) of clay was mixed with sand to increase the ﬁnes
content in the embankment material. The same clay was
used to prepare the soft bed as was used as the ﬁnes content
for the embankment soil. The shear strength properties of
the sand with diﬀerent ﬁnes contents were obtained from
unconsolidated undrained triaxial tests. Cylindrical speci-
mens, 38 mm in diameter and 76 mm in height, were used
for the triaxial testing of sand with or without a ﬁnes con-
tent. The triaxial samples were prepared in the cylindrical
mold at the target density by compaction in three layers.
Table 1
Details of model tests.
Sl. No.
Fines content (%)
Non-dimensional height
of embankment (He/S)
S/dc
1
0
2.7
3
2
10
2.7
3
Fig. 1. Laboratory model test setup for stone column-reinforced soft soil under c-U embankment: (a) upper half of setup, (b) lower half of setup, (c) top
view and (d) sectional elevation.
Table 2
Laboratory test results for clay used in model tests.
Parameter
Value
Speciﬁc gravity of clay (Gs)
2.67
Liquid limit (LL)
51%
Plastic limit (PL)
19%
Plasticity index (PI)
32
Moisture content (%)
44 ± 1
Vertical permeability of clay (kv) in m/s
1012
Degree of saturation (%)
98.5 ± 1
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
619
However, the compaction eﬀort was not the same for each
soil with diﬀerent ﬁnes contents. In the present study, the
maximum dry unit weight of the sand increases due to
the addition of ﬁnes up to 20%, and it reaches a value of
19.6 kN/m3 at a water content of 11%. The addition of
ﬁnes beyond 20% again decreases the maximum dry unit
weight. This is due to the fact that the voids in the sand
are being occupied by ﬁnes and this increases the density.
However, the addition of ﬁnes beyond a certain value
replaces the sand particles with ﬁnes. Thus, the density of
the sand is further decreased as the maximum dry density
of the sand is more than the maximum dry density of the
ﬁnes (Deb and Konai, 2014; Deb et al., 2010). The opti-
mum water content increases due to the addition of ﬁnes;
it is increased from 11% to 13.5% due to the addition of
ﬁnes from 10% to 50%. In the present study, the model
embankment soil and the triaxial samples were not fully
saturated. 10% water was added to the sand to prepare
the triaxial samples with the required percentage of ﬁnes
in order to achieve a common bulk unit weight of 16 kN/
m3 for each soil sample. Thus, to achieve the same unit
weight, diﬀerent compaction eﬀorts were applied for each
soil with diﬀerent ﬁnes contents. The compaction eﬀort
was determined based on a series of trials to achieve a com-
mon density for all the samples. However, the exact com-
paction energy was not measured for each sample. The
mechanical properties of the soil samples diﬀered signiﬁ-
cantly depending on the ﬁnes content. However, not all
the mechanical properties were measured for all the sam-
ples with diﬀerent ﬁnes contents. The maximum dry density
and the optimum moisture content were measured for each
sample. The strength parameters and the required model
parameters were also determined for each sample (as
shown in Table 4). The same moisture content and density
were maintained in the triaxial or element tests and the
model tests. Similar parameters were also reported by
Chowdhury et al. (2016) to study the eﬀect of ﬁnes on
the behavior of a braced excavation. According to the Uni-
ﬁed Soil Classiﬁcation System, if the percentage of ﬁnes is
more than 12%, the sandy soil can be designated as clayey
sand (SC). With a percentage of ﬁnes between 5% and 12%,
a dual symbol (SP-SC) is used. In the case of a percentage
of ﬁnes of 50%, the soil can be classiﬁed based on its liquid
limit and plasticity index. The original ﬁnes and sand (less
than 5% ﬁnes) are classiﬁed as CH and SP, respectively.
2.3. Formation of stone-column supported embankment
A clay bed was prepared inside the lower half of the
model test tank. Before preparing the clay bed, all the inner
side walls of the model tank were lubricated with silicon
emulsion to reduce the frictional resistance between the
clay and the tank wall and the loss of water. The clay
bed was prepared in six layers to make the bed homoge-
neous. Through a series of trials, the amount of water,
the height of the fall and the number of rammer blows
required to prepare the soft clay bed were determined.
Based on the trials, the water content and the unit weight
(saturated) were selected as 44% and 17.2 kN/m3
, respec-
tively, to prepare a saturated soft clay bed (the clay bed
was almost fully saturated with a degree of saturation of
around 98.5% ± 1%). The degree of saturation was calcu-
lated from the measured unit weight of the test bed at a
water content of 44% and speciﬁc gravity of the clay (by
applying the soil-phase relationship). Soil with this range
in the degree of saturation can be treated as near saturated
soil without inﬂuencing the test results for the soft clay bed.
The dry clay was mixed with water at the required percent-
age (by weight) and kept in an airtight condition for two
weeks to achieve a uniform water content. The required
weight of the clay for each layer was calculated based on
the saturated unit weight of 17.2 kN/m3. For each layer,
the required amount of soil to achieve the desired saturated
density was placed in the test tank. The clay was com-
pacted inside the tank using a rammer with the dimensions
of 150 mm  150 mm. The soil samples were collected from
various positions to check the moisture content. Uncon-
ﬁned compressive strength (UCS) tests were also conducted
on the collected samples from diﬀerent layers for cross
checking. In the present study, the diﬀerence in moisture
content of the clayey soil between the model test condition
and the liquid limit was 7% (=51%  44%). The average
UCS value at a moisture content of 44% was found to be
20 kPa, i.e., the undrained cohesion (cu) was 10 kPa.
Table 3
Selected
parameters
for
sand
and
stone
column
(crushed
stone
aggregates).
Parameter
Validation
(Oh et al., 2007)
Model test and
numerical study
Stone
column
Embankment
Stone column
Cohesion in kPa
0a
0a
0
Internal angle of friction
45a
32a
45
Poisson’s ratio
0.3b
0.3b
0.3
Vertical permeability (kv)
in m/s
104a
–
104
Height in m
16
4
–
Spacing to diameter ratio
(S/dc)
3
–
–
a Assumed for the present study.
b Bowles (1997).
Table 4
Properties of sand with ﬁnes contents.
Fines (%)
c (kPa)
/ ()
m
K
n
0
0
32
0.30
133.55
0.45
10
22.6
24
0.36
106.46
0.52
20
33.2
20
0.39
82.92
0.55
40
49.4
12
0.44
53.12
0.70
50
51.0
10
0.45
47.07
0.74
c = cohesion,
/ = internal
angle
of
friction,
m = Poisson’s
ratio,
K = modulus number, n = exponent.
620
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
Similar to the present study, Das et al. (1993), Shin et al.
(1993) and Dash and Bora (2013) also applied uniform
compaction on soft clay layers with a cu value of 7.0 kPa
(or less) and a water content close to the liquid limit (the
diﬀerence in the water content of the clay at the liquid limit
and the model test is less than 8%). The compaction energy
may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent studies, but compaction was
applied. The method used to prepare the soft clay bed in
the present study is also similar to that in a number of pre-
vious studies (Das et al., 1993; Shin et al., 1993; Ambily
and Gandhi, 2007; Deb et al., 2011; Dash and Bora,
2013; Saha Roy and Deb, 2017a, b, 2018, 2019).
After completing the clay bed, hand augers were used to
make boreholes for the stone columns. Each borehole was
ﬁlled with crushed stone aggregates and compacted in three
layers of 200 mm each. In each layer, the stone aggregates
were compacted six times with a hammer, 2 kg in weight,
falling from a height of 300 mm to form a stone column.
The stone columns were constructed by keeping the
weight-volume relationship consistent to maintain the
shape, i.e., the required weight of the stone for each layer
was calculated based on the known volume and the unit
weight of 18 kN/m3. A cross check was also made after
the completion of the each test while emptying the lower
tank. All nine stone columns were formed and the pressure
transducers were placed at the ground level, as shown in
Fig. 1. Four pressure transducers were used in the experi-
mental set up. Two transducers were placed on two stone
columns (C1 and C2) and two more transducers were
placed in the soft soil (S1 and S2), as shown in Fig. 2c.
The measurements obtained from C2 were not included
in the results due to the possible interaction between the
soft soil and the test tank wall (as it was placed close to
the wall), although lubricant was applied on the tank wall
before starting each experiment. On the other hand, the
results obtained from S1 and S2 were almost the same.
Therefore, the vertical stress obtained from C1 and S1
has been presented in the results. The pressure transducers
were 50 mm in diameter and 10 mm in thickness. Clayton
and Bica (1993) suggested that the ﬂexibility ratio (F)
should be less than 0.25 for a stress measurement having
no eﬀect of stiﬀness of the pressure transducers. Stiﬀness
factor (F) is expressed as F = (Esoil  R3)/(Ecell  t3), where
Esoil and Ecell are the moduli of elasticity of the soil and the
diaphragm material of the pressure transducers, respec-
tively. R and t are the radius and the thickness of the
diaphragms, respectively. The pressure transducers used
in the present study have diaphragms made of steel
(Ecell = 200 GPa) with a radius of 15 mm and a thickness
of 1.5 mm. Considering the maximum modulus of elasticity
of soil or stone as 40 MPa, the stiﬀness factor is 0.2. There-
fore, the stress measurements are not expected to be
Fig. 2. Steps of model laboratory tests: (a) preparation of clay bed, (b) formation of stone column, (c) instrumentation with stress transducer and (d)
placing of c-/ soil above clay bed.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
621
aﬀected by the stiﬀness of the pressure transducers. The
upper half of the tank was attached to the lower half for
sand ﬁlling after instrumentation.
The sand was thoroughly mixed with 10% water in the
case of the experiment for no ﬁnes content (otherwise
10% water along with the required quantity of clay). The
sand was placed inside the tank with a hopper in 200-mm
layers to achieve the target density. For all the model tests,
the bulk unit weight of the soil was kept at 16 kN/m3. For
each layer, the required amount of sand (with or without a
ﬁnes content) to achieve the desired unit weight was placed
in the upper half of the tank and compacted. The com-
paction was done by tamping with a light wooden block
(250 gm) having dimensions of 100  100 mm. The com-
paction eﬀort was diﬀerent for each sample with diﬀerent
ﬁnes contents. The required compaction eﬀort for each
sample to achieve the desired unit weight was also decided
based on trial tests. Very little eﬀort was applied to
compact the sand, which is not expected to aﬀect the soft
soil. A similar weight-volume method has also been used
by various researchers to prepare homogeneous sand beds
(Shin and Das, 2000; Lavasan and Ghazavi, 2012; Abu-
Farsakh et al., 2013) and sand beds over soft clay (Deb
et al., 2011; Debnath and Dey, 2017, Saha Roy and Deb,
2017a, b, 2018, 2019). However, the required compaction
energy was diﬀerent according to the density of the sand
bed of the respective studies. The vertical stress measure-
ment was done through the computerized data logger
system after the completion of the embankment. The rate
of change in the vertical stress was initially high and
reached a steady state after a certain period of time. The
stress recording was stopped once the rate of change in ver-
tical stress became very low. Drainage was allowed only
from the top surface of the stone column-improved clay
bed, i.e., at the clay-embankment level. Each experiment
was continued for a minimum duration of three days and
a maximum duration of ﬁve days. An observation was
made on the rate of change in stress during the model
experiments to decide when to stop the experiment. The
experiment was stopped when the rate of change in stress
was observed to be insigniﬁcant for a long duration. This
was used as an indication of the completion of the major
part of the soft soil consolidation. The experimental results
were used to validate the numerical model for a reasonable
time period; completing the consolidation was not the goal.
In the parametric study using the numerical model, com-
plete consolidation was achieved from the observations
on the changes in settlement and pore pressure. The numer-
ical modeling was stopped when no further changes in
settlement or pore pressure were observed after a long
duration. After the completion of the test, the sand and
the clay were removed from the tank. Fig. 2 shows the dif-
ferent steps involved in the laboratory model experiments.
Each test was repeated to ensure the reproducibility. It was
observed that the test results are reproducible with a
maximum variation of ±6%.
3. Numerical model
The numerical analysis is carried out using ﬁnite
diﬀerence software package FLAC3D. FLAC3D is specially
developed to analyze problems related to geotechnical
and geological engineering. In the present study, models
with appropriate boundary conditions are developed to
show the response of stone column-improved soft soil sub-
jected to c-/ embankment loading. The properties of the
embankment soil vary depending on the ﬁnes content pre-
sent in the embankment material. Both undrained and
drained analyses are performed for saturated soft soil in
the numerical simulation under the ‘conﬁg ﬂuid’ mode
(Itasca, 2009). However, only an undrained analysis was
performed for the embankment soil. In the present study,
the construction time of the embankment is not taken into
account. It has been observed that the ﬁnal load and the
time required to attain the ﬁnal settlement are the same
whether stage construction is considered or not (Zhu and
Yin, 2004; Xie et al., 2009). However, the initial settlement
rate may change due to the consideration of the construc-
tion loading. Studies have been done by various researchers
with and without giving consideration to the construction
process in the analysis (Han et al., 2007; Yoo, 2010; Ng
and Tan, 2015). Thus, before starting the drained analysis
in the stone column-improved ground, equilibrium is
achieved under the undrained condition immediately after
the application of gravity loading in the form of the
embankment. In the drained analysis, the soft soil is
subjected to three-dimensional consolidations, whereas
only vertical drainage is allowed in the stone columns. A
coupled ﬂuid-mechanical analysis is done to simulate the
consolidation process. In the present study, the pore ﬂuid
ﬂow is modeled both in horizontal and vertical directions
during consolidation of the soft soil. In the case of soft soil,
it is assumed that the permeability in both horizontal and
vertical directions (x and y directions) is equal. However,
the permeability of the soft soil in the horizontal direction
is considered to be three times that in the vertical direction,
as suggested by Ng and Tan (2015). An anisotropic ﬂuid
ﬂow condition is assigned to simulate diﬀerent permeabili-
ties in diﬀerent directions. Thus, the numerical model is
able to simulate the time-dependent responses along with
the changes due to the change in the ﬁnes content of the
embankment soil.
In the present study, the stone columns are arranged in a
square pattern. It is assumed that the pore water ﬂow to
each stone column occurs from a square cross-sectional
area. The area of the square cross section is called the inﬂu-
ence zone of the stone column; it is positioned at the center
of the inﬂuence zone. The vertical walls of each inﬂuence
zone are assumed to be impervious. Due to symmetry, only
a quarter of the inﬂuence zone is modeled in the numerical
analysis. All the models are developed with radial brick ele-
ments (as shown in Fig. 3). At ﬁrst, the geometry of the
model is generated up to the ground level by maintaining
622
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
the radius of the circular zone equal to the radius of the
stone column. The zones of the soft soil and the stone col-
umns are deﬁned at this stage with proper dimensions and
material properties. The initial equilibrium and stress states
are reached before the generation of the embankment
geometry. In the next stage, the embankment geometry is
generated and appropriate constitutive model and proper-
ties are assigned. The boundary conditions are deﬁned after
each stage of geometry generation. On all the vertical
planes of the model, the displacement in the orthogonal
direction is restricted to zero. All the points are assumed
to be ﬁxed in any direction at the bottom of the model as
the stone columns are of the end-bearing type. The bound-
ary conditions are selected appropriately, such that the
quarter symmetry model becomes a part of the soft soil
improved by the group of stone columns. Thus, the eﬀect
of arching is taken into consideration in the numerical
model developed in the present study. The initial pore pres-
sure is deﬁned as zero at the ground level (i.e., at the inter-
face between the stone column-improved ground and the
embankment) as drainage is allowed at the interface
between the base of the embankment and the stone
column-improved ground. Drainage is also allowed at the
interface between the stone columns and the soft soil.
The numerical model is conﬁgured for ﬂuid ﬂow only in
the stone columns and the soft soil. The embankment is
not conﬁgured for ﬂuid ﬂow as the embankment is not
expected to be aﬀected by the soft soil moisture, except
for a small thickness near the ground-embankment inter-
face. Thus, it is assumed that free drainage will occur at
the embankment-improved ground interface and that the
embankment soil will not aﬀect the drainage as, in practice,
a small layer of sand without a ﬁnes content may be used
for the drainage layer between the embankment and the
improved ground. However, this layer is not considered
in the present model as it will not signiﬁcantly aﬀect the
outcome of the present study. In the present study, the
water table position is considered at the embankment-
improved ground interface. Thus, only the ﬂuid ﬂow of
the improved ground is considered. Under this condition,
the permeability of the embankment has a negligible eﬀect
on the consolidation of the improved ground. However,
ﬂuid ﬂow in the embankment may also occur due to rain-
fall inﬁltration. However, this is not considered in the pre-
sent study and may be thought of as a limitation of the
present study. No interface element is used between the soft
soil and the stone columns as no signiﬁcant shearing occurs
in that zone (Ambily and Gandhi, 2007). A convergence
study is done for all the models by changing the number
of zones in diﬀerent directions. The smear eﬀect of the
stone columns is not considered in order to keep the anal-
ysis simple.
FALC3D provides many advanced constitutive models,
which can be assigned to model diﬀerent materials. The
Modiﬁed Cam-Clay (MCC) model is considered for the
soft soil and the Mohr-Coulomb (MC) model is considered
for the granular materials (crushed stone and sand with
ﬁnes) as the constitutive models. The input parameters
for the MCC model are determined from consolidated
drained (CD) triaxial tests (for slope (M) of the critical
state line in the p0 - q space) and from the sv-lnp0 curve plot-
ted using the isotropic consolidation test data conducted in
a triaxial test apparatus with loading-unloading-reloading
cycles (where sv is the speciﬁc volume and p0 is the normal
consolidation pressure). The curves in the sv-lnp0 space can
be expressed by the following equations:
sv ¼ svk  kln p
p1
ð1Þ
sv ¼ svj  jln p
p1
ð2Þ
where svk and svj are the speciﬁc volumes at the reference
pressure (p1) on the normal consolidation line and the elas-
tic swelling line, respectively. Eqs. (1) and (2) represent the
normal consolidation line and the elastic swelling line,
respectively. The properties required to deﬁne the MC
models are obtained from the triaxial tests.
3.1. Coupled ﬂuid-mechanical analysis
The present numerical study is performed on a stone
column-improved soft soil where three-dimensional consol-
idation is predominant. Three-dimensional consolidation
in FLAC3D is governed by Biot’s theory. In FLAC3D, con-
solidation or a drained analysis can be simulated with two
Fig. 3. Geometry and boundary conditions of model simulated in
FLAC3D for numerical analysis: (a) model with embankment, (b) model
without embankment and (c) top view of model.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
623
methods, either a coupled analysis or an uncoupled analy-
sis. In a coupled ﬂuid-mechanical analysis, the excess pore
water pressure dissipates either by means of a horizontal
pore ﬂuid ﬂow from the soft soil into the stone column
or by a vertical ﬂuid ﬂow. Volumetric changes in the soft
soil take place simultaneously; this changes the stress and
displacement with time. The occurrence of the ﬂuid ﬂow
followed by volumetric changes in the soft soil is a contin-
uous process in the coupled analysis until it reaches the pre-
deﬁned time. In the total coupled analysis, the ﬂuid ﬂow is
kept ‘on’ along with the ‘mechanical cycle’ (volumetric
changes). The two processes continue simultaneously
depending on the given number of steps deﬁned for each
process in each cycle (100 steps for the ﬂuid ﬂow and 10
steps for the mechanical cycle are considered in the present
study) and for a predeﬁned limit of unbalanced force (105
in the present study). The numbers of steps for the ﬂuid
ﬂow and the mechanical cycle are ﬁxed by trials following
the FLAC3D manual guidelines (Itasca, 2009). After per-
forming the given number of ﬂuid ﬂow steps, the mechan-
ical cycles are run for the given number of steps or until the
unbalanced force limit is reached, whichever happens
sooner. The time step is explicitly determined by the
FLAC3D depending on the geometry of the model. On
the other hand, in the uncoupled analysis, the mechanical
cycle is kept ‘oﬀ’ when the ﬂuid ﬂow steps are performed
and the ﬂuid ﬂow is kept ‘oﬀ’ when the mechanical cycles
are running. In the present study, a coupled analysis is per-
formed as the expected time for the ﬁnal consolidation is
long and the time required to reach the ultimate settlement
is unknown. In each analysis, the time limit for the drained
analysis is kept longer and the analysis is interrupted once
it reaches the ultimate settlement (which is decided by
observing the time-settlement plot).
4. Validation of numerical model with experimental data
The developed numerical models are validated with the
laboratory model test data. The elastic modulus of the sand
with ﬁnes and stone aggregates is scaled with respect to the
average conﬁning pressure for the numerical models used
in the comparative study. The average conﬁning pressure
is calculated based on the coeﬃcient of earth pressure at
rest (K0 = 1 – sin /0). The scaled elastic modulus is calcu-
lated based on the elastic modulus obtained from the triax-
ial tests for three diﬀerent conﬁning pressures (r3) and
using the correlation proposed by Janbu (1963) as follows:
Ei ¼ Kpa
r3
pa

n
ð3Þ
where Ei is the elastic modulus at any conﬁning pressure, pa
is the atmospheric pressure (101.325 kPa), K is the modulus
number and n is the exponent. In the present study, the
modulus number (K) and exponent (n) are obtained as
1471.06 and 1.55, respectively, for the stone aggregates.
The same parameters for the sand (with or without ﬁnes)
are summarized in Table 4. The elastic modulus of the
embankment soil was measured from the initial straight
portion of the stress-strain curve obtained from triaxial
tests. Duncan and Chang (1970) demonstrated from
reported cases in literature that the relationship shown in
Eq. (3) is valid for a wide range of soil, for example, from
rockﬁll material to silt. Fig. 4 shows a comparison of the
vertical stress (termed as contact stress) acting on stone col-
umns and soft soil at the interface between a stone column-
improved ground and an embankment obtained from the
experimental and numerical studies for zero and 10% ﬁnes
content in the embankment soil. The contact stress does
not start from zero as the measurement of contact stress
was started after the completion of the embankment con-
struction. It is also observed that after a certain time, the
change in contact stress with time becomes insigniﬁcant.
The contact stress on the soft soil is not the same through-
out the embankment loading. However, the change in con-
tact stress on the soft soil is small compared to the change
in contact stress on the stone columns. It is observed in
Fig. 4 that the rate of change in contact stress is very high
on the stone columns from the very beginning compared to
the soft soil due to the arching. However, the steady state
condition is reached at the same time on the soft soil and
the stone columns. This arching eﬀect is reduced due to
the increase in the ﬁnes content which causes the increase
in contact stress on the soft soil and the decrease in contact
stress on the stone columns. Once again, the reduction of
contact stress on the stone columns due to the addition
of ﬁnes is more compared to the increase in contact stress
on the soft soil. A good agreement is observed between
the contact stresses obtained from the experimental and
the numerical models with a maximum variation of 10%.
All the input parameters used in the constitutive models
are tabulated in Tables 3–5.
5. Comparison with case study
The deformation was very small in the model experi-
ment due to the small thickness of both the clay layer
Fig. 4. Comparison of numerical results with laboratory model test
results.
624
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
and the embankment loading compared to that of the pro-
totype model. Adequate technology was not available to
measure such small deformation at the embankment-soft
soil interface without aﬀecting the ground response. Even
the selected embankment height was greater than the criti-
cal height (the height at which no diﬀerential settlement is
observed on the embankment surface or the height of the
equal settlement plane) and no diﬀerential settlement was
observed on the embankment surface. Thus, the vertical
settlement obtained from the numerical model is also com-
pared with a case study of a trial embankment constructed
on estuarine clay in South-east Queensland, Australia (Oh
et al., 2007). The test embankment was constructed over a
ground of three segments with diﬀerent conditions. Among
the three segments, one segment was a natural deposit of
soft soil and the other two segments were improved with
stone columns with the spacing of 2 m and 3 m. The
required parameters (k and j) for the soft soil (MCC
model) were calculated from the oedometer test data pro-
vided for diﬀerent depths and boreholes using the following
correlations (Wood, 1990; Bowles, 1997):
k ¼ Cc=ln10
ð4Þ
j ¼ Cs=ln10
ð5Þ
where k and j are the slope of the normal consolidation
line and the slope of the elastic swelling line, respectively.
Cc and Cs are the compression index and the swelling index
of the soft soil, respectively. Tables 3 and 5 present the
input parameters used for the numerical simulation of the
untreated and treated (stone columns with the 3-m spacing)
segments of the embankment. Fig. 5 shows a comparison
between the rates of settlement of the untreated and the
stone column-treated (with the 3-m spacing) segments mea-
sured in the ﬁeld and obtained from the numerical model.
The results obtained from the present numerical model
show a good agreement with the results obtained from
the ﬁeld measurements and the laboratory model tests.
6. Results and discussion
Parametric studies are conducted with the validated
numerical model with prototype dimensions to show the
eﬀect of the ﬁnes content, the modular ratio, the spacing
to diameter ratio and the height of the embankment on
the arching ratio, the stress concentration ratio, the vertical
and horizontal displacements, the diﬀerential settlement
and the pore pressure. The material properties used for
the prototype model are presented in Tables 2–5. In the
present study, the model tests are conducted for 0% and
10% ﬁnes contents. However, the parametric studies are
conducted for 0%, 20%, 40% and 50% ﬁnes contents based
on the obtained model parameters. The experimental stud-
ies were carried out for a maximum ﬁnes content of 10% in
embankment soil as diﬃculties were involved in sampling
embankment soil with a higher ﬁnes content (FC). The
studies involved uncertainty over the homogeneity of a
large quantity of embankment soil with higher ﬁnes con-
tents. Therefore, further studies with higher ﬁnes contents
are conducted through numerical models.
6.1. Arching ratio
In the stone column-improved soft soil, the diﬀerence in
stiﬀness between the stone column and the soft soil inﬂu-
ences the vertical stress distribution from the embankment
to the sub-soil. The shear strength properties of the
embankment soil also play an important role in this regard.
It is often observed that due to soil arching, the vertical
stress acting on the soft soil in a stone column-supported
embankment is lower than the gravity load applied by
the self-weight of the embankment at that point. The
Table 5
Selected parameters of soft soil used in numerical analysis.
Parameter
Validation
(Oh et al., 2007)
Comparison and
parametric study
Porosity (g)
0.50b
0.50
Poisson’s ratio (m0)
0.30c
0.30
Frictional constant, M
0.80b
0.80
Slope of normal
consolidation line, k
0.20
0.18
Slope of elastic swelling
line, j
0.04
0.04
Reference pressure (p1)
in kPa
1.0
1.0
Speciﬁc volume at
reference pressure (sv)
2.5b
2.5
Pre-consolidation
pressure (pc) in kPa
100
100
Horizontal permeability
(kh) in m/s
1.6  109 a
3  1012
Vertical permeability (kv)
in m/s
0.5  109
1012
Thickness of soft soil
(Hc) in m
16
6
a After Indraratna et al. (2013).
b Assumed for the present study.
c Bowles (1997).
Fig. 5. Comparison of numerical results with case study for rate of
settlement.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
625
arching is expressed in terms of an arching ratio (ratio of
the vertical stress acting on the soft soil to the gravity load
or the self-weight of the embankment including the sur-
charge). Thus, the value of the arching ratio varies from
0 to 1. A value of zero for the arching ratio means full arch-
ing and a value of 1 means no arching. Fig. 6 shows the
eﬀect of the ﬁnes content in the embankment material on
the arching ratio for spacing to diameter ratios (S/dc) of
two, three and four. It is observed that the arching ratio
increases with the increase in ﬁnes content which means a
reduction in the arching eﬀect. The arching ratio increases
by 14.75% due to the increase in the ﬁnes content from zero
to 50% at the modular ratio of 40 with a non-dimensional
height of the embankment (He/dc) of 5.33. It is also
observed that with the increase in the spacing to diameter
ratio (S/dc), the arching ratio also increases. The arching
ratio increases by 46.9% due to the increase in the spacing
to diameter ratio (S/dc) from two to four at the modular
ratio of 40 with a non-dimensional height of the embank-
ment (He/dc) of 5.33 for a 20% ﬁnes content. It is also
observed that no arching takes place for higher spacing
to diameter ratios when the amount of ﬁnes increases in
the embankment soil.
6.2. Stress concentration ratio (SCR)
Arching in embankment soil transfers the vertical stress
from the lower stiﬀness zone (soft soil) to the higher stiﬀ-
ness zone (stone column) which causes a higher concentra-
tion of stress on the stone column. The stress concentration
is quantiﬁed as the stress concentration ratio (SCR) which
is an important factor in the design of stone columns. The
available studies on stone column-supported embankments
have mainly been conducted to show the eﬀect of the
embankment height, the spacing to diameter ratio and
the modular ratio (ratio of elastic modulus of stone aggre-
gates to soft soil, Ec/Es) on the stress concentration ratio.
However, Fig. 7 shows the change in the maximum stress
concentration ratio with the ﬁnes content present in the
embankment soil at diﬀerent modular ratios for the spacing
to diameter ratio (S/dc) of two and the non-dimensional
height of the embankment (He/dc) of 5.33. It is observed
that the maximum stress concentration ratio decreases with
an increase in the ﬁnes content. An increase in the ﬁnes
content in the embankment soil decreases the shear modu-
lus of the soil (as shown in Table 4). Soil arching in the
Fig. 6. Eﬀect of ﬁnes content in embankment soil on arching ratio for (a)
S/dc = 2, (b) S/dc = 3 and (c) S/dc = 4.
Fig. 7. Eﬀect of ﬁnes content in embankment soil on maximum stress
concentration ratio.
626
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
embankment soil also decreases with the reduction in shear
modulus which causes a lower stress concentration ratio.
The maximum stress concentration ratio decreases by
21.6% for an increase in ﬁnes content between zero and
50% at the modular ratio of 40 and the spacing to diameter
ratio of two.
Fig. 8 shows the variation in the stress concentration
ratio with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes contents at the spacing
to diameter ratio (S/dc) of three, the modular ratio of 40
and the non-dimensional height of the embankment (He/
dc) of 5.33. It is observed that the stress concentration ratio
initially increases with time and then gradually becomes
steady. The steady state stress concentration ratio is mar-
ginally lower than the maximum stress concentration ratio.
The decrease in the stress concentration ratio after reaching
the peak indicates a loss in maximum arching after a cer-
tain time period. Studies on pile-supported embankments
(van Eekelen et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2008) and trapdoor
experiments (Iglesia et al., 2011) have also revealed similar
ﬁndings.
The
maximum
stress
concentration
ratio
decreases with the increase in the ﬁnes content, but the
peak is attained at a faster rate. It is also observed that
the diﬀerence between the maximum and the steady state
stress concentration ratio increases with the increase in
the ﬁnes content.
6.3. Displacement
Fig. 9 shows the vertical displacement of the soft soil
with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes contents at the spacing to diam-
eter ratio of three, the modular ratio of 40 and the non-
dimensional embankment height of 5.33. It is observed that
the vertical displacement of the soft soil increases with the
increase in the ﬁnes content and that the change is not sig-
niﬁcant beyond the ﬁnes content of 20%. In addition, the
time required for the ﬁnal settlement is also extended with
the increase in the ﬁnes content. Increases in the ﬁnes con-
tent cause a reduction in the stress concentration ratio
which ensures more vertical stress on the soft soil as
compared to the cases of zero or lower ﬁnes contents.
Therefore, more vertical displacement is experienced by
the soft soil. Due to the higher vertical displacement, more
time is required for consolidation and for attaining the ﬁnal
settlement of the soft soil. In the case of a zero ﬁnes con-
tent, the ﬁnal vertical displacement is attained in almost
40 days, whereas it takes nearly 60 days for the ﬁnal verti-
cal displacement in the case of the embankment soil having
a ﬁnes content of 20% or more. The increase in the ﬁnal
vertical displacement is 5.3% with the increase in the ﬁnes
content from zero to 20%, whereas it is only 1.5% when
the ﬁnes content increases from 20% to 50%.
In the present study, it is assumed that the horizontal
displacement is symmetric due to the symmetric loading.
The symmetry quarter model represents only a quarter of
the inﬂuence zone (square in the present study) of the stone
column. Therefore, no horizontal displacement is expected
at its vertical boundaries. However, horizontal displace-
ment at the periphery of the stone column is observed
due to the bulging of stone columns under the action of
vertical load exerted by the embankment, while soft soil
undergoes consolidation. Fig. 10 shows the ﬁnal horizontal
displacement of the stone column for diﬀerent ﬁnes con-
tents, whereas Fig. 11 shows the time-dependent change
in the horizontal displacement of the stone column for
20% (Fig. 11(a)) and 40% (Fig. 11(b)) ﬁnes contents present
in the embankment soil at the spacing to diameter ratio of
three, the modular ratio of 40 and the non-dimensional
embankment height of 5.33. It is observed that the quantity
of the ﬁnes present in the embankment soil causes changes
in the amount of horizontal displacement sustained by the
stone column at the top and the point of maximum hori-
zontal displacement in the stone column. The stone column
experiences higher horizontal displacement at the top with
the increase in the ﬁnes content. This is due to the fact that
the
frictional
resistance
at
the
embankment-ground
interface decreases due to the increase in the ﬁnes content
which allows for more lateral deformation at the top of
the stone column. The point of occurrence of the maximum
Fig. 8. Change in stress concentration ratio with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes
contents in embankment soil.
Fig. 9. Change in vertical displacement with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes
contents in embankment soil.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
627
horizontal displacement moves in the downward direction
with the increase in the ﬁnes content in the embankment
material. However, the maximum horizontal deformation
and the time required to attain that is almost the same
for all the cases. The maximum horizontal deformation
occurs at a depth 2.5 times the diameter of the stone col-
umn from the top when there is no ﬁnes content present
in the embankment soil, but it occurs at a depth four times
the diameter of the stone column when the amount of ﬁnes
content is 40% or more. An increase in the ﬁnes content
increases the vertical stress on the soil and reduces the ver-
tical stress on the stone column at the ground level which
increases the passive pressure on the stone column. Thus,
the point of maximum horizontal displacement shifts in
the downward direction as the amount of ﬁnes increases
in the embankment material. It is also observed that most
of the ﬁnal horizontal displacement (95% or more) occurs
almost in 50% of the time required to attain the ﬁnal hor-
izontal settlement.
6.4. Diﬀerential settlement
Fig. 12 shows the change in the diﬀerential settlement
(diﬀerence in vertical settlement between the stone column
and
the
soft
soil)
with
time
at
the
ground
level
(embankment-ground interface) for diﬀerent percentages
of ﬁnes contents at the spacing to diameter ratio of three,
the modular ratio of 40 and the non-dimensional embank-
ment height of 5.33. It is observed that the diﬀerential set-
tlement initially increases with time and then gradually
becomes constant. It increases with an increase in the quan-
tity of the ﬁnes in the embankment soil. It is also observed
that the diﬀerential settlement becomes constant within the
Fig. 10. Eﬀect of ﬁnes content in embankment soil on horizontal
displacement of stone column.
Fig. 11. Change in horizontal displacement with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes contents in embankment soil: (a) 20% ﬁnes content and (b) 40% ﬁnes content.
628
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
short time period of 10–15 days. The time required to
attain the constant diﬀerential settlement increases margin-
ally with the increase in the ﬁnes content. In the case of a
ﬁnes content of zero, the diﬀerential settlement becomes
constant after 10 days, but it will take 15 days to become
constant if the ﬁnes content is 50%. Thus, the vertical dis-
placement takes more time to become stable, but the diﬀer-
ential settlement reaches a constant value within a much
shorter period.
Similar to that at the ground level, the diﬀerential settle-
ment at the top or the surface of the embankment is also
important. Fig. 13 shows the non-dimensional diﬀerential
settlement (wc/ws, where wc and ws are the embankment
surface settlement above the stone column and in between
the two stone columns, respectively) as a function of the
modular ratio and the non-dimensional embankment
height (He/S0), where S0 = S  dc and dc is the diameter
of the stone column. In the ﬁgure, the values are plotted
for diﬀerent spacing to diameter ratios along with the var-
ious modular ratios. In all the cases, a critical height of the
embankment is observed beyond which no diﬀerential set-
tlement occurs at the top of the embankment. In each ﬁg-
ure (Fig. 13(a)–(d)), the range in critical embankment
height is marked for particular ﬁnes contents. It is observed
that the critical height is 1.4–2.0 times the clear spacing
between the stone columns when no ﬁnes are present in
the embankment soil. However, a higher range (1.8–2.6)
is observed due to the presence of ﬁnes in the embankment
soil. Thus, no diﬀerential settlement can be observed on the
embankment surface under any modular ratio and spacing
to diameter ratio if the embankment height is more than 2
times the clear spacing between the stone columns for
embankment soil without any ﬁnes. And the value is
increased to 2.6 times the clear spacing when ﬁnes are
present in the embankment soil.
Surcharge is not considered in the present study,
but surcharge has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the stress
Fig. 12. Change in diﬀerential settlement with time for diﬀerent ﬁnes
contents in embankment soil at ground level.
Fig. 13. Change in diﬀerential settlement with time at embankment surface: (a) 0% ﬁnes content, (b) 20% ﬁnes content, (c) 40% ﬁnes content and (d) 50%
ﬁnes content.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
629
concentration ratio (SCR) when the surcharge is applied on
the embankment where the height of embankment is more
than the critical height. However, the eﬀect of the sur-
charge is expected to be more if it is applied on an embank-
ment whose height is less than the critical height. However,
the maximum stress concentration ratio will follow the
same trend corresponding to the equivalent height of the
embankment.
In
such
cases,
the
equivalent
height
(corresponding to the surcharge) can be added to the
embankment height to determine the maximum stress con-
centration ratio (Das and Deb, 2018). It is also expected
that full arching is accrued or arching is fully mobilized
Fig. 14. Pore pressure at diﬀerent times for (a) 0% ﬁnes content and (b) 40% ﬁnes content in the embankment soil.
630
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
when the height of the embankment is more than the crit-
ical height.
6.5. Pore water pressure
Fig. 14 shows the pore water pressure contour of stone
column-improved soil at diﬀerent time periods for a spac-
ing to diameter ratio of three, a modular ratio of 40 and
a non-dimensional embankment height of 5.33 with zero
(Fig. 14(a)) and 40% (Fig. 14(b)) ﬁnes contents. After the
same time period, higher pore pressure is observed for
the 40% ﬁnes which indicates the requirement of a longer
time period to attain the ﬁnal settlement of the soil. How-
ever, at the steady state condition (120 days), both cases
show almost the same pore pressure distribution along
the depth of the stone column-improved soil as the ﬁnal
settlement is achieved within 40 days and 60 days when
zero and 20% (or more) ﬁnes, respectively, are present in
the embankment soil.
7. Conclusions
The present study has shown that the presence of a ﬁnes
content in embankment soil causes signiﬁcant changes in
the response of stone column-supported embankments. It
is observed that the arching ratio increases and the stress
concentration ratio decreases with the increase in the ﬁnes
content in the embankment soil. Thus, a reduction in soil
arching increases the stress, the vertical displacement and
the pore pressure in the soft soil. The stress concentration
ratio initially increases with time and gradually becomes
steady after reaching a peak value. The peak is attained
at a faster rate with an increase in the ﬁnes content. The
vertical displacement of the soft soil does not change signif-
icantly above a ﬁnes content of 20%. The time required for
the ﬁnal settlement is also extended with the increase in the
ﬁnes content in the embankment material. In the case of a
ﬁnes content of zero, the ﬁnal vertical displacement is
attained in almost 40 days, whereas it takes nearly 60 days
when the embankment soil has a ﬁnes content of 20% or
more. It is also observed that the lateral displacement of
the stone columns increases at the top with an increase in
the ﬁnes content and the point of the maximum lateral dis-
placement shifts in the downward direction. However, the
maximum lateral displacement remains almost the same
due to the change in the ﬁnes content. The maximum hor-
izontal displacement occurs at a depth 2.5 times the diam-
eter of each stone column from the top when there is no
ﬁnes content present in the embankment soil, but it occurs
at a depth 4 times the diameter of the stone column when
the ﬁnes content is 40% or more. The diﬀerential settlement
increases at the ground level as well as at the embankment
top with the increase in the quantity of ﬁnes in the embank-
ment soil. The time required to attain the constant diﬀeren-
tial settlement increases marginally with an increase in the
ﬁnes content in the embankment soil. The vertical displace-
ment takes more time to become stable as compared to the
diﬀerential settlement. No diﬀerential settlement can be
observed on the embankment surface if the embankment
height is more than 2 times the clear spacing between the
stone columns for the embankment soil without any ﬁnes
and the value increases to 2.6 when ﬁnes are present in
the embankment soil. The presence of a ﬁnes content
causes an increase in the pore pressure which increases
the time required for ﬁnal consolidation. Therefore, it is
highly recommended to keep the ﬁnes content in the
embankment soil as low as possible. However, if it is not
possible to avoid the ﬁnes content in the embankment
material, the required modiﬁcation in the design should
be made prior to the construction.
Acknowledgements
The authors sincerely appreciate the ﬁnancial support
provided by SERB, Department of Science and Technol-
ogy, Government of India for this research work.
References
Abu-Farsakh, M., Chen, Q., Sharma, R., 2013. An experimental
evaluation of the behavior of footings on geosynthetic-reinforced
sand. Soils Found. 53 (2), 335–348.
Ambily, A.P., Gandhi, S.R., 2007. Behavior of stone column based on
experimental and FEM analysis. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng.
(ASCE) 133 (4), 405–415.
Basack, S., Indraratna, B., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., 2016. Modeling the
performance of stone column–reinforced soft ground under static and
cyclic loads. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. (ASCE) 142 (3). https://doi.
org/10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.0001378.
Basack, S., Indraratna, B., Rujikiatkamjorn, C., Siahaan, F., 2017.
Modeling the stone column behavior in soft ground with special
emphasis on lateral deformation. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng.
(ASCE)
143
(6).
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-
5606.0001652.
Bhattacharya, P., Kumar, J., 2017. Bearing capacity of foundations on
soft clays with granular column and trench. Soils Found. 57 (3), 488–
495.
BIS (Bureau of Indian Standards), 1970. Classiﬁcation and identiﬁcation
of soil for general engineering purposes. IS: 1498, New Delhi, India.
Borges, J.L., Domingues, T.S., Cardoso, A.S., 2009. Embankments on
soft soil reinforced with stone columns: numerical analysis and
proposal of a new design method. Geotech. Geol. Eng. 27 (6), 667–679.
Borges, J.L., Gonc¸alves, M.S., 2016. Jet-grout column-reinforced soft soils
incorporating
multilayer
geosynthetic-reinforced
platforms.
Soils
Found. 56 (1), 57–72.
Bowles, J.E., 1997. Foundation analysis and design, Fifth Ed. McGraw-
Hill, Singapore.
Chen, Y.M., Cao, W.P., Chen, R.P., 2008. An experimental investigation
of soil arching within basal reinforced and unreinforced piled
embankments. Geotextiles Geomembr. 26 (2), 164–174.
Chowdhury, S.S., Deb, K., Sengupta, A., 2016. Eﬀect of ﬁnes on behavior
of braced excavation in sand: experimental and numerical Study. Int.
J. Geomech. (ASCE) 16 (1). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-
5622.0000487.
Clayton, C.R.I., Bica, A.V.D., 1993. The design of diaphragm type
boundary total stress cells. Ge´otechnique 43 (4), 523–535.
Das, A.K., Deb, K., 2014. Modeling of uniformly loaded circular raft
resting on stone column-improved ground. Soils Found. 54 (6), 1212–
1224.
Das, A.K., Deb, K., 2017a. Response of cylindrical storage tank
foundation resting on tensionless stone column-improved soil. Int. J.
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
631
Geomech. (ASCE) 17 (1). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-
5622.0000697.
Das, A.K., Deb, K., 2017b. Modeling of stone column-supported
embankment under axi-symmetric condition. Geotech. Geol. Eng. 35
(2), 707–730.
Das, A.K., Deb, K., 2018. Experimental and 3D numerical study on time-
dependent behavior of stone column-supported embankments. Int. J.
Geomech., ASCE 18 (4), 1–16.
Das, B.M., Puri, V.K., Neo, B.K., 1993. Interference eﬀects between two
surface footings on layered soil. Transport. Res. Record, Transport.
Res. Board Washington, D.C. 1406, 34–40.
Dash, S.K., Bora, M.C., 2013. Inﬂuence of geosynthetic encasement on
the performance of stone columns ﬂoating in soft clay. Can. Geotech.
J. 50 (7), 754–765.
Deb, K., 2010. A mathematical model to study the soil arching eﬀect in
stone column-supported embankment resting on soft soil. Appl. Math.
Model. 34 (12), 3871–3883.
Deb, K., Sawant, V.A., Kiran, A.S., 2010. Eﬀects of ﬁnes on compaction
characteristics of poorly graded sands. Int. J. Geotech. Eng. 4 (2), 299–
304.
Deb, K., Dhar, A., 2011. Optimum design of stone column-improved soft
soil using multi objective optimization technique. Comp. Geotechnics.
38 (1), 50–57.
Deb, K., Samadhiya, N.K., Namdeo, J.B., 2011. Laboratory model
studies on unreinforced and geogrid-reinforced sand bed over stone
column-improved soft clay. Geotextiles Geomembr. 29 (2), 190–196.
Deb, K., Mohapatra, S.R., 2013. Analysis of stone column-supported
geosynthetic-reinforced embankments. Appl. Math. Model. 37 (5),
2943–2960.
Deb, K., Konai, S., 2014. Bearing capacity of geotextile-reinforced sand
with varying ﬁne fraction. Geomech. Eng.: Int. J. 6 (1), 33–45.
Debnath, P., Dey, A.K., 2017. Bearing capacity of reinforced and
unreinforced sand beds over stone columns in soft clay. Geosynth.
Int. 24 (6), 575–589.
Duncan, J.M., Chang, C.Y., 1970. Nonlinear analysis of stress and strain
in soils. J. Soil Mech. Found. Div. Proc. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 96 (SM5),
1629–1653.
Fattah, M.Y., Zabar, B.S., Hassan, H.A., 2016. Experimental analysis of
embankment on ordinary and encased on stone columns. Int. J.
Geomech. (ASCE) 16 (4). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)GM.1943-
5622.0000579.
Han, J., Oztoprak, S., Parsons, R.L., Huang, J., 2007. Numerical analysis
of foundation columns to support widening of embankments. Comp.
Geotech. 34 (6), 534–548.
Han, J., Ye, S.L., 2001. Simpliﬁed method for consolidation rate of stone
column reinforced foundations. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. (ASCE)
127 (7), 597–603.
Iglesia, G.R., Einstein, H.H., Whitman, R.V., 2011. Validation of
centrifuge model scaling for soil systems via trapdoor tests. J. Geotech.
Geoenviron. Eng. (ASCE) 137 (11), 1075–1089.
Indraratna, B., Basack, S., Rujikiyatkamjorn, C.A., 2013. Numerical
solution of stone column improved soft soil considering arching,
clogging and smear eﬀects. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. (ASCE) 139
(3), 377–394.
Itasca, 2009. Fast lagrangian analysis of continua (FLAC3D 4.00). Itasca
Consulting Group Inc., Minneapolis, USA.
Janbu, N., 1963. Soil compressibility as determined by odometer and
triaxial tests. Proceedings of European Conference on Soil Mechanics
and Foundation Engineering, Wiesbaden, Germany.
Lavasan, A.A., Ghazavi, M., 2012. Behaviour of closely spaced square
and circular footings on reinforced sand. Soils Found. 52 (1), 160–167.
Mitchell, J.K., Huber, T.R., 1985. Performance of a stone column
foundation. J. Geotech. Eng. (ASCE) 111 (2), 205–223.
Munfakh, G.A., Sarkar, S.K., Castelli, R.J., 1983. Performance of a test
embankment founded on stone columns. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Piling and Ground Treatment for
Foundations. Thomas Telford, London.
Ng, K.S., Tan, S.A., 2014. Design and analyses of ﬂoating stone columns.
Soils Found. 54 (3), 478–487.
Ng, K.S., Tan, S.A., 2015. Nonlinear behaviour of an embankment on
ﬂoating stone columns. Geomech. Geoeng.: Int. J. 10 (1), 30–44.
Nonaka, T., Yamada, S., Noda, T., 2017. Veriﬁcation of a macro-element
method in the numerical simulation of the pore water pressure
dissipation method – a case study on a liquefaction countermeasure
with vertical drains under an embankment. Soils Found. 57 (3), 472–
487.
Oh, E.Y.N., Balasubramaniam, A.S., Surarak, C., Bolton, M., Chai, G.
W.K., Huang, M., Braund, M., 2007. Behaviour of a highway
embankment on stone column improved estuarine clay. Proceedings
of the 16th Southeast Asian Geotechnical Conference, Bangkok.
Southeast Asian Geotechnical Society, Thailand.
Priebe, H.J., 1995. The design of vibroreplacement. Ground Eng., 31–37
Saha Roy, S., Deb, K., 2017a. Eﬀects of aspect ratio of footings on
bearing capacity for geogrid-reinforced sand over soft soil. Geosynth.
Int. 24 (4), 362–382.
Saha Roy, S., Deb, K., 2017b. Bearing capacity of rectangular footings on
multilayer geosynthetic-reinforced granular ﬁll over soft soil 04017069.
Int. J. Geomech., ASCE 17 (9), 1–17.
Saha Roy, S., Deb, K., 2018. Closely spaced footings on sand underlain by
soft clay with geogrid at the interface. Geosynth. Int. 25 (4), 412–426.
Saha Roy, S., Deb, K., 2019. Interference eﬀect of closely spaced footings
resting on granular ﬁll over soft clay. Int. J. Geomech. 19 (1), 1–17,
04018181.
Shahu, J.T., Madhav, M.R., Hayashi, S., 2000. Analysis of soft ground-
granular pile-granular mat system. Comp. Geotech. 27 (1), 45–62.
Shin, E.C., Das, B.M., Puri, V.K., Yen, S.C., Cook, E.E., 1993. Bearing
capacity of strip foundation on geogrid-reinforced clay. Geotech. Test.
J. 16 (4), 534–541.
Shin, E.C., Das, B.M., 2000. Experimental study of bearing capacity of a
strip foundation on geogrid-reinforced sand. Geosynth. Int. 7 (1), 59–
71.
Tan, S.A., Tjahyono, S., Oo, K.K., 2008. Simpliﬁed plane-strain modeling
of stone-column reinforced ground. J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng.
(ASCE) 134 (2), 185–194.
van Eekelen, S.J.M., Bezuijen, A., Alexiew, D., 2010. The kyoto road piled
embankment: 3½ years of measurements. Proceeding of the 9th
International Conference on Geosynthetics, Brazil.
Wood, D.M., 1990. Soil behavior and critical state soil mechanics.
Cambridge University, London.
Xie, K.H., Lu, M.M., Hu, A.F., Chen, G.H., 2009. A general theoretical
solution for the consolidation of a composite foundation. Comp.
Geotech. 36 (1–2), 24–30.
Yoo, C., 2010. Performance of geosynthetic-encased stone columns in
embankment
construction:
numerical
investigation.
J.
Geotech.
Geoenviron. Eng. (ASCE) 136 (8), 1148–1160.
Yoo, C., Kim, S.B., 2009. Numerical modeling of geosynthetic-encased
stone column-improved ground. Geosynth. Int. 16 (3), 116–126.
Zhu, G., Yin, J.H., 2004. Consolidation analysis of soil with vertical and
horizontal drainage under ramp loading considering smear eﬀects.
Geotextiles Geomembr. 22 (1–2), 63–74.
632
A. K. Das, K. Deb / Soils and Foundations 59 (2019) 617–632
