 
The Study Methods and the New Progresses of Slope Stability 
Yongtao Zhang 
The Southern Engineering of the Chinese Road Bridge, LTD, Beijing 101121, China 
Keywords: Slope stability; The limit equilibrium theory; Numerical; Critical slip surface 
Abstract. Systematically introduce the research situation and development trends of the analysis 
method of slope stability at home and abroad, Focus on the two kinds of calculation methods and 
critical slip surface searching method based on the limit equilibrium theory and numerical analysis, 
And it also briefly discusses the main characteristics of these methods and their advantages and 
disadvantages, introduces the dynamic 3D slope stability research, and the prospect of the research 
direction in the future, providing the reference of the relevant personnel engaged in the slope study. 
Introduction 
Slope is an important part of the engineering construction. The problem of slope stability is 
related to the human life and property safety and the safety and efficiency of engineering itself. A 
comprehensive evaluation of its stability has an important theoretical and practical significance. 
Analysis of slope stability has always been an important research contents in the field of 
geotechnical engineering. It emerges in an endless stream in the analysis method currently, 
However, different research methods can only be applied to different engineering geology 
environment, Whether is the stability analysis reasonable or not directly affects the guidance for the 
engineering construction. So how to effectively use the appropriate analysis method is particularly 
important. This article tries to classify and explain the theory and method of analysis on slope 
stability systematically and deeply probe the characteristics, advantages and disadvantages of the 
major domestic and foreign research methods, aiming to help the readers have a better cognizance 
hope that it can emerge the new methods and traditional ones can be improved and developed in the 
field slope stability research. 
Review a Slope Stability Analysis 
The recognition of the slope stability of the tunnel originate from the tunnel entrance landslide 
phenomenon Early research on slope mostly based on long-term data observations, describing it 
qualitatively using the geological historical analysis method. On the early 1960s, it was recognized 
that the geological analysis must be combined with the mechanical mechanism analysis about the 
slope stability study During this period it mainly uses a rigid limit equilibrium method. Since 1980s. 
Due to the development of computing technology, the series of numerical analysis methods has 
developed. In recent years, some new theories have been introduced to the study of the slope. From 
the different perspective, the structure and stability of the slope factors were analyzed, which 
greatly promoted the study of slope stability. 
Limit equilibrium method which takes the soil that has a sliding trend within the scope of the 
slope along a slip surface into bar or oblique, established the whole sliding mass force or torque 
balance equation based on the analysis of the strip and determine the safety factor of slope stability 
on this basis These methods all assume that the soil mass slide rigid or rotate along a potential slip 
surface. sliding soil mass is the ideal rigid-plastic body, don't consider the stress-strain relationship 
of soil, and assume the strength level and the shear strength reduction factor of safety of every point 
along the slip surfaces is similar its safety factor expression has nothings to do with the deformation 
characteristics of the landslide, the landslides in vitro regional geological situation or the stress.  
The finite element method, developed in recent years which based on the theory of limit 
equilibrium, the condition of solving complex geotechnical slope of the stress and displacement 
distribution, adopting all kinds of search technology to get the critical slip surface and the 
2nd International Conference on Machinery, Materials Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology (MMECEB 2015)
© 2016. The authors - Published by Atlantis Press
396
 
corresponding safety factor, to evaluate the stability of the slope. In recent years, there are still some 
scholars committed to the research the Limit equilibrium method. However, there is no thorough 
and recognized evaluation method. A variety of expression about the safety factor often does not 
have explicit physical meaning. Therefore, considering the various assumptions in the calculation 
under the limit equilibrium method, the search of the most dangerous slip surface and the 
determination of the minimum safety factor still exist many difficulties. As the more rigorous 
numerical analysis among the theory system have a large number of application in geotechnical 
engineering, reducing the range of application of the limit equilibrium method in some degree.  
Considering the limit equilibrium method using some simplified assumptions on mechanics, the 
result is not the real system solutions even that it appears obvious error sometimes, at the same time 
the calculation to the complex soil and geotechnical structure is very difficult. The limit on the 
mechanics analysis method is introduced into the soil mechanics to make up for the deficiency of 
the limit equilibrium method. Sloan introduced the variation theory which solve the extreme value 
to seek for upper limit solution, Mr. Li, Jiangshen Zhu and others adopt the viewpoint of limit 
analysis lower limit and introduce mathematical programming method to seek the lower bound 
solutions of the problem. In recent years, with the rapid development of computing technology, the 
application of numerical methods to solve the upper(lower) limit problem about the tunnel on the 
slope stability has become a vigorous field, the finite element method, the limit solution and the 
method of upper limit solution put forward by Sloan and others, slope analysis upper bound 
solution put forward by Chen ZY are two kinds of relatively mature and practical methods. 
Since the 1980's, with the development of computing technology, the slope stability of numerical 
calculation method has made great progress. Among the numerical calculation method of the slope, 
there are the following categories basically: 
Finite element method is a kind of numerical analysis method, which is based on continuum 
mechanics. It was divided the analysis domain into a finite number that only in the node phase 
coupling subdomains, namely finite element, and then use low order polynomial interpolation in the 
unit and set up the stiffness matrix Then reuse the energy variation theory to form the total stiffness 
matrix, finally combined with the initial conditions and boundary conditions to solve the problem. 
Finite element method can meet the static permission, strain compatibility and the constitutive 
relationship between stress and strain, and can be not affected by the irregular of the slope geometry 
shape and the limitation of material inhomogeneity, the finite element solution also provides all the 
information about stress and deformation. All the above are the theory of limit equilibrium method 
can't solve, so the finite element method (fem) is an ideal method for analysis of slope stability. The 
main limitation is that the finite element method exist difficulties in some respect such as elastic 
plastic constitutive relation and determining the slope initial stress state, It also can't do well in 
solving problems such as large deformation and displacement of discontinuous, neither as solving 
the infinite domain and stress concentration. In addition, how to combine finite element calculation 
results with traditional criterion on the safety factor of slope, also needs to be further research. 
In order to reduce the computing workload, someone combine the analytical method and 
numerical method and develop many half analytical method, such as the finite layer method, the 
finite element method and boundary element method, and the method of coupling application, such 
as the finite element and boundary element coupling, boundary element and discrete element 
coupling, etc. In addition, the application of all kinds of uncertain analysis method in slope analysis 
is also very common, such as system analysis, reliability analysis, grey system theory, fuzzy 
classification method, method of catastrophe theory, artificial neural network analysis method, the 
genetic evolutionary algorithm, the fractal geometry technique theory of fracture mechanics, 
damage, and the theory of bifurcation and chaos. With the development of computer technology, 
multimedia and network technology, perturbation stochastic finite element method based on the 
theory of probability, the computer simulation technology based on GPS and GIS are also play a 
more and more important role in the assessment of slope stability.  
397
 
Critical Slip Surface Search Method 
Among the slope stability analysis, it generally consists of two steps: one is to figure out a crack 
in landslide stability factor of safety at the surface, the other is to figure out the corresponding 
minimum safety factor of the critical slip surface at all possible surface .Before the 1980’s, analysis 
on the stability of the slope mainly concentrate on the first step and obtain so many widely 
recognized safety coefficient calculation formula. In the past 20 years, the critical slip surface 
search problems have got a lot of attention .Meanwhile it produces many search techniques and 
methods. This article has simply discussed the analysis of several major search method and its 
characteristics. 
When utilizing the theory of limit equilibrium of the slope stability analysis and research, people 
use the enumeration search Circle arc sliding surface firstly. The fundamental ideology of the 
Enumeration method is according to the model and inspect the objective function of different 
variables then screen to find the minimum value eventually. which is one of the most original and 
most simple search method. The enumeration method search efficiency is relatively low, because of 
this the development of the other 0.618 methods such as enumeration method, in a certain degree, 
improve the efficiency of the search. 
With the development of computer technology, the critical sliding surface search start to turn to 
the numerical analysis method which is usually called the optimization method this approach can be 
mainly divided into the following categories: 
Pattern search method is according to the model and inspect the objective function between 
different independent variables, then determine the optimal search direction finally found the 
minimum value, later Haihong Mo come up with the improved pattern search method. Jianjing 
Jiang was based on the simplified Bishop method and use dichotomy of elimination method in 
calculation of critical slip surface. In addition, Giam and Donald proposed a finite element known 
stress field to determine the critical slip surface of the pattern search method, which is based on the 
stress calculated from the finite element field, starting from the point of high stress level, the 
formation of a from top to bottom of the failure surface. This kind of method is generally used to 
determine the arc sliding surface, and the search points are generated during the search process, the 
local minimum easily trapped into safety coefficient. 
Analysis of Newton system reference the thinking that consider the variational method in the 
safety coefficient as the critical slip surface functional theory and then combine with the limit 
equilibrium theory, using analytic methods to seek the extreme point which objective function of 
the independent variable partial derivative is zero. The method is to use the derivation of the 
objective function to determine the moving along the gradient direction so as to obtain the 
minimum safety coefficient. Arai and Tagyo used the conjugate gradient method, Yan Zhonghua  
used the golden section method, Wentong Zhou used Powell’s method, Sun Junshi adopted 
complex method and so on. But as a result of these methods on the objective function derivation is 
extremely complex when the number of degrees of freedom is too much (more than 7), practice 
shows that the search results will become very rough, especially for complex soil condition, this 
method is easy to fall into local extreme points. 
The dynamic programming method regard the critical slip surface search as a multistage decision 
process. Baker firstly adopt the dynamic programming method combined with the Spencer method 
to determine the critical slip surface and the minimum safety factor of non arc. Cao Wengui and  
Ronggui Yan combined with Janbu’s method using the similar search method, and satisfactory 
results are obtained. This method is actually transformed a optimization problems with continuous 
variables into a discrete variable optimization problem, but considering the the convergence and 
accuracy of calculation it can not find the true global minimum value. Yamagami and Ueta, 
HaT.V.Pham and D.G.Fredlund respectively, combine the dynamic programming and the finite 
element analysis, the critical slip surface and safety factor showing great potential for development 
and application. 
398
 
In the process of the finite element analysis of slope stability, except the above optimization 
methods, it also produced a number of special, completely out of the traditional sense of the critical 
slip surface search methods, such as strength reduction finite element method, the critical sliding 
surface of slope failure time can be got in the most intensive computing element of the incremental 
displacement isoline. the finite element analysis of stress level method, it is analyzed by the 
nonlinear finite element calculation and obtain the slope of soil at different points of the stress level, 
drawing the contour map, the most dangerous sliding surface of slope can be determined. 
It is necessary to point out that the slope critical slip surface searching area is experiencing a 
stage of rapid development, new concepts and methods are constantly emerging. A noteworthy 
trend is that optimization method has been transferring from the analytical method, numerical 
method to the non classical numerical methods. Non numerical method utilize the advantage of 
computer which has the large capacity and high speed to find the optimal value of the objective 
function through a large number of random sampling The emergence of this field of simulated 
annealing algorithm, genetic algorithm can be better than the traditional method in terms of 
accuracy, the research method of neural network, ant colony algorithm and other aspects have also 
been started. 
Three Dimensional Slope Stability Research 
At present, in the stability analysis of slope, it is still a commonly used method that the slope has 
been simplified and appropriate treatment and carries on the analysis in the plane. But in many 
cases the three-dimensional stability analysis has its unique and important significance, because the 
landslide happened the nature mostly emerge in 3D, 3D slope stability analysis can reflect the actual 
state of the slope, especially when the sliding surface has been determined, using dimensional 
analysis method can properly consider the impact of the slope safety coefficient suffered that the 
spatial variability made. Which belong to sliding body And in some cases it must use the 
dimensional analysis, such as the excavation slope. The excavation only happen in a limited range, 
if we use the two-dimensional analysis, excavation face is infinite, apparently it is different with the 
actual situation. Therefore in the slope engineering design and safety assessment, considering three 
dimensional stability analysis can get the analysis results more actual. 
Numerous studies have been conducted by domestic and foreign scholars on the 
three-dimensional stability of slope, which mainly concentrated on three dimensional limit 
equilibrium method. Duncan made a comprehensive review of the various methods in the past 20 
years about three-dimensional slope .then list the characteristics and limitations of these methods. In 
recent years, the scholars in our country has achieved some results in the 3D slope stability analysis. 
The 3D slope stability limit equilibrium analysis method proposed by Shuren Feng, the upper bound 
theorem of plasticity based on three-dimensional slope stability analysis method and based on the 
limit equilibrium theory the simplified analysis method by Zuyu Chen et al and put forward by  
Guoxiang Zhang, the potential slip plane theory and its application in the analysis of the slope. 
Three-dimensional Slope Analysis of the Existing Problems: 
(1) In order to make the problem becomes indeterminate solution, on the application of a three 
dimensional limit equilibrium analysis of slope column method, introduce a large number of 
assumptions, and many assumed the shape of sliding surface, as is assumed to be symmetric, 
ellipsoid and the logarithmic spiral surface, weakened the theoretical basis and the scope of 
application of this method. 
(2) In the stability analysis of three-dimensional slope, the sliding direction of 3D slope is 
usually unknown. the process of the 3D slip surface corresponding to the minimum factor of safety 
and the sliding direction are difficult. 
(3) In the field of three-dimensional space stress analysis, nonlinear equations iterative operation 
is a large scale and complex. convergence of numerical analysis method is a very difficult problem. 
(4) To search the critical slip surface, the three-dimensional analysis, the increase of degree of 
freedom, the optimization method is facing severe challenges. the current research work in this area 
is relatively few, the research work can not guarantee that in any case, can successfully terminate at 
399
 
the minimum. 
(5) Most of the 3D slope stability analysis of the research work is limited to the academic field 
and relatively rare in the practical application, the stability analysis method and program 
development work is still far from the practical requirements. 
Test results 
Due to the three-dimensional slope stability research has important theoretical and practical 
significance, and the utilization of three-dimensional limit equilibrium analysis method has some 
obvious defects,the optimization method for solving 3D critical slip surface also face many 
difficulties, using three dimensional finite element analysis for slope stability will become the main 
research direction in the future. Analyzing three-dimensional slope by finite element analysis, 
avoiding the traditional "column" idea, it can make the space of sliding body to meet all of the 
equilibrium conditions and get the 3D safety factor of slope of the answer the in astrict sense The 
main method can consider the prospect: 
(1) Analysis model by using a column method put finite element calculation of the stress results 
into the limit analysis framework. This method still need assume a shape of sliding surface, the 
sliding surface of slope may be through the construction of any region of space, using the three 
dimensional finite element stress field interpolation slip stress on the surface, and by using the finite 
element method to calculate, combined with a variety of optimization method to search the critical 
slip surface and got the minimum safety coefficient. 
(2) Direct analysis by using three dimensional finite element strength reduction method. In the 
definition of safety factor, with the reduction of soil strength parameters, Calculate in 3-D finite 
element program, till the calculation does not converge, the reduction factor is the safety factor. At 
the same time, the critical slip surface can be determined by the displacement increment of the most 
intensive areas in the contour map. 
(3) By using the three-dimensional finite element stress field, calculating the stress level of the 
slope and drawing the contour map, 3D slope of the most dangerous slip surface can be determined, 
the calculation of stress level along the critical slip surface got the average value, the minimum 
safety factor can be obtained by the corresponding numerical. 
(4) The use of the space of potential sliding surface theory can calculate the space in the middle 
of the potential slip surface in principal stress space and potential slip lines, construct the space of 
potential slip plane grid lines, form the space of potential sliding surface. Comparison of various 
spatial potential slip surface average safety factor of stability, the smallest is the most dangerous slip 
surface. 
(5) Considering the use of the tetrahedron finite element stress field and the mesh has been split, 
construct an auxiliary function that contains the safety factor, use dynamic programming, find the 
minimum of the auxiliary function of sliding surface, and then calculate the safety factor of sliding 
surface the safety factor by the definition of safety factor method, and compared with that, through 
iterative calculation get slip surface and the minimum safety value of critical. 
Conclusion 
The analysis of slope stability in the landslide analysis and governance is a field which have a bit 
difficult and the development is relatively mature. Although it can not solve all the problems of 
landslide analysis and treatment, it still occupies a very important position in the slope design and 
reinforcement. At present, various research methods continue to emerge, but the exact solution of 
slope stability analysis is still one of the frontiers in the field of geotechnical engineering. With the 
continuous efforts of engineering researchers and the progress of the scientific. we believe that the 
study of slope stability in theory will be more and more mature and perfect so that more reasonable 
analysis results of the slope engineering can be provided. 
400
 
References 
[1] Bishop A W.The use of slip circle in stability analysis of slopes.Geotechnique.1955,5(1):7-17. 
[2] Spencer E. A method for analysis of the stability of embankments assuming parallel interslice 
forces Geotechnique,1997,17(1):11-26. 
[3] Chen Z Y.and Morgenstem N R.Extension to the generalized method of slices for stability 
analysis ,Canadian Geotechnical Journal,2003,20(1):104-119 
[4] Huang Y H.Stability analysis of earth slopes[M].Dept of Civil Engineering,The Univ.of 
Califomia at Berkeley,2001. 
[5] Haihong Mo, Chaohong Tang, Shaoyue Liu.Determination of most dangerous slip surface with 
pattem search method[J].Chinese Journal of Geotechnical Engineering 2009,21(6):696-699. 
[6] Maotian Luan, Li Yong,Yang Qing.Discontinuous deformation computational mechanics model 
and its application in stability analysis of rock slop.Chinese Journal Rock Mechanics and 
Engineering,2010,19(3):289-294. 
[7] Ha.T.V.Pham,D.G.Fredlund.The application of dynamic programming to slop stability 
analysis,Can.Geotech.J.2012,32:233-246. 
[8] Zuyu Chen.Rock Slop Stability Analysis-Theory,Methods and Programs[M].Beijing,China 
Water Power Press 2014. 
[9] Shuren Feng, Dingxiang Feng，Xiurui Ge,etal.3D limit equilibrium method for slop stability 
and its application[J].Chinese Journal of Geotechnical Engineering,2014,21(6):657-661. 
401
