
ELSEVIER GEO-ENGINEERING BOOK SERIES
VOLUME 5
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
Dedicated to
Practicing Engineers, Scientists,
Academicians & Readers
ELSEVIER GEO-ENGINEERING BOOK SERIES
VOLUME 5
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
Bhawani Singh
Professor (Retd),
IIT Roorkee
Rajnish K. Goel
Scientist F
CMRI Regional Centre
Roorkee, India
Geo-Engineering Book Series Editor
John A. Hudson FREng
Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine,
University of London, UK
2006
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
ELSEVIER B.V.
ELSEVIER Inc.
ELSEVIER Ltd
ELSEVIER Ltd
Radarweg 29
525 B Street, Suite 1900
The Boulevard, Langford
84 Theobalds Road
P.O. Box 211, 1000
San Diego, CA 92101-4495
Kidlington, Oxford
London WC1X 8RR
AE Amsterdam
USA
OX5 1GB, UK
UK
The Netherlands
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
This work is protected under copyright by Elsevier Ltd, and the following terms and conditions apply to its use:
Photocopying
Single photocopies of single chapters may be made for personal use as allowed by national copyright laws.
Permission of the Publisher and payment of a fee is required for all other photocopying, including multiple or
systematic copying, copying for advertising or promotional purposes, resale, and all forms of document
delivery. Special rates are available for educational institutions that wish to make photocopies for non-proﬁt
educational classroom use.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier’s Rights Department in Oxford, UK: phone (+44) 1865
843830, fax (+44) 1865 853333, e-mail: permissions@elsevier.com. Requests may also be completed on-line
via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissions).
In the USA, users may clear permissions and make payments through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.,
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA; phone: (+1) (978) 7508400, fax: (+1) (978) 7504744, and in
the UK through the Copyright Licensing Agency Rapid Clearance Service (CLARCS), 90 Tottenham Court
Road, London W1P 0LP, UK; phone: (+44) 20 7631 5555; fax: (+44) 20 7631 5500. Other countries may have
a local reprographic rights agency for payments.
Derivative Works
Tables of contents may be reproduced for internal circulation, but permission of the Publisher is required for
external resale or distribution of such material. Permission of the Publisher is required for all other derivative
works, including compilations and translations.
Electronic Storage or Usage
Permission of the Publisher is required to store or use electronically any material contained in this work,
including any chapter or part of a chapter.
Except as outlined above, no part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior written
permission of the Publisher.
Address permissions requests to: Elsevier’s Rights Department, at the fax and e-mail addresses noted above.
Notice
No responsibility is assumed by the Publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter
of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. Because of rapid advances in the medical sciences,
in particular, independent veriﬁcation of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made.
First edition 2006
Elsevier
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Singh, Bhawani
Tunnelling in weak rocks. - (Elsevier geo-engineering book series; v. 5)
1. Tunneling 2. Tunnels - Design 3. Rock mechanics
I. Title II. Goel, R. K. 1960-624.1’93
ISBN 13: 978-0-08-044987-6
ISBN 10: 0-08-044987-5
Typeset by Cepha Imaging Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore, India
Printed in Great Britain
Series Preface
TheobjectiveoftheElsevierGeo-EngineeringBookSeriesistoprovidehighqualitybooks
on subjects within the broad geo-engineering subject area – e.g. on engineering geology,
soil mechanics, rock mechanics, civil/mining/environmental/petroleum engineering, etc.
The ﬁrst four books in the Series have already been published:
• “Stability Analysis and Modelling of Underground Excavations in Fractured
Rocks” by Weishen Zhu and Jian Zhao;
• “Coupled Thermo-Hydro-Mechanical-Chemical Processes in Geo-systems” edited
by Ove Stephansson, John A Hudson and Lanru Jing;
• “Ground Improvement – Case Histories” edited by Buddhima Indraratna and
Jian Chu; and
• “Engineering Properties of Rocks” by Lianyang Zhang.
Now, I am pleased to introduce “Tunnelling in Weak Rocks” by Bhawani Singh and
R.K. Goel. The authors have placed their emphasis in exactly the right area because it is
much more difﬁcult to tunnel in a soft, weak rock mass than in a stiff, strong rock mass.
Also, they have set their stage in the Himalayas which is an exciting setting, not only on
the surface but often even more so underground!
Readers will recall the 1999 Elsevier book written by the same authors: “Rock Mass
Classiﬁcation: A Practical Approach in Civil Engineering”. This earlier book has proved
to be a most useful reference source because all the key information relating to rock
mass classiﬁcation is contained in the book and so one automatically takes it off the shelf
whenever there is a question about the rock mass classiﬁcation approach or the associated
details. The authors have adopted the same approach with “Tunnelling in Weak Rocks”:
they provide 29 chapters covering all aspects of the subject, including theory, reviews of
rock mass classiﬁcation approaches, the different types of tunnelling methods, excavation
and support, hazards, instrumentation, swelling and squeezing rock conditions and many
other practical aspects of tunnelling.
We hope that you enjoy the book and we welcome proposals for new books. Please
send these to me at the email address below.
Professor John A. Hudson FREng
Geo-Engineering Series Editor
jah@rockeng.co.uk
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
Preface
“A book is a man’s best friend.”
Groucho Marx
The basic approach in the design of underground support system has been an empirical
approach based on rock mass classiﬁcation. This approach was the subject of the authors’
ﬁrst book, Rock Mass Classiﬁcation – A Practical Approach in Civil Engineering (1999),
which has been enjoyed by the experts all over the world. Lately, however, a growing
need for reliable software packages to aid engineering control of landslide and tunnelling
hazards has inspired the writing of the next book on Software for Engineering Control of
Landslide and Tunnelling Hazards based on the use of a rational approach to check the
empirical predictions to be sure of the solution.
The instant liking and success of these two books further boosted our morale and
we have written this book on Tunnelling in Weak Rocks, which is based on intensive
ﬁeld-oriented research work and experience. It is expected that the book will generate
more conﬁdence and interest among civil and mining design and construction engi-
neers, geologists, geophysicists, managers, planners, researchers and students. The set
of three complementary books that we have produced has been possible due to God’s
grace, team-work and worldwide acceptance and moral support.
Emphasis is given to the practical-construction solution of tunnelling hazard con-
trol rather than any rigorous analytical/numerical methods. Practical knowledge of
the engineering behavior of rock masses, discontinuities, the time-tested classiﬁcation
approach, tunnelling hazards, and simple analytical methods are also offered to add to the
understanding of realistic actual construction approach.
We have been blessed by modern tunnelling machines and shielded TBM with auto-
matic support system to bore rapidly through soils, boulders and weak rocks, etc. By the
grace of God, the modern tunnel engineers have tremendous conﬁdence now. This book
also tries to integrate the happy experience of tunnel engineers, managers, reputed ﬁeld
researchers and famous site engineering geologists from all over the world. This book
may help in on-spot-decisions during tunnelling.
Himalaya is a vast region, an amazingly beautiful creation which possesses exten-
sive rejuvenating life support system. It is also one of the best ﬁeld laboratories for
viii
Preface
learning rock mechanics, tunnelling, engineering geology and geohazards. The research
experience gained in Himalaya is precious to the whole world.
The authors are deeply grateful to Professor J. A. Hudson, Imperial College of Science
and Technology, London, and President-elect, International Society for Rock Mechanics
(ISRM) for continuous encouragement and for including this book in the Elsevier Geo-
Engineering Series. The authors are also thankful to Elsevier Limited for publishing
the book.
The authors’ foremost wish is to express their deep gratitude to: Professor Charles
Fairhurst, University of Minnesota; Professor E. Hoek, International Consulting
Engineer; Dr. N. Barton, Norway; Professor J.J.K. Daemen, University of Nevada;
Dr. E. Grimstad, NGI, Professor G.N. Pandey, University of Swansea; Professor
J. Nedoma, Academy of Sciences of Czech Republic; Professor Zhao Jian, Nanyang Tech-
nological University, Singapore; Professor V.D. Choubey; Professor T. Ramamurthy,
IITD; Dr. R.K. Bhandari, CSIR; Mr. B.B. Deoja, Nepal; Mr. A. Wagner, Switzerland;
Professor R.N. Chowdhary, Australia; Professor S. Sakurai, Japan; Dr. R. Anbalagan,
IITR; Professor M. Kwasniewski,
Poland;
Dr. B. Singh;
Professor B.B. Dhar,
Dr. N.M. Raju, Dr. A.K. Dube, Dr. J.L. Jethwa, Dr. V.M. Sharma, ATES; Late Professor
L.S. Srivastava; Professor Gopal Ranjan, COER; Professor P.K. Jain, IITR; Professor
M.N. Viladkar, IITR; Dr. A.K. Dhawan, CSMRS; Dr. V.K. Mehrotra; Dr. H.S. Badrinath;
Dr. Prabhat Kumar, CBRI; Dr. P.P. Bahuguna, ISM; Dr. Subhash Mitra, Uttaranchal Irri-
gation Department; Dr. R.B. Singh, Tala Hydroelectric Project, Bhutan; Dr. Mahendra
Singh, IITR; Dr. N.K. Samadhiya, IITR; Mr. H.S. Niranjan, HBTI and Dr. Rajesh
K. Goel, ONGC for their constant moral support and vital suggestions and for freely
sharing precious ﬁeld data. The authors are also grateful to the scientists and engineers
of CMRI, CSMRS, UPIRI, IIT Roorkee, IIT Delhi and ATES, AIMIL, HEICO, VS
Engineering Services, New Delhi and to all project authorities for supporting the ﬁeld
researches. The authors are also grateful to Mr. N.P. Atterkar and Mr. Sandesh Atterkar,
Soilex Ltd., Roorkee for kind support. Special thanks to Dr. Daya Shankar, IITR and
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, CMRI for sharing their research work and contributing chapters
on “Application of Geophysics. . .” and “Blasting for Tunnels and Roadways”, respec-
tively. Thanks to Professor Yuzuru Ashdia, Kyoto University, Japan for allowing us to
use his work in Chapter 2.
The authors are also very grateful to their families and friends for their sacri-
ﬁcing spirit. Without their support the writing of this book would have been very
difﬁcult.
The authors also thank A.A. Balkema, the Netherlands; American Society of Civil
Engineers (ASCE), Reston; Ellis Horwood, U.K.; Institution of Mining & Metallurgy,
London; John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; Springer-Verlag, Germany; Trans Tech.,
Germany; Wilmington Publishing House, U.K.; Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York;
ICIMOD, Kathmandu; Bureau of Indian Standards, India, for their kind permission to
reproduce material and also to all eminent professors, researchers and scientists whose
work is referred to in the book.
Preface
ix
All engineers and geologists are requested to kindly send their precious suggestions
for improving the book to the authors for the future editions.
Bhawani Singh
Rajnish K. Goel
Professor (Retd)
Scientist F
DCE, IIT Roorkee
CMRI Regional Centre
Roorkee, India
Roorkee, India
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
Contents
Series Preface
v
Preface
vii
1
Introduction
1
References
4
2
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities
5
2.1 Geophysical exploration
5
2.2 Examples of application
7
2.3 Prediction ahead of tunnel face with source placed on face
12
2.4 Application to construction site
17
References
22
3
Terzaghi’s rock load theory
25
3.1 Introduction
25
3.2 Rock classes
25
3.3 Rock load factor
27
3.4 Modiﬁed Terzaghi’s theory for tunnels and caverns
32
References
35
4
Rock mass rating (RMR)
37
4.1 Introduction
37
4.2 Collection of ﬁeld data
38
4.3 Estimation of rock mass rating
41
4.4 Applications of RMR
43
4.5 Precautions
47
4.6 Tunnel alignment
49
References
49
5
Rock mass quality Q
51
5.1 The Q-system
51
5.2 The joint orientation and the Q-system
58
xii Contents
5.3 Updating the Q-system
58
5.4 Collection of ﬁeld data
59
5.5 Classiﬁcation of the rock mass
61
5.6 Estimation of support pressure
61
5.7 Unsupported span
67
5.8 Rock mass characterization
69
5.9 Concluding remarks
74
References
74
6
Rock mass number
77
6.1 Introduction
77
6.2 Interrelation between Q and RMR
78
6.3 Prediction of ground conditions
81
6.4 Prediction of support pressure
81
6.5 Effect of tunnel size on support pressure
82
6.6 Correlations for estimating tunnel closure
85
6.7 Effect of tunnel depth on support pressure and closure in tunnels
86
6.8 Approach for obtaining ground reaction curve (GRC)
86
References
88
7
Strength of discontinuities
91
7.1 Introduction
91
7.2 Joint wall roughness coefﬁcient (JRC)
92
7.3 Joint wall compressive strength (JCS)
95
7.4 Joint matching coefﬁcient (JMC)
96
7.5 Residual angle of friction
97
7.6 Shear strength of joints
97
7.7 Dynamic shear strength of rough rock joints
99
7.8 Theory of shear strength at very high conﬁning stress
99
7.9 Normal and shear stiffness of rock joints
101
References
101
8
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels
103
8.1 Causes of strength enhancement
103
8.2 Effect of intermediate principal stress on tangential stress at
failure in tunnels
104
8.3 Uniaxial compressive strength of rock mass
106
8.4 Reason for strength enhancement in tunnels and a new failure theory
108
8.5 Critical strain of rock mass
111
8.6 Criterion for squeezing/rock burst of rock masses
113
8.7 Tensile strength across discontinuous joints
114
Contents
xiii
8.8 Dynamic strength of rock mass
115
8.9 Residual strength parameters
116
References
116
9
The new Austrian tunnelling method
119
9.1 Old tunnelling practice
119
9.2 Development of construction and lining methods
120
9.3 Modern tunnelling methods
120
9.4 Temporary supports
121
9.5 Philosophy of NATM
124
9.6 Final dimensioning by measurement
128
9.7 Concluding remarks
130
References
132
10
Norwegian method of tunnelling
133
10.1 Introduction
133
10.2 Unsupported span
134
10.3 Design of supports
135
10.4 Design of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
136
10.5 Drainage measures
148
10.6 Experiences in poor rock conditions
148
10.7 Concluding remarks
149
References
150
11
Blasting for tunnels and roadways
151
11.1 Introduction
151
11.2 Blasting mechanics
152
11.3 Blast holes nomenclature
153
11.4 Types of cut
154
11.5 Tunnel blast performance
156
11.6 Parameters inﬂuencing tunnel blast results
156
11.7 Models for prediction of tunnel blast results
162
11.8 Blast design
167
References
177
12
Rock bolting
183
12.1 General
183
12.2 Types of rock bolts
183
12.3 Selection of rock bolts
188
12.4 Installation of rock bolts
190
12.5 Pull-out tests
192
12.6 Reinforcement of jointed rock mass around openings
195
xiv Contents
12.7 Bolting pattern
201
12.8 Floor bolting
201
References
201
13
Tunnelling hazards
203
13.1 Introduction
203
13.2 The tunnelling hazards
205
13.3 Empirical approach for predicting degree of squeezing
212
13.4 Sudden ﬂooding of tunnels
213
13.5 Chimney formation
214
13.6 Environmental hazards due to toxic or explosive gases and
geothermal gradient
214
13.7 Interaction between rock parameters
217
13.8 Concluding remarks
217
References
222
14
Tunnel instrumentation
223
14.1 Introduction
223
14.2 Basic considerations and requirements for the design
of an opening in rock
223
14.3 Data requirement
224
14.4 Instrumentation for tunnelling
226
14.5 Stress ﬁeld
226
14.6 Support pressure in tunnels
230
14.7 Measurement of rock mass behavior around an underground
opening by borehole extensometer
233
14.8 Case histories
234
14.9 Layout of a typical test section
238
References
239
15
Tunnelling machines
241
15.1 General
241
15.2 System’s mis-match
241
15.3 Tunnel jumbo
242
15.4 Muck hauling equipment
244
15.5 Tunnel boring machine (TBM)
245
15.6 Safety during tunnelling
247
References
248
16
Rock mass quality for tunnel boring machines (QTBM)
249
16.1 Introduction
249
16.2 Q and QTBM
249
Contents
xv
16.3 Penetration and advance rates
253
16.4 Cutter wear
253
16.5 Penetration and advance rate vs QTBM
254
16.6 Estimating time for completion
254
References
255
17
Metro tunnels
257
17.1 Introduction
257
17.2 Shielded tunnel boring machines
260
17.3 Precast lining
262
17.4 Building condition survey and vibration limit
263
17.5 Impact on the structures
263
17.6 Subsidence
265
17.7 Portal and cut slopes
265
References
266
18
Tunnelling in swelling rocks
269
18.1 Introduction
269
18.2 Support pressures in swelling ground
270
18.3 Variation of support pressure with time
272
18.4 Case histories
274
18.5 Design approach
276
References
276
19
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition
279
19.1 Introduction
279
19.2 Criterion for squeezing ground condition
280
19.3 Elasto-plastic theory of squeezing ground
281
19.4 Displacements of tunnel walls
282
19.5 Compaction zone within broken zone
284
19.6 Face advance for stabilization of broken zone
285
19.7 Ground response curve
285
19.8 Strain criterion of squeezing ground condition
288
19.9 Support design
291
References
292
20
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
295
20.1 Introduction
295
20.2 Regional geology, tunnelling problems and alternative layouts
295
20.3 Tectonic activity and tunnel lining
303
20.4 Tunnel construction and instrumentation in the intra-thrust zone
at Kalawar
306
xvi Contents
20.5 Tunnel construction and instrumentation in intra-thrust zone
at Chhibro
311
20.6 Elasto-plastic theory
313
20.7 Conclusions
320
References
322
21
Tunnels in seismic areas
325
21.1 Introduction
325
21.2 Response of an underground structure to dynamic loading
326
21.3 Observed response
327
21.4 Case history of 1991 Uttarkashi earthquake
328
21.5 Pseudo-static theory of seismic support pressure
330
21.6 Support system for blast loading
332
References
333
22
Rock burst in tunnels
335
22.1 Introduction
335
22.2 Conditions for rock burst in deep tunnels
336
22.3 Concept of strain energy release rate
338
22.4 Seismic energy released in a rock burst
339
22.5 Semi-empirical criterion of predicting rock burst
339
22.6 Suggestion for reducing severity of rock bursts
343
References
344
23
Pressure tunnels
345
23.1 Introduction
345
23.2 Minimum overburden above a pressure tunnel
346
23.3 Solid concrete lining
347
23.4 Cracked plain cement concrete lining
347
23.5 Steel liner in penstock
349
23.6 Hydraulic fracturing near junction of pressure tunnel
and penstock
352
References
352
24
Shafts
355
24.1 Introduction
355
24.2 Shapes of shaft
356
24.3 Self-supporting shaft
357
24.4 Support pressures on the wall of shaft
357
24.5 Design of support system
359
24.6 Surge shaft
360
Contents
xvii
24.7
Excavation
361
24.8
Self-compacting concrete
362
References
363
25
Half tunnels
365
25.1
Introduction
365
25.2
Application of rock mass classiﬁcation
365
25.3
Wedge analysis
366
25.4
Stress distribution around half tunnel
372
References
373
26
Contractual risk sharing
375
26.1
The risk
375
26.2
Management of risk
379
26.3
Construction planning and risk
385
26.4
Time and cost estimates
386
References
386
27
Rate of tunnelling
389
27.1
Introduction
389
27.2
Classiﬁcation of ground/job conditions for rate of tunnelling
390
27.3
Classiﬁcation of management conditions for rate of tunnelling
390
27.4
Combined effect of ground and management conditions on rate
of tunnelling
392
27.5
Tunnel management
397
27.6
Poor tender speciﬁcations
398
27.7
Contracting practice
399
27.8
Quality management by International Tunnelling Association
400
References
401
28
Integrated method of tunnelling
403
28.1
Introduction
403
28.2
Probe holes
404
28.3
Effect of seismicity
404
28.4
Tunnel instrumentation
404
28.5
Selection of type of support system
405
28.6
Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
406
28.7
Treatment of shear zone
411
28.8
Shotcrete
412
28.9
Rock/roof bolts
414
28.10 Steel ribs
418
28.11 Grouting in pressure tunnels
429
xviii
Contents
28.12 Design of integrated support system
433
28.13 Special requirements
439
References
442
29
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
443
29.1
General
443
29.2
Suggested model for rock mass
445
29.3
Residual strength
449
29.4
Effect of conﬁning pressure on friction angle
452
References
452
Appendix I
Tunnel mechanics
455
AI.1
Elastic stress distribution around circular tunnels
455
AI.2
Proposed elasto-plastic theory of stress distribution in broken zone
in squeezing ground
459
AI.3
Short-term support pressure on closely spaced tunnels in squeezing
ground condition
462
AI.4
Seismic support pressures
465
References
465
Appendix II
Software TM for empirical design of support system
for caverns and tunnels
467
AII.1 General
467
AII.2 Software TM
468
AII.3 Experience in poor rock conditions
469
AII.4 Concluding remarks
471
AII.5 Users manual – TM
471
References
475
Appendix III
Capacity of blocked steel beam sections in the
roof of tunnel
477
References
480
Index
481
1
Introduction
“College is where you learn how to learn.”
Socrates (470–399 B.C.)
Tunnelling is a joy. Tunnelling is an art. Tunnelling in weak rock masses is an adventure.
Tunnels are liked by people all over the world. Tunnels are expected to become future craze
of people in view of high level of curiosity of people and its uses to the society. Tunnels
attract tourists, specially along hill roads and hill rail lines. Underground metros are
popular and safer than surface transport, as escape routes are minimum. Tunnels are safe
even during earthquakes of high intensity. Moreover the underground space technology
has improved the ecosystem and environmental conditions.
Classical books of Szechy (1967), Bienisawski (1984), Bickel et al. (1997) and Hoek
et al. (1995) deal with the subject of tunnelling generally in hard rocks. Bieniawski
(1984) have given the history of tunnelling which is very interesting. Fascinating undersea
tunnels (immersed tube road and rail tunnels all over the world) have been described by
Culverwell (1990). Himalayan region is the best ﬁeld laboratory to learn Rock Mechanics
and Tunnelling Technology for weak rocks. Thus, the experiences of tunnelling in the
tectonically disturbed, young and fragile Himalaya are precious for the tunnel engineers
all over the world. The Himalaya provides the acid tests for the theories and tunnelling
technologies. Therefore, Himalaya is a boon for all of us.
Prof. Charles Fairhurst once said that only a strategy of tunnelling can be designed.
The design of support system may not be possible in complex geological and geohydrolog-
ical conditions. Geologically complex and high mountains have big EGO (Extraordinary
Geological Occurrences) problems. Geological surprises are common along deep and
long tunnels (>1 km long) in young and tectonically disturbed high mountainous terrains.
Geological surprises (faults/shear zones) may be discovered even after the completion
of a tunnel. Thus, the designed strategy should be ﬂexible enough to strengthen the tun-
nel locally near unexpected geological weaknesses, whenever discovered. Thus planning
should be ﬂexible and not rigid unlike in other civil engineering projects. In hard rocks,
the art of tunnelling has evolved into a science of tunnelling with the Grace of God.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
2 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Exploration is the weakest link in a deep long tunnelling project. There are practical
difﬁculties in making drill-holes along a long and deep tunnel alignment in mountainous
terrain as neither drilling machine can be transported on mountain top nor water is avail-
able. Generally exploration pits are made to get some idea of geological cross section.
But errors of extrapolation of rock layers on the basis of observed dips at the top may be
serious in a folded and faulted strata. Adits are generally made for geological exploration.
Civil engineers need the engineering geological cross section in addition to a reliable
geological cross section. Civil engineers should, therefore, drill a probe hole behind the
tunnel face for an advance knowledge of the tunnelling ground conditions. This probe hole
may also act as drainage hole in unknown water-charged strata. Engineering judgment
plays a very important role during tunnelling in the weak rocks.
The properly designed tunnel boring machine (TBM) is a good choice in the homoge-
neous rock masses in the non-squeezing ground condition (H < 350 Q1/3 m) without shear
zones and non-ﬂowing rock conditions. Engineers should not use TBM where engineer-
ing geological investigations have not been done in detail and the rock masses are very
heterogeneous. Contractors can design TBM according to the given rock mass conditions
which are nearly homogeneous (Bhasin, 2004).
Tunnel mechanics plays an important role in planning and construction of tunnels.
A deep and long tunnel should be carefully planned to avoid too high overburden causing
squeezing ground condition or rock bursts; water charged or active faults and ﬂowing
ground conditions. It should be realized that the same strata which is safe may pose severe
tunnelling problems when met again along a tunnel alignment but under a very high
overburden. Tunnelling was done before tunnel mechanics was developed around 1970.
Tunnelling hazards are better understood now and are tackled more effectively. Rock
engineers and engineering geologists should be employed at major tunnelling projects
for safety of workers and tackling the tunnelling hazards, etc. Good support will reduce
the cost over-runs and delays in completion of tunnels. Section 4.6 and Figs 11.2–11.6
underline the importance of geological investigations in the deep and long tunnels within
the young mountains.
The combined New Austrian Tunnelling Method (NATM) and Norwegian Method of
Tunnelling (NMT) have been used extensively in the conventional method of tunnelling
by drilling and blasting. Tunnelling machines are very helpful in rapid excavation and
supporting. The NATM (Chapter 9) gives strategy of tunnelling through various ground
conditions. The NMT (Chapter 10) offers a design chart for support system. The steel ﬁber
reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) is fortunately found to be generally successful in supporting
weak rocks and mild to moderate squeezing grounds. The full-column grouted rock bolts
(grouted anchors) are better choice than pre-tensioned rock bolts in supporting weak rocks.
Naturally SFRS with grouted rock bolts is the ideal choice in case of weak rocks where
feasible. It should be understood that high support pressures be reduced signiﬁcantly
by allowing certain amount of tunnel closures in the case of squeezing grounds. Engi-
neers and geoscientists should be congratulated for safe tunnelling in the modern times.
The fear of tunnelling at great depths (>1000 m) is no more there. This book tries to offer
Introduction 3
a modern integrated strategy of tunnelling through weak rocks for twenty-ﬁrst century
(Chapter 28).
Management conditions affect the rate of tunnelling surprisingly sometimes more
than the geological conditions. Therefore, improvement in the management condition
is very important. The managers must make efforts to make the contractors successful
and efﬁcient in challenging jobs like tunnelling in weak and disturbed rocks. The spirit
of co-operation and commitment (i.e., mutual trust and beneﬁt) should be created by
executives. Risk management is specially important in tunnelling. Contractors should
insure lives of workers and TBM and tunnelling machines. All the willpower of civil
engineers is concentrated on the fast completion of a project. Their psychology is not to
tolerate any hindrance in the enthusiasm of construction activity. A tunnel instrumentation
is, therefore, disliked by civil engineers at the tunnelling project. In fact, all that we have
learnt today about Rock mechanics is due to tunnel instrumentation. The reliable and
continuous monitoring by modern tunnel instruments is the key to success in tackling
unexpected tunnelling hazards. This is shown by extensive experiences of Central Mining
Research Institute in India.
The later half of twentieth century has been called as the dawn of the golden era of
tunnelling all over the world. Nothing succeeds like success. In about 50 years, many
deep and long tunnels were built through the Alps and the Rocky mountains. The 34 km
long Loetschberg tunnel under Swiss Alps, set to open to trains in 2007 is now the longest
over land tunnel. Another tunnel – 58 km long Gotthard tunnel parallel to the Loetschberg
tunnel will be the world’s longest tunnel when it is completed by 2020.
The tunnel engineers, geologists and managers should be trained for the challenges
of the future. Bieniawski (1984) suggested that the following lessons should be learnt
from the precious past ﬁeld experiences.
1. Tunnelling in hard rocks has now become a science from the empirical art of
tunnelling.
2. The great advances in tunnelling technology were due to team efforts but often
depended upon the leadership of a single man.
3. The engineer’s ingenuity has been amply proved in the past but full potential is
yet to be discovered and many new inventions and breakthroughs are awaiting us
in the future. A Rock engineer should be in charge of a tunnelling project for its
efﬁcient management.
4. Modern shielded tunnel boring machine may be successful in all homogeneous
rocks, soils, boulders and fault zones, etc.
Due to the Grace of God, the future of tunnelling and underground space tech-
nology appears to be good. Under city bypass tunnels along highways is becoming
popular as in Australia. Demand for multiple level underground metros with many lanes
is increasing rapidly. The expectation is that automation in tunnelling even in weak
rocks will advance rapidly. Drinking water tunnel network is an immediate necessity
4 Tunnelling in weak rocks
in over-populated nations. Interlinking of rivers is also feasible on large scale. Under
sea tunnels are going to catch up imagination of planners. A Tunnel between London
and New York is being planned in Atlantic Ocean. Underground cities may be feasible
economically by the end of twenty-ﬁrst century. United States of America invented rock
melting drilling machine in 1972. It is learnt that a TBM is developed on this principle.
It uses a tiny nuclear reactor to heat its head to about 2000◦C. It thereby burns the rock
mass into a gas. Thus a tunnel of glassy rock is created. But it is a very costly method
of tunnelling. Norway is experimenting upon ﬂoating tunnels on the lakes and oceans.
Vision is very good. Future engineers and scientists are going to be very bold and most
efﬁcient in using energies.
The underground structures are permanent property of the people, protected from all
kinds of natural disasters, unlike surface structures in the disaster prone regions which are
temporary property of the people.
REFERENCES
Bhasin, R. (2004). Personal communication with Prof. Bhawani Singh, IIT Roorkee, India.
Bickel, J. O., Kuesel, T. R. and King, E. H. (1997). Tunnel Engineering Handbook. 2nd edition,
Asian edition, Chapman & Hall Inc., New York and CBS Publishers, New Delhi, 544.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1984). Rock Mechanics Design in Mining and Tunnelling. A. A. Balkema, 272.
Hoek, E., Kaiser, P. K. and Bawden, W. F. (1995). Support of Underground Excavations in Hard
Rock. A. A. Balkema, 215.
Szechy, K. (1967). The Art of Tunnelling. Akademiai Kiado, Budapest, 891.
2
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and
site survey activities∗
“And so geology, once considered mostly a descriptive and historical science, has in
recent years taken on the aspect of an applied science. Instead of being largely
speculative as perhaps it used to be, geology has become factual, quantitative, and
immensely practical. It became so ﬁrst in mining as an aid in the search for metals; then
in the recovery of fuels and the search for oil; and now in engineering in the search for
more perfect adjustment of man’s structures to nature’s limitations and for greater safety
in public works.”
Charles P. Berkey, Pioneer Engineering Geologist, 1939
A modern technique in underground construction needs to use modern knowledge, which
is state-of-the-art. At turn of the millennium, and with the ever increasing number of
underground excavations, it has become all the more important that excavations are made
economically and are safe. The modern geophysical techniques, the concept and method-
ology, and its application in underground construction especially in tunnels have been
discussed in this chapter.
Initial development of geophysical techniques to determine the geological structure of
the sub-surface was stimulated primarily by the search for potential reservoirs of petroleum
and natural gas. Today, geophysical techniques are being developed for application not
only to the search for deeper reservoirs of petroleum and natural gas, i.e., depths of the
order of several kilometers, but also underground openings i.e., depths of the order of
100 m or less below surface, driven by the need to make effective use of underground
space. This trend has been promoted by recently established special regulations governing
public use of underground space in many countries.
2.1 GEOPHYSICAL EXPLORATION
Geophysical exploration may be deﬁned as the application of non-invasive (i.e., no exca-
vations) techniques for identiﬁcation of sub-surface structures and the associated physical
∗Contributed by Dr. Daya Shankar, Department of Earthquake Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
6 Tunnelling in weak rocks
properties of the rocks. The location and distribution of faults and fractured zones are
now routinely identiﬁed by geophysical techniques.
Table 2.1 shows the geophysical techniques currently used and the geophysical phe-
nomenon on which they are based. Fig. 2.1 summarizes the various techniques in terms
of their application in forward and inverse analysis procedures.
Forward analysis deﬁnes techniques that are designed to acquire geophysical data
with a high S/N (signal to noise amplitude) ratio, whereas inverse analysis concerns
techniques designed to reconstruct the structure of the sub-surface with high resolution
by interpretation of this data. The S/N ratio is deﬁned by equation (2.1) (Ashida, 2001).
dB (decibel) = 20 log10 S/N
(2.1)
Where dB is the ratio expressed in decibels.
Resolution deﬁnes the ability to separate two features. In terms of geological structure,
this is measured by the ability to distinguish thin layers. In the case of a reﬂection seismic
survey, the resolution in the vertical direction is limited to one-quarter of the wavelength.
For example, if the seismic velocity (V) of a wave is 2000 m/s and the frequency ( f )
Table 2.1 Geophysical exploration techniques and geophysical phenomenon.
Seismic exploration
Reﬂection and refraction of seismic waves
Electric sounding
Resistivity and induced polarization phenomenon
Electromagnetic method
Induction phenomenon
Gravity survey
Density
Magnetic survey
Susceptibility
Radiometric survey
Scattering phenomenon of γ-ray, radon
Geothermal prospecting
Geothermal phenomenon of geothermal gradient,
heat ﬂux
Well log
Geophysical prospecting using borehole
Geotomography
Geophysical prospecting between boreholes
-------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------
Forward Problem
Improvement of S/N ratio
Data acquisition. Data processing
Data processing & interpretation
Improvement of resolution
Inverse problem & inversion
Geophysical
Structure
Geophysical
Data
Fig. 2.1
Forward and inverse problem in geophysical techniques.
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 7
of the reﬂected wave is 50 Hz then, from the relationship V = f · λ; one-quarter of the
wavelength (λ) will be 10 m. Consequently, it is not possible in this case to resolve a layer
less than 10 m thick. Since one cannot control the seismic velocity of layer, increased
resolution depends on improving the ability to detect the high frequency waves emitted
from the seismic sources. Considerable progress is being made in this area, aided by the
recent technical innovations in electronics. The principal developments in geophysical
techniques include:
• Universal application of three-dimensional geophysical surveys.
• Introduction of S wave seismic reﬂection surveys using three-component receivers.
• Data processing and interpretation using man–machine interaction.
• More comprehensive use of various prospecting techniques.
• Interpretation of physical properties and integrated interpretation.
• Introduction of four-dimensional surveys, i.e., periodic surveys for monitoring.
• Increased application of virtual reality techniques.
• Introduction of new mathematical and physical concepts.
Factors to be considered in applying geophysical techniques to tunnelling technology
and geotechnical engineering are as follows:
• Knowledge of the physical properties of target objects to aid in selecting the
geophysical technique to be applied.
• Awareness of the physical scale of the target objects to help deﬁne the survey
parameters.
• Good understanding of each geophysical technique and its limitations.
• The value of integrated interpretation using several geophysical techniques to
increase the accuracy of interpretation.
• Recognition of limitations on the accuracy of interpretation.
Geophysical methods may be reliable in sites where there is a contrast between prop-
erties of rock materials. A variety of measurement techniques and surveys are used in
geotechnical engineering in order to determine the physical properties required in the
design of structures in or on rocks. The accuracy and reliability with which these are
determined controls the factor of safety assumed during planning of a project and con-
sequently has an effect on the construction cost. Table 2.2 lists geophysical techniques
currently used in geotechnical engineering.
2.2 EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION
The following section presents several examples of applications of geophysical techniques
to tunnelling technology.
8 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 2.2 Geophysical exploration techniques in the geotechnical and rock engineering ﬁelds.
Technical ﬁeld
Object
Geophysical techniques
A. Civil and construction
ﬁeld
Looking ahead of tunnel face
Horizontal seismic proﬁling
electromagnetic method
(1) Tunnel boring
Survey for tunnel
Survey for loosened areas by
tunnel boring
Reﬂection seismic sounding
Geotomography
(2) Road construction
Grasp of fractured zone
Electromagnetic method
(3) Strength improvement
of thin ground-layer
Evaluation of strength
improvement of thin
ground-layer
Reﬂection seismic;
PS logging
B. Energy development
ﬁeld
(1) Gas pipe setting
Setting of gas pipes without
excavation
Ground penetrating radar
C. Environment and
disaster prevention
ﬁeld
(1) Active fault survey
Determination of location
of trench
Reﬂection seismic and
electric sounding
(2) Landslide survey
Prediction of landslide
Electromagnetic
micro-seismic method
(3) Cavity detection in
river bank
Detection of cavity in
river bank
Three-dimensional reﬂection
seismic
(4) Underground disposal
of industrial wastes
Leakage of water at wastes
location
Electric sounding
D. Conservation of
national land
(1) Survey of archeology
Discovery of new ruins
Repair of statue
Electric sounding
Thermal-infrared
E. Maintenance ﬁeld
(1) Diagnosis of concrete
Detection of fracture and
cavity
Ground penetrating radar;
thermal-infrared; sounding
by hammer
F. Defence/Military ﬁeld
(1) Blasting of land mine
Removal of land mine
Energy sources
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 9
2.2.1 Looking ahead of a tunnel face
Geophysical surveys to investigate the geological conditions ahead of a tunnel face are
conducted using both elastic and electromagnetic waves. In this application, looking
ahead of tunnel face, a short turn-around time is essential in order to identify the geo-
logical conditions with high accuracy, without interrupting drilling operations at the
face and without changing the sequence of ﬁeld operations. A schematic diagram of
ﬁeld data acquisition in looking ahead of a tunnel face using elastic waves is shown in
Fig. 2.2. Several energy sources for the elastic waves are available at the tunnel face, i.e.,
a 100–200 g charge of dynamite, delay blasting at the tunnel face, or vibrations induced
by the TBM (Tunnel Boring Machine) as it cuts the rock. The seismic disturbances from
the geological boundaries are received by three-component geophone placed on each side
of the tunnel wall and fed to data recorders. The reﬂection waves of positive polarity
generated from approximately 40 m on the left side, and about 60 and 90 m on the
right side, ahead of the tunnel face indicate changes from hard rock to soft rock, as
the polarities indicate a negative change in compressive strength of the rock. Fig. 2.3 is
the inversion result of electromagnetic survey data using transmitter and receiver placed
on the tunnel face. This ﬁgure is in good agreement with the resistivity distribution on
the observation report.
2.2.2 Geological information required before tunnelling
The principle of the helicopter-borne electromagnetic method is shown in Fig. 2.4.
The transmitter, carried on the helicopter generates the primary electromagnetic ﬁeld
and the receiver, also on the helicopter, observes the secondary electromagnetic ﬁeld
Tunnel
Tunnel Face
Reflector
Source
Receivers
Fig. 2.2
Schematic map of data acquisition ahead of a tunnel face.
10 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Fig. 2.3
Inversion result of electromagnetic survey for looking ahead of tunnel face.
Fig. 2.4
Schematic map of helicopter-borne electromagnetic survey.
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 11
programed to cancel the principal ﬁeld. The geo-magnetic ﬁeld is also observed
simultaneously.
Ashida (2001) also presented the results of a helicopter-borne electromagnetic survey
performed to predict geological conditions ahead of the proposed route of a tunnel. This
procedure allows geological information for the proposed tunnel alignment to be acquired
before tunnelling is started. This is a modern trend for feasibility studies. Big ﬁrms have
used this technique in unapproachable hilly terrains for submitting the tenders.
Thereisanapproximatecorrelationbetweenrockmassquality(Q)andP-wavevelocity
according to equation (5.15) and Fig. 5.5. The details are presented brieﬂy in Section 5.8.3.
Once the rock mass quality is determined by seismic refraction survey ahead of the tunnel
face, the support design may be adopted from Fig. 10.2 for different rock conditions.
Electrical resistivity survey is good in exploring the water-charged fractured zones
in rock masses. Thus, one may puncture these zones by advance drill holes ahead of
tunnel face before tunnelling. Extensive water-charged zones can exist surprisingly in
the hard rocks like granites, basalts, quartzites, etc. and can pose serious tunnelling
problems/hazards.
2.2.3 Strength improvement of thin ground layers
The improvement of thin ground layer was carried out to eliminate adverse ground erosion
effects of a river passing through a city. Weak, thin ground layers in the river bank and
river bed werestrengthenedby injecting cement groutfrom a boreholealmostcontinuously
upto selected depth at intervals upto approximately 2.0 m. This was done in order to avoid
differential settlement of facilities such as communication cables and drainage pipes.
The strength of weak, thin ground layers may be improved in various ways, including:
• Damming off of the river over one-half of its width to allow treatment of the river
bottom layers.
• Strength improvement of selected depth intervals upto approximately 2 m.
• After removal of the soil above the strength-improved layer, installation of facil-
ities such as communication cables and drainage pipes on the strength-improved
(stabilized) layer.
• Similar treatment of the other half of the river.
• After reclamation, effective utilization of ground surface as a park.
In assessing the strength improvement of the thin ground layer, it is important to
determine whether or not the compressive strength and the thickness of the strengthened
layer meet the requirements.
The S waves are used in preference to P waves because the lower velocity of S waves
results in higher resolution at a given frequency. In using the chart, the recorded reﬂection
seismic signals produced by the S-wave energy sources are displayed together with the
velocity proﬁle. The width of the strength improvement of thin ground layer is obtained
12 Tunnelling in weak rocks
and the velocity of the layer is estimated from the velocity analysis. The relationship
between the S-wave velocity Vs (m/s) and the uniaxial compressive strength qu (MPa) of
the layer, as determined from cores, is given by equation (2.2).
qu = 6.0 × 10−7V 2.3821
s
(2.2)
Equation (2.2) allows the compressive strength of the layer to be determined from the
velocity of the thin ground layer after strength improvement. It should be mentioned also
that the shallow reﬂection survey method using S-wave energy sources as described above
is applicable to the survey of proposed alignments prior to construction of a tunnel for
underground drainage. The S-wave velocity is not affected by saturation, whereas P-wave
velocity is increased by saturation due to easier passage through ground water.
2.3 PREDICTION AHEAD OF TUNNEL FACE WITH SOURCE
PLACED ON FACE
The new data acquisition and analysis method has been introduced into the seismic refrac-
tion method in order to estimate the velocity ahead of the tunnel faces. The approach is
the expansion of the high-resolution seismic refraction method by using sources at the
tunnel faces. At ﬁrst, the surface seismic refraction method using sources and receivers
only on the surface is performed in the investigation phase. Next, the data acquisition and
analysis using in-tunnel sources are repeated in the construction phase. The data acquired
in the investigation and construction phases are analyzed simultaneously. The numerical
experiments of seismic refraction method including in-tunnel sources have been carried
out in order to show the efﬁciency of the method. The data without in-tunnel sources can-
not delineate the velocity model clearly. As the number of in-tunnel sources increased,
the resolution of reconstructed models also increased. Specially, the velocity just ahead
of the tunnel face can be estimated precisely. The method was applied to an actual tunnel
site with an in-tunnel reﬂection method. A velocity model was obtained from the refrac-
tion method with an in-tunnel source and reﬂector distribution was obtained from the
in-tunnel reﬂection method. The prediction of rock quality ahead of a tunnel face from
seismic methods agreed with the excavation records.
One of the methods applied to above objective, is the in-tunnel seismic reﬂection
method, e.g., TSP, HSP (Sattel et al., 1992; Ashida et al., 1999 and Inazaki et al., 1999)
in which sources and receivers are placed in a tunnel. The method has been applied to
many construction sites although these attempts were mainly in the experimental stage.
However, as the number of practical application increases, disagreements between pre-
dictions and construction results are often reported and many problems of prediction
accuracy are pointed out. The surface seismic refraction method which is carried out in
investigation phase is one of the other methods. The method has been applied to many
tunnel investigations, as a standard method in Japan, over the years. However, more accu-
rate investigation is required in recent years. The geoscientists have improved traditional
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 13
seismic new seismographs and an automatic analysis using a computer, and named it
High-resolution Seismic Refraction Method (Hayashi & Saito, 1998 and Hayashi, 1999).
Although the method has greatly improved accuracy and reliability of seismic refraction
results, one cannot say that the method satisﬁes the requirements completely.
Both the in-tunnel reﬂection method and the seismic refraction method predict rock
quality along a tunnel route by estimating seismic velocity (or reﬂector) model using
seismic waves generated artiﬁcially. There are two main causes for disagreement between
predictions and construction results. The ﬁrst is the analytical models, such as velocity
models or the reﬂector distributions obtained from the seismic refraction method and the
in-tunnel reﬂection method, are not accurate. The second is that the interpretation of the
analytical results is not appropriate. The ﬁrst one is the generic problem of methods.
For example, two-dimensional seismic methods cannot obtain true velocity models in
three-dimensional structures. This problem can be solved by the development of more
sophisticated data acquisition and analytical approaches. The second problem is more
important. The velocity models or reﬂector distributions are not related to rock quality
directly. For example, although the same seismic velocity (e.g., 4.5 km/s) is obtained,
rock quality may have large difference between igneous rocks and Mesozoic sedimentary
rocks. It is obvious that other information, such as geological, hydrological in borehole,
have to be considered with the results of geophysical explorations, such as the seismic
refraction or in-tunnel reﬂection methods, in order to predict rock quality along a tunnel
route with accuracy and reliability.
One of the important problems of the in-tunnel reﬂection method is difﬁculty in esti-
mating seismic velocity ahead of the tunnel face. Geoscientists have tried to estimate the
velocity ahead of the tunnel face from the precise velocity analysis of reﬂected waves
(Hayashi & Takahashi, 1999a), and concluded that estimation of the velocity ahead of the
tunnel face is difﬁcult (Hayashi & Takahashi, 1999b). In order to solve this problem, one
has to use sources and receivers surrounding the target area, that is, on the ground surface
also and/or in the ground ahead of the tunnel face.
On the other hand, a generic problem in the seismic refraction method is the method
using sources and receivers only on the ground surface. This source–receiver geometry
limits severely the accuracy and resolution of analysis in case of a thick overburden.
In order to solve this problem, one has to use sources and receivers surrounding or within
the target area. The idea is to combine the seismic refraction method and in-tunnel seismic
reﬂection method. Geoscientists have developed a new seismic refraction method in which
sources are placed not only on the ground surface but also within a tunnel under construc-
tion. This method may improve simultaneously both the seismic refraction method and
the in-tunnel reﬂection method.
2.3.1 Method
The investigation program of the new method may be summarized as follows. Before
construction, the high-resolution seismic refraction survey is carried out with sources
14 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Seismograph
GPS clock
Shot-mark
Geophones
Seismograph
GPS clock
Tunnel face
Fractured zone
Sources
Fig. 2.5
Schematic diagram of data acquisition. Sources are placed not only on the ground surface
but also within a tunnel under construction (Hayashi & Saito, 2001).
and receivers only on the ground surface. During construction, the data acquisition and
analysis using sources within a tunnel are repeated periodically. As tunnel excavation
proceeds, the number of geophones placed within the tunnel increases. Fig. 2.5 shows the
schematic diagram of the method. GPS clocks are employed to synchronize the sources
within a tunnel and receivers on the ground surface. (GPS does not work in tunnels, as
open sky is needed.)
A seismic refraction analysis is repeated with the data obtained both before and during
construction. The analysis is based on a non-linear least square method in which a forward
modelling and ﬁrst-order simultaneous equations are iteratively performed to minimize
travel time error acquired both before and during the construction. The ray tracing based
on the shortest-path calculation is used as the forward modelling (Moser, 1991) and
SIRT (Simultaneous Iterative Reconstruction Technique) is used for solving ﬁrst-order
simultaneous equations.
2.3.2 Numerical example
Numerical tests have been performed in order to prove the efﬁciency of the method.
Fig. 2.6 shows the velocity model used in the numerical tests and source locations. The-
oretical travel times calculated by ray tracing for this model are considered as observed
data. A velocity model that may satisfy the travel time data is obtained by a linear least
square method.
Not only the travel time data but also ray paths have to be known to obtain a velocity
model by linear inversion. In an actual seismic refraction method, an iterative method
is used as mentioned before because both velocity model and ray paths are unknown.
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 15
True ray paths are, however, given in this study in order to simplify the problem. Con-
sequently, a velocity model can be obtained by solving simultaneous equations once the
Choresky factorization is used as a simultaneous equation solver.
Figs 2.7 to 2.9 show the examples of numerical tests. An analysis with sources only
on the ground surface is shown in Fig. 2.7. Almost true velocity model is obtained in
Sources on the surface
Sources at the tunnel faces
Tunnel route
Fig. 2.6
A velocity model used in numerical tests and source location.
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Distance (m)
Velocity (km/s)
Model
Analysis result
Fig. 2.7
Record of trajectory used to analyze test number 138.
16 Tunnelling in weak rocks
near surfaces region. However, as the depth increases, the resolution of a reconstructed
velocity model decreases. Specially, low velocity zones can be seen only around the top
of the bedrock. Its distribution along a tunnel route is not clear.
Fig. 2.8 shows result of analysis in which two sources are deployed at the vicinity of
both the tunnel entrances, respectively (four in-tunnel sources are used). This numerical
test supposes that both the tunnel faces have proceeded 20 m from the entrances. One
may see that the low velocity zone placed between 25 and 30 m and velocity boundary
at distance of 170 m are more clearly imaged than Fig. 2.7. In this test, the low velocity
zone and the velocity boundary can be considered as placed ahead of the tunnel face. This
result shows that the use of the sources placed within a tunnel improved the resolution of
a velocity model ahead of the tunnel face.
Fig. 2.9 shows an analysis in which eight sources are deployed within both the tunnel
respectively (sixteen in-tunnel sources are used). Almost true velocity distribution through
the tunnel route has been obtained; and the low-velocity zone placed at the middle of the
tunnel, which can be considered as head of the tunnel face, has been clearly imaged.
The numerical tests show that the analysis with the data obtained during constructions
using sources with a tunnel as well as the data obtained before the constructions may
improve the accuracy and resolution of analyzed velocity models. The method can also
improve the in-tunnel reﬂection method. The seismic refraction method with in-tunnel
sources can supply reliable velocity distribution ahead of the tunnel face to the in-tunnel
Model
Analysis result
Sources
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Distance(m)
Velocity(km/s)
Fig. 2.8
Masses, velocities and energies of rocks crossing the plane deﬁned by the fence post.
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 17
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
50
100
150
200
Distance(m)
Velocity(km/s)
Analysis result
Sources
Model
Fig. 2.9
Velocities, forces and energy dissipation in the protective system.
reﬂection method so that the accuracy of reﬂector position can be increased. Furthermore,
rock classiﬁcation from tunnel faces to reﬂectors as well as behind the reﬂectors is possible
with precise velocity distribution obtained from the new seismic refraction method.
2.4 APPLICATION TO CONSTRUCTION SITE
The new method has been applied to an actual tunnel site. The tunnel length is about
2 km and is located within Mesozoic sedimentary rocks with slate, sandstone and chert.
The seismic refraction method carried out before construction shows that velocity along
the tunnel route is mainly 4.0–4.2 km/s. An accurate velocity model is required during the
construction phase because of a thick overburden (maximum depth to the tunnel route is
about 400 m at the middle of the tunnel). The data acquisition using a source within the
tunnel under construction and receivers on the ground surface was carried out and the
data were analyzed with the data acquired before the construction. In addition to this,
the in-tunnel reﬂection method was carried out in order to evaluate the fractured zone pre-
dicted from the seismic refraction method and geological reconnaissance. Fig. 2.10 shows
the velocity model obtained from the refraction method carried out before construction.
Fig. 2.10 also shows the position of source and receiver for data acquisition during the
construction. On the ground surface, receivers were deployed from a distance of 600 to
1050 m for the seismic refraction analysis.
18 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Receivers for the in-tunnel reflection
Excavation
A source for surface receivers
(tunnel face at the measurement)
Receivers on the surface
A source for in-tunnel receivers
 
Fig. 2.10
A velocity model obtained from a refraction method carried out before construction and
source and receiver location for data acquisition during the construction. A black thick line indicates
receivers for the in-tunnel reﬂection method. • Indicates a source for the in-tunnel reﬂection method.
⊚Indicates a source for surface receivers.
2.4.1 In-tunnel seismic reﬂection method
Fig. 2.11 shows a raw shot gather data of the in-tunnel seismic reﬂection method (source
location is shown as • in Fig. 2.10). The ﬁrst arrival with apparent velocity of about
3.6 km/s is direct P-wave. Clear after-phase with apparent velocity of 1.2 km/s seems to
be a kind of surface waves propagating along the tunnel. One may dimly see after-phase
with negative apparent velocity in the distance of 20 to 50 m and in the time of 60 to 80 ms.
This after-phase seems to be reﬂected waves from a reﬂector ahead of the tunnel face.
The apparent velocity of this reﬂected arrival is clearly faster than the direct P-waves
and it suggests that the reﬂector is not perpendicular to the tunnel route. It is unusual that
reﬂected waves could be seen on a raw shot gather. The data suggests that a clear reﬂector
exists ahead of the tunnel face. Fig. 2.12 shows the shot gather after applying a band-pass
and a F-K ﬁlter. Waves with negative apparent velocity are extracted and the reﬂected
waves can be seen clearly.
2.4.2 Seismic refraction method with a source placed at tunnel face
Fig. 2.10 shows source ⊚and receiver locations for the data acquisition. A source was
placed at a tunnel face and receivers were placed on the ground surface. The data were
analyzed with the data obtained before the tunnel construction. Fig. 2.13 shows result of
analysis. The whole velocity model does not change signiﬁcantly. However, the velocity
ahead of the tunnel face at distances of 500 to 900 m and elevation of 1000 to 1200 m
decreases clearly. Fig. 2.14 shows the velocity along the tunnel route obtained from the
seismic refraction analysis. The analysis with a source at the tunnel face suggested that
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 19
Fig. 2.11
A raw shot gather data of the in-tunnel seismic reﬂection method. A source was placed
55.8 m away from a receiver array (⊚in Fig. 2.10). Big arrows indicate reﬂected waves from a
reﬂector ahead of the tunnel face.
Fig. 2.12
A shot gather after applying a band-pass and F-K ﬁlter. Big arrows indicate reﬂected
waves from a reﬂector ahead of the tunnel face.
20 Tunnelling in weak rocks
A source for surface receivers
(tunnel face at the measurement) 
Receivers on the surface
Fig. 2.13
Result of an analysis of seismic refraction data with an in-tunnel source ⊚. The velocity
ahead of tunnel face at distances of 500 to 900 m and elevation of 1000 to 1200 m decreases clearly,
compared to results of analysis before construction (Fig. 2.10).
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4
4.1
4.2
4.3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Distance (m)
Velocity (km/s)
Analysis result with an in-tunnel source
Analysis result without in-tunnel source
The tunnel face at the measurement (439m)
Receivers for the in-tunnel
seismic reflection method
A tunnel face collapsed (544m)
Fig. 2.14
Seismic velocity along a tunnel route. A thick line indicates result of an analysis with
an in-tunnel source. A thin line indicates result of an analysis without in-tunnel sources.
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 21
the velocity ahead of the tunnel face is lower than the velocity behind the tunnel face, and
that the velocity from the tunnel face to 100 m ahead of it is about 4.15 km/s.
2.4.3 Construction result
It was predicted that the condition of the tunnel face is going to be worse than the current
condition because the in-tunnel reﬂection method imaged a clear reﬂector ahead of the
tunnel face and the seismic refraction method suggested that the velocity ahead of the
tunnel face is lower than the velocity behind the tunnel face. A shot record of the tun-
nel reﬂection method has been transformed into a reﬂector image by a pre-stack depth
migration. Fig. 2.10 shows a reﬂector image by the migration. Fig. 2.15 shows a reﬂector
image by the migration with the migration velocity of 4.15 km/s obtained from the seismic
refraction analysis with a source at the tunnel face.
During excavation, the tunnel face condition got worse from 90 m ahead of the tunnel
face where the measurements had been performed, and a tunnel face had collapsed at
104.7 m ahead of the tunnel face (see Figs 2.8 and 2.10). In this example, only one
in-tunnel source was used. However, it is ideal to perform a data acquisition with in-tunnel
sources periodically, so that as many in-tunnel sources may be used as possible.
The new data acquisition and analysis method in which sources are placed not only on
the ground surface but also within a tunnel has been introduced into the seismic refraction
Distance (m)
Tunnel face collapsed
(104.7m)
0m
−60m
Excavation
The tunnel face at the measurement 
Receivers
Fall of rocks (92.7m)
Distance (m)
Fig. 2.15
A reﬂector image by the migration with the migration velocity of 4.5 km/s obtained from
the seismic refraction analysis with a source at the tunnel face. A white broken line indicates the
reﬂector that a stacking performance is maximum if velocity is 4.1 km/s. A tunnel face collapsed
on the extension of clear reﬂector.
22 Tunnelling in weak rocks
method for the construction of a tunnel. Numerical tests have been carried out and the
results have shown the efﬁciency of the method. The method was applied to an actual
tunnel site. Although only one in-tunnel source was used, a weak rock zone ahead of the
tunnel face was successfully predicted by seismic methods. The point to be emphasized
in the actual example can be summarized as follows. One could predict that tunnel face
condition was getting worse by obtaining velocity ahead of the tunnel face from the
seismic refraction method with a source at the tunnel face. The conventional in-tunnel
reﬂection method in which sources and receivers are placed only within a tunnel can image
reﬂector distribution. The method cannot, however, predict rock quality and tunnel face
condition corresponding to the reﬂector. For example, it is difﬁcult to determine whether
the rock quality is getting better or worse from the in-tunnel seismic reﬂection method.
It is possible to estimate the rock quality ahead of the tunnel face from the new seismic
refraction method in which sources and receivers are placed not only on the surface but also
within a tunnel. Applying a new seismic refraction method with the in-tunnel reﬂection
method, valuable information may be supplied for tunnel construction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Dr. Koichi Hayashi & Dr. Hideki Saito and Prof. Yuzuru Ashida for kind
permission to use their respective work published in ISRM News Journal, Vol. 7, No. 1,
December 2001.
REFERENCES
Ashida, Y. (2001). Application of geophysical techniques to geotechnical engineering. ISRM News
Journal, 7(1), December, 34-43.
Ashida, Y., Matuchi, A., Matsuoka, T. and Watanable, T. (1999). Forward prediction of tunnel
face by using the excavation vibration of tunnel boring machine. Proc. of the 100th SEGJ
Conference, 1999, 16-19.
Hayashi, K. (1999). Application of high resolution seismic refraction method to civil engineer-
ing investigations. 61st EAGE Annual Conference and Technical Exhibition, Extended
Abstracts, 1, 4-46.
Hayashi, K. and Saito, H. (1998). High resolution seismic refraction method-development and
application. Butsuri-tansa (Geophys. Explor.), 51, 471-492.
Hayashi, K. and Saito, H. (2001). Prediction ahead of the tunnel face by a high resolution seismic
refraction method with sources placed in the tunnel. ISRM News Journal, 7(1), 28-33.
Hayashi, K. and Takahashi, T. (1999a). Estimation of the velocity ahead of the tunnel face in the
tunnel seismic reﬂection method. Proc. of the 100th SEGJ Conference, 20-24 (in Japanese).
Application of geophysics in tunnelling and site survey activities 23
Hayashi, K. Takahashi, T. (1999b). Estimation of velocity ahead of the tunnel face in the tunnel
seismic reﬂection method (Part II). Proc. of the 101th SEGJ Conference, 87-91 (in
Japanese).
Inazaki, T., Isahai, H., Kawamura, S., Kurahashi, T. and Hayashi, H. (1999). Stepwise application
of horizontal seismic proﬁling for tunnel prediction ahead of the face. The Leading Edge,
18(12), 1429-1431.
Moser, T. J. (1991). Shortest path calculation of seismic rays. Geophysics, 56, 59-67.
Sattel, G., Frey, P. and Amberg, R.(1992). Prediction ahead of tunnel face by seismic methods.
Pilot Project in Centovalli Tunnel. Locarno, Switzerland, First Break, 10, 19-25.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
3
Terzaghi’s rock load theory
“The geotechnical engineer should apply theory and experimentation but temper them by
putting them into the context of the uncertainty of nature. Judgement enters through
engineering geology.”
Karl Terzaghi
3.1 INTRODUCTION
This was probably the ﬁrst successful attempt in classifying the rock masses for the
engineering purposes. Terzaghi (1946) proposed that the rock load factor Hp is the height
of loosening zone over tunnel roof which is likely to load the steel arches. These rock
load factors were estimated by Terzaghi from a 5.5 m wide steel-arch supported rail/road
tunnel in the Alps during the late twenties. In these investigations, wooden blocks of
known strengths were used for blocking the steel arches to the surrounding rock masses.
Rock loads were estimated from the known strength of the failed wooden blocks. Terzaghi
used these observations to back-analyze rock loads acting on the supports. Subsequently,
he conducted “Trap-door” experiments on the sand and found that the height of loosened
arch above the roof increased directly with the opening width in the sand.
3.2 ROCK CLASSES
Terzaghi (1946) considered the structural discontinuities of the rock masses and classiﬁed
them qualitatively into nine categories as described in Table 3.1. Extensive experience
from tunnels in the lower Himalaya has shown that the term squeezing rock is really
squeezing ground condition; because a jointed and weak rock mass fails at high overburden
stress and squeezes into the tunnels.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
26 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 3.1 Deﬁnitions of rock classes of Terzaghi’s rock load theory (Sinha, 1989).
Rock class
Type of rocks
Deﬁnition
I.
Hard and intact
The rock is unweathered. It contains neither joints nor
hair cracks. If fractured, it breaks across intact rock.
After excavation, the rock may have some popping
and spalling failures from roof. At high stresses spon-
taneous and violent spalling of rock slabs may occur
from the side or the roof. The unconﬁned compressive
strength is equal to or more than 100 MPa.
II.
Hard stratiﬁed and
schistose
Therockishardandlayered. Thelayersareusuallywidely
separated. The rock may or may not have planes of
weakness. In such rocks, spalling is quite common.
III.
Massive,
moderately
jointed
A jointed rock, the joints are widely spaced. The joints
may or may not be cemented. It may also contain hair
cracks but the huge blocks between the joints are inti-
mately interlocked so that vertical walls do not require
lateral support. Spalling may occur.
IV.
Moderately blocky
and seamy
Joints are less spaced. Blocks are about 1 m in size. The
rock may or may not be hard. The joints may or may
not be healed but the interlocking is so intimate that no
side pressure is exerted or expected.
V.
Very blocky and
seamy
Closely spaced joints. Block size is less than 1 m. It con-
sists of almost chemically intact rock fragments which
are entirely separated from each other and imperfectly
interlocked. Some side pressure of low magnitude is
expected. Vertical walls may require supports.
VI.
Completely
crushed but
chemically intact
Comprises chemically intact rock having the character of
a crusher-run aggregate. There is no interlocking. Con-
siderable side pressure is expected on tunnel supports.
The block size could be few centimeters to 30 cm.
VII.
Squeezing rock –
moderate depth
Squeezing is a mechanical process in which the rock
advances into the tunnel opening without perceptible
increase in volume. Moderate depth is a relative term
and could be from 150 to 1000 m.
VIII.
Squeezing rock –
great depth
The depth may be more than 150 m. The maximum
recommended tunnel depth is 1000 m.
IX.
Swelling rock
Swelling is associated with volume change and is due to
chemical change of the rock, usually in presence of
moisture or water. Some shales absorb moisture from
air and swell. Rocks containing swelling minerals such
asmontmorillonite, illite, kaoliniteandotherscanswell
and exert heavy pressure on rock supports.
Terzaghi’s rock load theory 27
3.3 ROCK LOAD FACTOR
Terzaghi (1946) combined the results of his trap-door experiments and the estimated rock
loads from Alpine tunnels to compute rock load factors Hp in terms of tunnel width B
and tunnel height Ht of the loosened rock mass above the tunnel crown (Fig. 3.1) which
loads the steel arches. Such rock load factors for all the nine rock classes are listed in
Table 3.2.
For obtaining the vertical support pressure from the rock load factor Hp, Terzaghi
suggested the following equation (Fig. 3.1).
pv = γ · Hp
(3.1)
where pv is the support pressure, γ is the unit weight of the rock mass and Hp is the height
of loose overburden above tunnel roof (Fig. 3.1). A limitation of Terzaghi’s theory is that
it may not be applicable for tunnels wider than 6 m.
The roof of the tunnel is assumed to be located below the water table. If it is located
permanently above the water table, the values given for classes IV to VI in Table 3.2 can
be reduced by 50 percent (Rose, 1982).
Deere et al. (1970) modiﬁed Terzaghi’s classiﬁcation system by introducing the
RQD as the lone measure of rock quality (Table 3.3). They have distinguished between
blasted and machine excavated tunnels and proposed guidelines for selection of steel set,
Surface
Hp
Ht
Bi
H
W
X
Y
Z
B
Fig. 3.1
Terzaghi’s (1946) rock-load concept in tunnels.
28 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 3.2 Rock load in tunnels within various rock classes (Terzaghi, 1946).
Rock class
Rock condition
Rock load factor Hp
Remarks
I.
Hard and intact
Zero
Light lining required only if
spalling or popping occurs.
II.
Hard stratiﬁed or
schistose
0 to 0.5B
Light support mainly for
protection against spalling.
Load may change erratically
from point to point.
III.
Massive,
moderately
jointed
0 to 0.25B
IV.
Moderately blocky
and seamy
0.25B to 0.35 (B + Ht)
No side pressure.
V.
Very blocky and
seamy
0.35 to 1.10 (B + Ht)
Little or no side pressure.
VI.
Completely
crushed but
chemically intact
1.10 (B + Ht)
Considerable side pressure.
Softening effects of seepage
toward bottom of tunnel
requires either continuous
support for lower ends of ribs
or circular ribs.
VII.
Squeezing rock –
moderate depth
1.10 to 2.10 (B + Ht)
Heavy side pressure, invert struts
required. Circular ribs are
recommended.
VIII.
Squeezing rock –
great depth
2.10 to 4.50 (B + Ht)
IX.
Swelling rock
Upto 250 ft (80 m),
irrespective of the
value of (B + Ht)
Circular ribs are required. In
extreme cases, use of yielding
support recommended.
Notations: B = Tunnel span in meters; Ht = height of the opening in meters and Hp = height of the loosened
rock mass above tunnel crown developing load (Fig. 3.1).
rock bolts and shotcrete supports for 6 and 12 m diameter tunnels in rock. These
guidelines are presented in Table 3.4.
Deere et al. (1970) also considered the rock mass as an integral part of the support
system, meaning that Table 3.4 is only applicable if the rock mass is not allowed to loosen
and disintegrate extensively. Deere et al. (1970) assumed that machine excavation had
the beneﬁcial effect of reducing rock loads by about 20 to 25 percent.
Terzaghi’s rock load theory 29
Table 3.3 Terzaghi’s rock load concept as modiﬁed by Deere et al. (1970).
Rock class and condition
RQD %
Rock load Hp
Remarks
I.
Hard and intact
95–100
Zero
Same as Table 3.2
II.
Hard stratiﬁed or
schistose
90–99
0–0.5B
Same as Table 3.2
III.
Massive
moderately
jointed
85–95
0–0.25B
Same as Table 3.2
IV.
Moderately blocky
and seamy
75–85
0.25B–0.35 (B + Ht)
Types IV, V and VI
reduced by about 50%
from Terzaghi values
because water table has
little effect on rock load
(Terzaghi, 1946;
Brekke, 1968)
V.
Very blocky and
seamy
30–75
(0.2–0.6) (B + Ht)
Same as above
VI.
Completely crushed
3–30
(0.6–1.10) (B + Ht)
Same as above
VIa.
Sand and gravel
0–3
(1.1–1.4) (B + Ht)
Same as above
VII.
Squeezing rock at
moderate depth
NA
(1.10–2.10) (B + Ht)
Same as Table 3.2
VIII.
Squeezing rock at
great depth
NA
(2.10–4.50) (B+ Ht)
Same as Table 3.2
IX.
Swelling rock
NA
Upto 80 m irrespective
of the value of
(B+ Ht)
Same as Table 3.2
Notes: B = Tunnel span; Ht = height of the opening and Hp = height of the loosened rock mass above the
tunnel crown developing load (Fig. 3.1).
3.3.1 Limitations
Terzaghi’s approach was successfully used earlier when conventional drill and blast
method of excavation and steel-arch supports were employed in the tunnels of comparable
size. This practice lowered the strength of the rock mass and permitted signiﬁcant roof
convergence which mobilized a zone of loosened rock mass above the tunnel roof. The
height of this loosened rock mass, called “cofﬁn cover”, acted as dead load on the supports.
Cecil (1970) concluded that Terzaghi’s classiﬁcation provided no quantitative information
regarding the rock mass properties. Despite all these limitations, the immense practical
values of Terzaghi’s approach cannot be denied and this method still ﬁnds application
under conditions similar to those for which it was developed.
30 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 3.4 Guidelines for selection of steel sets for 6 to 12 m diameter tunnels in rock (Deere et al., 1970).
Steel sets
Rock bolt
Conventional shotcrete
Rock
Construction
Weight of
Spacing
Spacing of
Additional
Total thickness (cm)
Additional
quality
method
steel sets
pattern bolt
requirements
Crown
Sides
supports
Excellent
RQD > 90
Tunnel boring
machine
Light
None to
occasional
None to
occasional
Rare
None to
occasional
None
None
Drilling and
blasting
Light
None to
occasional
None to
occasional
Rare
None to
occasional
None
None
Good RQD
75 to 90
Boring machine
Light
Occasional
or 1.5 to
1.8 m
Occasional
or 1.5 to
1.8 m
Occasional mesh
and straps
Local
application
5 to 7.5 cm
None
None
Drilling and
blasting
Light
1.5 to 1.8 m
1.5 to 1.8 m
Occasional mesh
or straps
Local
application
5 to 7.5 cm
None
None
Fair RQD 50
to 75
Boring machine
Light to
medium
1.5 to 1.8 m
1.2 to 1.8 m
Mesh and straps
as required
5 to 10 cm
None
Rock bolts
Drilling and
blasting
Light to
medium
1.2 to 1.5 m
0.9 to 1.5 m
Mesh and straps
as required
10 cm or
more
10 cm or
more
Rock bolts
Poor RQD
25 to 50
Boring machine
Medium
circular
0.6 to 1.2 m
0.9 to 1.5 m
Anchorage may
be hard to
obtain.
Considerable
mesh and straps
required
10 to 15 cm
10 to 15 cm
Rock bolt as
required (1.2 to
1.8 m center to
center)
Terzaghi’s rock load theory 31
Drilling and
blasting
Medium to
heavy
circular
0.2 to
1.2 m
0.6 to 1.2 m
As above
15 cm or more
15 cm or
more
As above
Very poor
RQD < 25
Boring machine
Medium to
heavy
circular
0.6 m
0.6 to 1.2 m
Anchorage may be
impossible. 100
percent mesh and
straps required
15 cm or more
on whole
section
Medium sets as
required
Drilling and
blasting
Heavy circular
0.6 m
0.9 m
As above
15 cm or more
on whole
section
Medium to
heavy sets as
required
Very poor
squeezing
and
swelling
ground
Both methods
Very heavy
circular
0.6 m
0.6 to 0.9 m
Anchorage may be
impossible. 100
percent mesh and
straps required
15 cm or more
on whole
section
Heavy sets as
required
32 Tunnelling in weak rocks
With the advent of the New Austrian Tunnelling Method (NATM) (Chapter 9)
and Norwegian Method of Tunnelling (NMT) (Chapter 10), increasing use is made of
controlledblastingandmachineexcavationtechniquesandsupportsystememployingsteel
ﬁber reinforced shotcrete and rock bolts. Even in steel-arch supported tunnels, wooden
struts have been replaced by pneumatically ﬁlled lean concrete. These improvements in
the tunnelling technology preserve the pre-excavation strength of the rock mass and use it
as a load carrying structure in order to minimize roof convergence and restrict the height
of the loosening zone above the tunnel crown.
Consequently, the support pressure does not increase directly with the opening width.
Based on this argument, Barton et al. (1974) advocated that the support pressure is inde-
pendent of opening width in rock tunnels. Rock mass – tunnel support interaction analysis
of Verman (1993) also suggests that the support pressure is practically independent of the
tunnel width, provided support stiffness is not lowered. Goel et al. (1996) also studied this
aspect of effect of tunnel size on support pressure and found that there is a negligible effect
of tunnel size on support pressure in non-squeezing ground conditions, but the tunnel size
could have considerable inﬂuence on the support pressure in squeezing ground condition.
This aspect has been covered in detail in Chapter 6.
TheestimatedsupportpressuresfromTable3.2havebeencomparedwiththemeasured
values and the following conclusions emerge:
(i) Terzaghi’s method provides reasonable support pressure for small tunnels
(B < 6 m).
(ii) It provides over-safe estimates for large tunnels and caverns (Diam. 6 to
14 m) and
(iii) The estimated support pressure values fall in a very large range for squeezing
and swelling ground conditions for a meaningful application.
3.4 MODIFIED TERZAGHI’S THEORY FOR TUNNELS
AND CAVERNS
Singh et al. (1995) have compared support pressure measured from tunnels and caverns
with estimates from Terzaghi’s rock load theory and found that the support pressure in
rock tunnels and caverns does not increase directly with excavation size as assumed by
Terzaghi (1946) and others mainly due to dilatant behavior of rock masses, joint roughness
and prevention of loosening of rock mass by improved tunnelling technology. They have
subsequently recommended ranges of support pressures as given in Table 3.5 for both
tunnels and caverns for the beneﬁt of those who still want to use Terzaghi’s rock load
approach. They observed that the support pressures are nearly independent of the size of
opening.
It is interesting to note that the recommended roof support pressures turn out to be the
same as those obtained from Terzaghi’s rock load factors when B and Ht are substituted
Terzaghi’s rock load theory 33
Table 3.5 Recommendations of Singh et al. (1995) on support pressure for rock tunnels and caverns.
Terzaghi’s classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation of Singh et al. (1995)
Recommended support
pressure (MPa)
Category
Rock condition
Rock load factor Hp
Category
Rock condition
pv
ph
Remarks
I.
Hard and intact
0
I.
Hard and intact
0
0
–
II.
Hard stratiﬁed or
schistose
0 to 0.5B
II.
Hard stratiﬁed or schistose
0.04–0.07
0
–
III.
Massive, moderately
jointed
0 to 0.25B
III.
Massive, moderately
jointed
0.0–0.04
0
–
IV.
Moderately blocky
seamy and jointed
0.25B to 0.35
(B + Ht)
IV.
Moderately blocky seamy
very jointed
0.04–0.1
0–0.2 pv
Inverts may be
required
V.
Very blocky and
seamy, shattered
arched
0.35 to 1.1 (B+ Ht)
V.
Very blocky and seamy,
shattered highly jointed,
thin shear zone or fault
0.1–0.2
0–0.5 pv
Inverts may be
required, arched
roof preferred
VI.
Completely crushed
but chemically intact
1.1 (B+ Ht)
VI.
Completely crushed but
chemically unaltered,
thick shear and fault zone
0.2–0.3
0.3–1.0 pv
Inverts essential,
arched roof
essential
continued
34 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 3.5—Continued
Terzaghi’s classiﬁcation
Classiﬁcation of Singh et al. (1995)
Recommended support
pressure (MPa)
Category
Rock condition
Rock load factor Hp Category
Rock condition
pv
ph
Remarks
VII.
Squeezing rock at
moderate depth
1.1 to 2.1 (B+ Ht)
VII.
Squeezing rock
condition
VIIA.
Mild squeezing
(ua/a upto 3%)
0.3–0.4
Depends on primary
stress values, ph may
exceed pv
Inverts essential. In
excavation ﬂexible support
preferred. Circular section
with struts recommended.
VIIB.
Moderate squeezing
(ua/a = 3 to 5%)
0.4–0.6
As above
As above
VIII.
Squeezing rock at
great depth
2.1 to 4.5 (B+ Ht)
VIIC.
High squeezing
(ua/a >5%)
6.0–1.4
As above
As above
IX.
Swelling rock
upto 80 m
VIII.
Swelling rock
VIIIA.
Mild swelling
0.3–0.8
Depends on type and
content of swelling
clays, ph may exceed
pv
Inverts essential in
excavation, arched roof
essential.
VIIIB.
Moderate swelling
0.8–1.4
As above
As above
VIIIC.
High swelling
1.4–2.0
As above
As above
Notations: pv = Vertical support pressure; ph = horizontal support pressure; B = width or span of opening; Ht = height of opening; ua = radial tunnel closure; a = B/2;
thin shear zone = upto 2 m thick.
Terzaghi’s rock load theory 35
by 5.5 m. The estimated roof support pressures from Table 3.5 were found comparable
with the measured values irrespective of the opening size and the rock conditions (Singh
et al., 1995). They have further cautioned that the support pressure is likely to increase
directly with the excavation width for tunnel sections through slickensided shear zones,
thick clay-ﬁlled fault gouges, weak clay shales and running or ﬂowing ground conditions
where interlocking of blocks is likely to be missing or where joint strength is lost and
rock wedges are allowed to fall due to excessive roof convergence on account of delayed
supports beyond stand-up time. It may be noted that wider tunnels require reduced spacing
of bolts or steel-arches and thicker linings since rock loads increase directly with the
excavation width even if the support pressure does not increase with the tunnel size.
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcaion of Rock Masses for the Design
of Tunnel Support. NGI Publication No.106, Oslo, 48.
Brekke, T. L. (1968). Blocky and seamy rock in tunnelling. Bull. Assoc. Eng. Geol., 5(1), 1-12.
Cecil, O. S. (1970). Correlation of Rock Bolts – Shotcrete Support and Rock Quality Parameters in
Scandinavian Tunnels. PhD thesis, University of Illinois, Urbana, 414.
Deere, D. U., Peck, R. B., Parker, H., Monsees, J. E. and Schmidt, B. (1970). Design of tunnel
support systems. High Res. Rec., 339, 26-33.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Dhar, B. B. (1996). Effect of tunnel size on support pressure. Technical
Note. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 33(7), 749-755.
Rose, D. (1982). Revising Terzaghi’s tunnel rock load coefﬁcients. Proc. 23rd U.S.Sym. Rock
Mech., AIME, New York, 953-960.
Singh, Bhawani, Jethwa, J. L. and Dube, A. K. (1995). A classiﬁcation system for support pressure
in tunnels and caverns. J. Rock Mech. & Tunnelling Technology, India, 1(1), January,
13-24.
Sinha, R. S. (1989). Underground Structures – Design and Instrumentation. Elsevier Science,
U.K., 480.
Terzaghi, K. (1946). Rock defects and loads on tunnel support. Introduction to Rock Tunnelling
with Steel Supports. Eds: R. V. Proctor and T. L. White, Commercial Sheering & Stamping
Co., Youngstown, Ohio, U.S.A., 271.
Verman, M. K. (1993). Rock Mass – Tunnel Support Interaction Analysis. PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee,
Roorkee, India, 258.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
4
Rock mass rating (RMR)
“Effectiveness of knowledge through research (E) is E = mc2; where m is mass of
knowledge and c is communication of knowledge by publications.”
Z. T. Bieniawski
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The geomechanics classiﬁcation or the rock mass rating (RMR) system was initially
developed at the South African Council of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research (CSIR) by
Bieniawski (1973) on the basis of his experiences in shallow tunnels in sedimentary rocks
(Kaiser et al., 1986). Since then the classiﬁcation has undergone several signiﬁcant evo-
lutions: in 1974 – reduction of classiﬁcation parameters from 8 to 6; in 1975 – adjustment
of ratings and reduction of recommended support requirements; in 1976 – modiﬁcation of
class boundaries to even multiples of 20; in 1979 – adoption of ISRM (1978) rock mass
description, etc. It is, therefore, important to state which version is used when RMR-values
are quoted. The geomechanics classiﬁcation reported by Bieniawski (1984) is referred in
this book.
To apply the geomechanics classiﬁcation system, a given site should be divided into
a number of geological structural units in such a way that each type of rock mass is repre-
sented by a separate geological structural unit. The following six parameters (representing
causative factors) are determined for each of the structural unit:
(i) Uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock material,
(ii) Rock quality designation RQD,
(iii) Joint or discontinuity spacing,
(iv) Joint condition,
(v) Ground water condition and
(vi) Joint orientation.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
38 Tunnelling in weak rocks
4.2 COLLECTION OF FIELD DATA
The rating of six parameters of the RMR system are given in Tables 4.1 to 4.6. For
reducing doubts due to subjective judgments, the rating for different parameters should
be given a range in preference to a single value. These six parameters are discussed in the
following paragraphs. The beginners do not get the feeling of the value of RMR or Q, etc.
at a location and they get confused on transition from one category to another (Tables 4.4
and 4.5). In fact, approximate average RMR is good enough.
4.2.1 Uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock material (qc)
The strength of the intact rock material should be obtained from rock cores in accordance
with site conditions. The ratings based on both uniaxial compressive strength (UCS)
(which is preferred) and point load strength are given in Table 4.1. UCS may also be
obtained from the point load strength index tests on rock lumps at the natural moisture
content. Please see Table 5.12 also for UCS.
4.2.2 Rock quality designation (RQD)
Rock quality designation (RQD) should be determined from rock cores or volumetric
joint count (Singh & Goel, 1999). RQD is percentage of rock cores (equal to or more
than 10 cm) in one meter of drill run. The details of rating are given in Table 4.2 (see also
Section 5.1.1). The fresh broken cores are ﬁtted together and counted as one piece.
Table 4.1 Strength of intact rock material (Bieniawski, 1979, 1984).
Qualitative
description
Compressive
strength (MPa)
Point load
strength
(MPa)
Rating
Exceptionally
strong
>250
8
15
Very strong
100–250
4–8
12
Strong
50–100
2–4
7
Average
25–50
1–2
4
Weak
5–25
Use of uniaxial
compressive
strength is
preferred
2
Very weak
1–5
As above
1
Extremely weak
<1
As above
0
Note: At compressive strength less than 0.6 MPa, many rock materials would be
regarded as soil.
Rock mass rating (RMR) 39
Table 4.2 Rock quality designation, RQD
(Bieniawski, 1979).
Qualitative
description
RQD
Rating
Excellent
90–100
20
Good
75–90
17
Fair
50–75
13
Poor
25–50
8
Very poor
< 25
3
4.2.3 Spacing of discontinuities
The term discontinuity covers joints, beddings or foliations, shear zones, minor faults
or other surfaces of weakness. The linear distance between two adjacent discontinuities
should be measured for all sets of discontinuities and the rating should be obtained from
Table 4.3 for the most critically oriented discontinuity.
4.2.4 Condition of discontinuities
This parameter includes roughness of discontinuity surfaces, their separation, length or
continuity, weathering of the wall rock or the planes of weakness and inﬁlling (gouge)
material. The details of rating are given in Table 4.4. The joint set which is oriented
unfavorably with respect to a structure (tunnel or cavern) should be considered as in
Section 4.2.3.
4.2.5 Ground water condition
In the case of tunnels, the rate of inﬂow of ground water in liters per minute per 10 m length
of the tunnel should be determined, or a general condition may be described as completely
Table 4.3 Spacing of discontinuities (Bieniawski, 1979).
Description
Spacing (m)
Rating
Very wide
> 2
20
Wide
0.6–2
15
Moderate
0.2–0.6
10
Close
0.06–0.2
8
Very close
< 0.06
5
Note: If more than one discontinuity sets are present and the spacing
of discontinuities of each set varies, consider the unfavorably oriented
set with lowest rating.
40 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 4.4 Condition of discontinuities (Bieniawski, 1979).
Description
Joint separation (mm)
Rating
Very rough and unweathered, wall rock tight and
discontinuous, no separation
0
30
Rough and slightly weathered, wall rock surface
separation <1 mm
< 1
25
Slightly rough and moderately to highly
weathered, wall rock surface separation <1 mm
< 1
20
Slickensided wall rock surface or 1–5 mm thick
gouge or 1–5 mm wide continuous
discontinuity
1–5
10
5 mm thick soft gouge, 5 mm wide continuous
discontitnuity
> 5
0
dry, damp, wet, dripping and ﬂowing. If actual water pressure data are available, these
should be stated and expressed in terms of the ratio of the seepage water pressure to the
major principal stress. The ratings as per the water condition are shown in Table 4.5.
Ratings of the above ﬁve parameters (Tables 4.1 to 4.5) are added to obtain what is
called the basic rock mass rating, RMRbasic.
4.2.6 Orientation of discontinuities
Orientation of discontinuities means the strike and dip of discontinuities. The strike
should be recorded with reference to magnetic north. The dip angle is the angle between
the horizontal and the discontinuity plane taken in a direction in which the plane dips.
The value of the dip and the strike should be recorded as shown in Table 4.6. In addition,
the orientation of tunnel axis or slope face or foundation alignment should also be recorded.
Theinﬂuenceofthestrikeandthedipofthediscontinuitiesisconsideredwithrespectto
the direction of tunnel drivage or slope face orientation or foundation alignment. To facili-
tate a decision whether or not the strike and the dip are favorable, reference should be made
Table 4.5 Ground water condition (Bieniawski, 1979).
Inﬂow per 10 m tunnel
length (liter/min.)
None
<10
10–25
25–125
>125
Ratio of Joint water
pressure to major
principal stress
0
0–0.1
0.1–0.2
0.2–0.5
>0.5
General description
Completely dry
Damp
Wet
Dripping
Flowing
Rating
15
10
7
4
0
Rock mass rating (RMR) 41
Table 4.6 Orientation of discontinuities.
A.
Orientation of tunnel/slope/foundation axis ......................................
B.
Orientation of discontinuities:
Set - 1
Average strike........(from.......to.......)
Dip/Dip direction..........
Set - 2
Average strike........(from.......to.......)
Dip/Dip direction..........
Set - 3
Average strike........(from.......to.......)
Dip/Dip direction..........
to Tables 4.7 and 4.8 which provide a quantitative assessment of critical joint orientation
effect with respect to tunnel and dam foundations, respectively. Once the ratings for the
effect of the critical discontinuity is known, as shown in Table 4.9 an arithmetic sum of
the joint adjustment rating and the RMRbasic is obtained. This number is called the ﬁnal
rock mass rating (RMR).
It should be kept in mind that the effect of orientation in rough-dilatant joint is not
so important in the case of tunnels according to Table 4.9. That is why orientation of
joints is ignored in the Q-system of Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI) (Chapter 5).
The effect of orientation of joints is more important for rafts. It is most important obviously
in rock slopes for which slope mass rating (SMR) is recommended.
4.3 ESTIMATION OF ROCK MASS RATING
The rock mass rating should be determined as an algebraic sum of ratings for all
the parameters given in Tables 4.1 to 4.5 and 4.9 after adjustments for orientation of
Table 4.7 Assessment of joint orientation effect on tunnels (dips are apparent dips along tunnel
axis) (Bieniawski, 1984).
Strike perpendicular to tunnel axis
Strike parallel
to tunnel axis
Irrespective
of strike
Drive with dip
Drive against dip
Dip 45◦–90◦
Dip 20◦–45◦Dip 45◦–90◦
Dip 20◦–45◦Dip 20◦–45◦
Dip 45◦–90◦
Dip 0◦–20◦
Very favorable Favorable
Fair
Unfavorable
Fair
Very unfavorable
Fair
Table 4.8 Assessment of joint orientation effect on stability of dam foundation.
Dip 10◦–30◦
Dip direction
Dip 0◦–10◦
Upstream
Downstream
Dip 30◦–60◦
Dip 60◦–90◦
Very favorable
Unfavorable
Fair
Favorable
Very unfavorable
42 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 4.9 Adjustment for joint orientation (Bieniawski, 1979).
Joint orientation
assessment for
Very favorable
Favorable
Fair
Unfavorable
Very
unfavorable
Tunnels
0
−2
−5
−10
−12
Raft foundation
0
−2
−7
−15
−25
Slopes*
0
−5
−25
−50
−60
* It is recommended to use slope mass rating (SMR) (Singh & Goel, 1999).
discontinuities given in Tables 4.7 and 4.8. The sum of ratings for four parameters
(Tables 4.2 to 4.5) is called rock condition rating (RCR) which discounts the effect
of compressive strength of intact rock material and orientation of joints (Goel et al.,
1996). Heavy blasting creates new fractures. Experience suggests that 10 points should
be added to get RMR for undisturbed rock masses in situations where TBMs or road
headers are used for tunnel excavation and 3 to 5 points may be added depending upon
the quality of the controlled blasting.
On the basis of RMR values for a given engineering structure, the rock mass is classi-
ﬁed into ﬁve classes, namely very good (RMR 100–81), good (80–61), fair (60–41), poor
(40–21) and very poor (<20) as shown in Table 4.10.
In case of wider tunnels and caverns, RMR may be somewhat less than obtained
from drifts. As in drifts, one may miss intrusions of weaker rocks and joint sets having
Table 4.10 Design parameters and engineering properties of rock mass (Bieniawski, 1979).
S.
No
Parameter/properties
of rock mass
Rock mass rating (Rock class)
100–81 (I)
80–61 (II)
60–41 (III)
40–21 (IV)
<20 (V)
1.
Classiﬁcation of rock
mass
Very
good
Good
Fair
Poor
Very poor
2.
Average stand-up
time
10 years
for 15 m
span
6 months
for 8 m
span
1 week
for 5 m
span
10 h for
2.5 m
span
30 min.
for 1 m
span
3.
Cohesion of rock
mass (MPa)*
> 0.4
0.3–0.4
0.2–0.3
0.1–0.2
< 0.1
4.
Angle of internal
friction of
rock mass
> 45◦
35◦–45◦
25◦–35◦
15◦–25◦
< 15◦
5.
Allowable bearing
pressure (T/m2)
600–440
440–280
280–135
135–45
45–30
* These values are applicable to slopes only in saturated and weathered rock mass.
Note: During earthquake loading, the above values of allowable bearing pressure may be increased by 50 percent
in view of rheological behavior of rock masses.
Rock mass rating (RMR) 43
lower joint condition ratings. Separate RMR should be obtained for tunnels of different
orientations after taking into account the orientation of tunnel axis with respect to the
critical joint set (Table 4.6).
The classiﬁcation may be used for estimating many useful parameters, such as the
unsupported span, the stand-up time or the bridge action period and the support pressure
for an underground opening as shown in the following paragraphs under Section 4.4.
It can also be used for selecting a method of excavation and the permanent support system.
Further, cohesion, angle of internal friction, modulus of deformation of the rock mass and
allowable bearing pressure for foundations can also be estimated for analysis of stability
of rock slopes. Back-analysis of rock slopes in distress is more reliable approach for
assessment of shear strength parameters. It is emphasized that the correlations suggested in
Section 4.4 should be used for feasibility studies and preliminary designs only. In situ tests,
supported with numerical modelling could be essential, particularly for a large opening,
such as a cavern.
4.4 APPLICATIONS OF RMR
The following engineering properties of rock masses can be obtained using RMR. If the
RMR lies within a given range, the value of engineering properties can be interpolated
between the recommended range of properties.
4.4.1 Average stand-up time for arched roof
The stand-up time depends upon effective span of the opening which is deﬁned as the width
of the opening or the distance between the tunnel face and the last support, whichever is
smaller. For arched openings, the stand-up time would be signiﬁcantly higher than that for
a ﬂat roof. Controlled blasting will further increase the stand-up time as damage to the rock
mass is decreased. For the tunnels with arched roof, the stand-up time is related with the
rock mass class in Table 4.10 (Fig. 4.1). It is important that one should not unnecessarily
delay supporting the roof in the case of a rock mass with high stand-up time as this
may lead to deterioration in the rock mass which ultimately reduces the stand-up time.
Lauffer (1988) observed that the stand-up time improves by one class of RMR value in
case of excavations by TBM.
4.4.2 Cohesion and angle of internal friction
Assuming that a rock mass behaves as a Coulomb material, its shear strength will depend
upon cohesion and angle of internal friction. RMR is used to estimate the cohesion and
angle of internal friction (Table 4.10). Usually the strength parameters are different for
peak failure and residual failure conditions. In Table 4.10, only peak failure values are
given. It is experienced that these values are applicable to slopes only in saturated and
44 Tunnelling in weak rocks
20
20
40
40
60
80
80
RMR
0.1
1.0
10
102
103
104
105
1
2
6
10
15
20
Unsupported Span, m
Stand-up Time, hr
60
RMR
No Support Required
Immediate Collapse
Limit of
Applicability
Fig. 4.1
Stand-up time vs. unsupported span for various rock mass classes as per RMR.
weathered rock masses. Cohesion is small under low normal stresses due to rotation of
rock blocks. The cohesion is one order of magnitude higher in the case of tunnels because
joints are relatively discontinuous, tight and widely spaced. Joints may have smaller
lengths than those near rock slopes. See Section 4.4.5.
4.4.3 Modulus of deformation
Following correlations are suggested for determining modulus of deformation of rock
masses.
Modulus reduction factor
Fig. 4.2 gives a correlation between RMR and modulus reduction factor (MRF), which
is deﬁned as a ratio of modulus of deformation of a rock mass to the elastic modulus
of the rock material obtained from core. Thus, modulus of deformation of a rock mass
(Ed) can be determined as a product of the modulus reduction factor corresponding to a
given RMR (Fig. 4.2) and the elastic modulus of the rock material (Er) from the following
equation (Singh, 1979),
Ed = Er · MRF
(4.1)
There is an approximate correlation between modulus of deformation and RMR
suggested by Bieniawski (1978) for hard rock masses (qc > 100 MPa).
Ed = 2 RMR −100,
GPa (applicable for RMR > 50)
(4.2)
Seraﬁm and Pereira (1983) suggested the following correlation
Ed = 10(RMR−10)/40,
GPa (applicable for RMR < 50 also)
(4.3)
Rock mass rating (RMR) 45
0
20
40
60
80
100
Rock Mass Rating (RMR)
Modulus Reduction Factor (Ed/Er)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Kotlibel Dam, India
Tehri Dam, India
Cases of Bieniawski
Fig. 4.2
Relationship between RMR and modulus reduction factor (Singh, 1979).
These correlations are shown in Fig. 4.3. Here qc means average uniaxial crushing
strength of the intact rock material in MPa.
The modulus of deformation of a dry and weak rock mass (qc < 100 MPa) around
underground openings located at depths exceeding 50 m is dependent upon conﬁning
0
20
40
60
80
100
20
40
60
80
0
Bieniaswki, 1978 (Ed = 2RMR - 100)
Serafim & Pereira, 1983 [Ed = 10(RMR-10)/40]
Rock Mass Rating (RMR)
Insitu Modulus of Deformation (Ed), Gpa
Fig. 4.3
Correlation between modulus of deformation of rock masses and RMR (Bieniawski,
1984).
46 Tunnelling in weak rocks
pressure due to overburden and may be determined by the following correlation
(Verman, 1993),
Ed = 0.3Hα · 10(RMR−20)/38,
GPa
(4.4)
where
α = 0.16 to 0.30 (higher for poor rocks) and
H = depth of location under consideration below ground surface in meters.
≥50 m
Table 5.13 summarizes various other correlations for assessment of modulus of
deformation.
The modulus of deformation of poor rock masses with water sensitive miner-
als decreases signiﬁcantly after saturation and with passage of time after excavation.
For design of dam foundations, it is recommended that uniaxial jacking tests should be
conducted very carefully soon after the excavation of drifts, particularly for poor rock
masses in saturated condition.
4.4.4 Allowable bearing pressure
Allowable bearing pressure for 12 mm settlement of foundation is also related to RMR
and can be estimated from the last row of Table 4.10 (Mehrotra, 1992).
4.4.5 Shear strength of rock masses
Singh and Goel (2002) summarized the non-linear shear strength equations for various
RMR, degree of saturation and rock types. The recommended criteria is based on 43 block
shear tests by Mehrotra (1992). It has been realized that for highly jointed rock masses, the
shear strength (τ) may not be governed by the strength of the rock material as suggested
by Hoek and Brown (1980). The results show that saturation does affect shear strength of
rock mass signiﬁcantly (see Fig. 29.5).
For hard and massive rock masses (RMR > 60), the shear strength is proportional to
the UCS. It follows that block shear tests on saturated rock blocks should be conducted
for design of concrete dams and stability of abutments.
4.4.6 Estimation of support pressure
In 1983, Unal, on the basis of his studies in coal mines, proposed the following correlation
for estimation of support pressure using RMR for openings with ﬂat roof,
pv =
100 −RMR
100

· γ · B
(4.5)
Rock mass rating (RMR) 47
where
pv = support pressure,
γ = unit weight of rock and
B = tunnel width.
Goel and Jethwa (1991) have evaluated equation (4.5) for application to rock tunnels
with arched roof by comparing the measured support pressures with estimates from equa-
tion (4.5). The comparison shows that equation (4.5) is not applicable to rock tunnels.
They found that the estimated support pressures were unsafe for all sizes of tunnels under
squeezing ground conditions. Further, the estimates for non-squeezing ground conditions
were unsafe for small tunnels (diam. upto 6 m) and oversafe for large tunnels (diam. > 9 m)
which implies that the size effect is over-emphasized for arched openings. This obser-
vation is logical since bending moments in a ﬂat roof increases geometrically with the
opening unlike in an arched roof.
Subsequently, using the measured support pressure values from 30 instrumented
Indian tunnels, Goel and Jethwa (1991) have proposed equation (4.6) for estimating
the short-term support pressure for underground openings in both squeezing and non-
squeezing ground conditions in the case of tunnelling by conventional blasting method
using steel rib supports (but not in the rock burst condition).
pv = 7.5B0.1 · H 0.5 −RMR
20 RMR
,
MPa
(4.6)
where
B
= span of opening in meters,
H
= overburden or tunnel depth in meters (50–600 m),
pv
= short-term roof support pressure in MPa and
RMR = post-excavation rock mass rating just before supporting.
Bieniawski (1984) provided guidelines for selection of tunnel supports (Table 4.11).
This is applicable to tunnels excavated with conventional drilling and blasting method.
These guidelines depend upon the factors like depth below surface (to take care of over-
burden pressure or the in situ stress), tunnel size and shape and method of excavation.
The support measures in Table 4.11 are the permanent and not the temporary or primary
supports.
The interrelation between RMR and Q is presented in Section 6.2.
4.5 PRECAUTIONS
It must be ensured that double accounting for a parameter should not be done in the
analysis of rock structures and estimating rating of a rock mass. For example, if pore
water pressure is being considered in the analysis of rock structures, it should not be
48 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 4.11 Guidelines for excavation and support of rock tunnels in accordance with the RMR system (Bieniawski, 1984).
Supports
Rock bolts (20 mm diam. fully
Conventional
Rock mass class
Excavation
grouted)
shotcrete
Steel sets
Very good rock
RMR = 81–100
Full face 3 m advance.
Generally, no support required except for occasional spot bolting.
Good rock
RMR = 61–80
Full face. 1.0–1.5 m advance.
Complete support 20 m from face.
Locally, bolts in crown 3 m
long, spaced 2.5 m, with
occasional wire mesh.
50 mm in crown
where required.
None
Fair rock
RMR = 41–60
Heading and bench. 1.5–3 m
advance in heading. Commence
support after each blast. Complete
support 10 m from face.
Systematic bolts 4 m long,
spaced 1.5–2 m in crown and
walls with wire mesh
in crown.
50–100 mm in
crown and
30 mm in sides.
None
Poor rock
RMR = 21–40
Top heading and bench. 1.0–1.5 m
advance in top heading. Install
support concurrently with
excavation 10 m from face.
Systematic bolts 4–5 m long,
spaced 1–1.5 m in crown and
wall with wire mesh.
100–150 mm in
crown and
100 mm in
sides
Light to medium ribs
spaced 1.5 m where
required.
Very poor rock
RMR < 20
Multiple drifts 0.5–1.5 m advance
in top heading. Install support
concurrently with excavation.
Shotcrete as soon as possible
after blasting.
Systematic bolts 5–6 m long
spaced 1–1.5 m in crown
and walls with wire mesh.
Bolt invert.
150–200 mm in
crown 150 mm
in sides and
50 mm on face.
Medium to heavy ribs
spaced 0.75 m with
steel lagging and
forepoling if required.
Close invert
Shape: Horseshoe; Width: 10m; Vertical stress < 25MPa; Construction: Drilling & blasting.
Rock mass rating (RMR) 49
accounted for in RMR. Similarly, if orientation of joint sets is considered in stability
analysis of rock slopes, the same should not be accounted for in RMR.
It is cautioned that the RMR system is found to be unreliable in very poor rock masses.
Care should therefore be exercised to apply the RMR system in such rock mass. Q-system
is more reliable for tunnelling in the weak rock masses.
4.6 TUNNEL ALIGNMENT
The following checklist can be followed for an economical, trouble-free alignment of a
long tunnel.
(i) Does the tunnel passes through the young mountains?
(ii) Is there intra-thrust zone?
(iii) Are there active and inactive fault/thrust zones?
(iv) Where are thick shear zones?
(v) Is rock cover excessive?
(vi) Is pillar width between tunnels adequate?
(vii) Are there thermic zones of too high ground temperature?
(viii) What is the least rock cover or shallow tunnel beneath the gullies/river/
ocean?
(ix) Are there water-charged rock masses?
(x) Are there swelling rocks?
(xi) Are joints oriented unfavorably or strike parallel to the tunnel axis (Table 4.7)?
Is tunnel along anticline (favorable) or syncline (unfavorable)?
(xii) Please mark expected tunnelling conditions along all alignments according to
Chapter 13.
(xiii) In which reaches, tunnel boring machines may be used?
(xiv) In which reaches, conventional method is recommended?
(xv) Is it likely that a landslide-dam is formed and lake water enters the tail race
tunnel and powerhouse cavern, etc.
(xvi) What are the expected costs of tunnelling for different alignments along with
their periods of completion?
Mega chaos is self-organizing.
REFERENCES
BIS Codes: Guidelines for Classiﬁcation System on Rock Mass, Part I - for Predicting Engineering
Properties (RMR Method). Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi, India.
50 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1973). Engineering classiﬁcation of jointed rock masses. The Civil Engineer in
South Africa, 15, 335-344.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1976). Rock mass classiﬁcations in rock engineering. Proc. of the Sym. on
Exploration for Rock Engineering, Johannesburg, 97-106.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1978). Determining rock mass deformability. Experience from case histories.
Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 15, 237-247.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1979). The geomechanics classiﬁcation in rock engineering applications.
Reprinted from: Proc. 4th Cong. of the Int. Society for Rock Mech./ Comptes-rendus/
Berichte-Montreux, Suisse, 2–8 Sept. 1979.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1984). Rock Mechanics Design in Mining and Tunnelling. A. A. Balkema,
Rotterdam, 97-133.
Goel, R. K. and Jethwa, J. L. (1991). Prediction of support pressure using RMR classiﬁcation.
Proc. Indian Getech. Conf., Surat, India, 203-205.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1996). Correlation between Barton’s Q and
Bieniawski’s RMR - A new approach. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr.,
Pergamon, 33(2), 179-181.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1982). Underground Excavations in Rocks. Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London, 527.
ISRM (1978). Description of discontinuities in a rock mass. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. &
Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 15, 319-368.
Kaiser, P. K., MacKay, C. and Gale, A. D. (1986). Evaluation of rock classiﬁcations at B.C. Rail
tumbler ridge tunnels. Rock Mechanics & Rock Engineering, 19, 205-234.
Lauffer, H. (1988). Zur Gebirgsklassiﬁzierung bei Frasvortrieben. Felsbau, 6(3), 137-149.
Mehrotra, V. K. (1992). Estimation of engineering properties of rock mass, PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee,
Roorkee, India, 267.
Seraﬁm, J. L. and Pereira, J. P. (1983). Considerations of the geomechanics classiﬁcation of
Bieniawski. Int. Symp. Eng. Geol. Underground Constr., LNEC, Lisbon, II.33-II.42.
Singh, Bhawani (1979). Geological and geophysical investigation in rocks for engineering
projects. Int. Symp. Insitu Testing of Soils & Performance of Structures, India, 486-492.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (1999). Rock Mass Classiﬁcation - A Practical Approach in Civil
Engineering. Chapter 7, Elsevier Science Ltd., The Netherlands, 267.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslides and
Tunnelling, Hazards. Chapter 6, A. A. Balkema and Swets & Zetpinger, 344.
Unal, E. (1983). Design guidelines and roof control standards for coal mine roofs. PhD thesis,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 355.
Verman, M. K. (1993). Rock mass-tunnel support interaction analysis. PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee,
Roorkee, India.
5
Rock mass quality Q
“Genius is 99 percent perspiration and 1 percent inspiration.”
Bernard Shaw
5.1 THE Q-SYSTEM
Barton et al. (1974) at the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute (NGI) originally proposed
the Q-system of rock mass classiﬁcation on the basis of about 200 case histories of tunnels
and caverns. They have deﬁned the rock mass quality Q by the following causative
factors
Q =
RQD
Jn
  Jr
Ja
  Jw
SRF

(5.1)
where
RQD = Deere’s Rock Quality Designation ≥10,
= 115 −3.3 Jv ≤100
(5.1a)
Jn
= Joint set number,
Jr
= Joint roughness number for critically oriented joint set,
Ja
= Joint alteration number for critically oriented joint set,
Jw
= Joint water reduction factor,
SRF = Stress reduction factor to consider in situ stresses and
Jv
= Volumetric joint count.
For various rock conditions, the ratings (numerical value) to these six parameters
are assigned. The six parameters given in equation (5.1) are deﬁned below. The goal
of Q-system is preliminary empirical design of support system for tunnels and caverns
(see Chapter 10 on NMT). There are 1260 case records to prove efﬁcacy of this design
approach. It is the best among all the classiﬁcation systems for support in tunnels
(Kumar, 2002).
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
52 Tunnelling in weak rocks
5.1.1 Rock quality designation (RQD)
RQD is discussed in Section 4.2.2 and in detail by Singh and Goel (1999). The RQD value
in percentage is also the rating of RQD for the Q-system. In case of a poor rock mass
where RQD is less than 10 percent, a minimum value of 10 should be used to evaluate Q
(Table 5.1). In case the rock cores are not available, the RQD may be estimated by the
volumetricjointcount(Jv)fromequation(5.1a). ExperienceshowsthattheRQDestimated
from Jv is conservative. The Jv is sum of frequencies of all joint sets per meter in a pit of
1 m × 1 m × 1 m.
5.1.2 Joint set number (Jn )
The parameter Jn, representing the number of joint sets, is often affected by foliations,
schistocity, slaty cleavages or beddings, etc. If strongly developed, these parallel dis-
continuities should be counted as a complete joint set. If there are few joints visible or
only occasional breaks in rock core due to these features, then one should count them as
“a random joint set” while evaluating Jn from Table 5.2. Rating of Jn is approximately
equal to square of the number of joint sets.
5.1.3 Joint roughness number and joint alteration number (Jr and Ja )
The parameters Jr and Ja, given in Tables 5.3 and 5.4, respectively, represent roughness
and degree of alteration of joint walls or ﬁlling materials. The parameters Jr and Ja should
be obtained for the weakest critical joint set or clay-ﬁlled discontinuity in a given zone.
If the joint set or the discontinuity with the minimum value of (Jr/Ja) is favorably oriented
for stability, then a second less favorably oriented joint set or discontinuity may be of
greater signiﬁcance, and its value of (Jr/Ja) should be used when evaluating Q from
equation (5.1). For the critical orientation of the joint sets, Table 4.7 in Chapter 4, may
be referred.
Table 5.1 Rock quality designation RQD (Barton, 2002).
Condition
RQD
A. Very poor
0–25
B. Poor
25–50
C. Fair
50–75
D. Good
75–90
E. Excellent
90–100
Notes: (i) Where RQD is reported or measured as ≤10 (including
0), a nominal value of 10 is used to evaluate Q in equation (5.1).
(ii) RQD intervals of 5, i.e., 100, 95, 90 etc. are sufﬁciently accurate.
Rock mass quality Q
53
Table 5.2 Joint set number Jn (Barton, 2002).
Condition
Jn
A. Massive, no or few joints
0.5–1.0
B. One joint set
2
C. One joint set plus random
3
D. Two joint sets
4
E. Two joint sets plus random
6
F. Three joint sets
9
G. Three joint sets plus random
12
H. Four or more joint sets, random, heavily
jointed, “sugar cube”, etc.
15
J.
Crushed rock, earthlike
20
Notes: (i) For intersections use (3.0 · Jn). (ii) For portals use (2.0 · Jn).
Table 5.3 Joint roughness number Jr (Barton, 2002).
Condition
Jr
(a) Rock wall contact and
(b) Rock wall contact before 10cm shear
A. Discontinuous joint
4
B. Rough or irregular, undulating
3
C. Smooth, undulating
2.0
D. Slickensided, undulating
1.5
E. Rough or irregular, planar
1.5
F. Smooth, planar
1.0
G. Slickensided, planar
0.5
(c) No rock wall contact when sheared
H. Zone containing clay minerals thick enough to
prevent rock wall contact
1.0
J.
Sandy, gravelly or crushed zone thick enough to
prevent rock wall contact
1.0
Notes: (i) Descriptions refer to small-scale features and intermediate scale features, in
that order. (ii) Add 1.0 if the mean spacing of the relevant joint set is greater than 3 m.
(iii) Jr = 0.5 can be used for planar, slickensided joints having lineation, provided the
lineations are favorably oriented. (iv) Jr and Ja classiﬁcation is applied to the joint
set or discontinuity that is least favorable for stability both from the point of view of
orientation and shear resistance, τ.
5.1.4 Joint water reduction factor (Jw)
The parameter Jw (Table 5.5) is a measure of water pressure, which has an adverse
effect on the shear strength of joints. This is due to reduction in the effective normal
stress across joints. Water in addition may cause softening and possible wash-out in the
54 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 5.4 Joint alteration number Ja (Barton, 2002).
φr approx
Condition
(degree)
Ja
(a) Rock wall contact (No mineral ﬁlling, only coating)
A. Tightly healed, hard, non-softening, impermeable ﬁlling, i.e., quartz
or epidote
0.75
B. Unaltered joint walls, surface staining only
25–35
1.0
C. Slightly altered joint walls. Non-softening mineral coatings, sandy
particles, clay-free disintegrated rock, etc.
25–30
2.0
D. Silty or sandy clay coatings, small clay fraction (non-softening)
20–25
3.0
E. Softening or low friction clay mineral coatings, i.e., kaolinite, mica.
Also chlorite, talc, gypsum and graphite, etc. and small quantities of
swelling clays (Discontinuous coatings, 1–2 mm or less in thickness)
8–16
4.0
(b) Rock wall contact before 10cm shear (Thin mineral ﬁllings)
F. Sandy particles, clay-free disintegrated rock, etc.
25–30
4.0
G. Strongly over-consolidated, non-softening clay mineral ﬁllings
(continuous, <5 mm in thickness)
16–24
6.0
H. Medium or low over-consolidation, softening, clay mineral ﬁllings
(continuous, <5 mm in thickness)
12–16
8.0
J. Swelling clay ﬁllings, i.e., montmorillonite (continuous, <5 mm in
thickness). Value of Ja depends on percent of swelling clay-size
particles, and access to water, etc.
6–12
8–12
(c) No rock wall contact when sheared (Thick mineral ﬁllings)
K, L, M. Zones or bands of disintegrated or crushed rock and clay
(see G, H, J for description of clay condition)
6–24
6, 8 or
8–12
N.
Zones or bands of silty or sandy clay, small clay fraction
(non-softening)
–
5
O, P, R. Thick, continuous zones or bands of clay (see G, H, J for
description of clay condition)
6–24
10, 13 or
13–20
case of clay-ﬁlled joints. The value of Jw should correspond to the future ground water
condition where seepage erosion or leaching of chemical can alter permeability of rock
mass signiﬁcantly.
5.1.5 Stress reduction factor (SRF)
The parameter SRF (Table 5.6) is a measure of (i) loosening pressure in the case of an
excavation through shear zones and clay bearing rock masses, (ii) rock stress qc/σ1 in a
competent rock mass, where qc is uniaxial compressive strength of rock material and σ1 is
Rock mass quality Q
55
Table 5.5 Joint water reduction factor Jw (Barton, 2002).
Approx water
Condition
pressure (MPa)
Jw
A. Dry excavations or minor inﬂow, i.e., 5 l/min locally
<0.1
1
B. Medium inﬂow or pressure, occasional out-wash of
joint ﬁllings
0.1–0.25
0.66
C. Large inﬂow or high pressure in competent rock with
unﬁlled joints
0.25–1.0
0.5
D. Large inﬂow or high pressure, considerable out-wash of
joint ﬁllings
0.25–1.0
0.33
E. Exceptionally high inﬂow or water pressure at blasting,
decaying with time
>1.0
0.2–0.1
F. Exceptionally high inﬂow or water pressure continuing
without noticeable decay
>1.0
0.1–0.05
Notes: (i) Factors C to F are crude estimates. Increase Jw if drainage measures are installed. (ii) Special
problems caused by ice formation are not considered. (iii) For general characterization of rock masses distant
from excavation inﬂuences, the use of Jw = 1.0, 0.66, 0.5, 0.33, etc. as depth increases from 0–5, 5–25, 25–250 to
>250 m is recommended, assuming that RQD/Jn is low enough (e.g., 0.5–25) for good hydraulic conductivity.
This will help to adjust Q for some of the effective stress and water softening effects, in combination with
appropriate characterization values of SRF. Correlations with depth-dependent static modulus of deformation
and seismic velocity will then follow the practice used when these were developed.
Table 5.6 Stress reduction factor SRF (Barton, 2002).
Condition
SRF
(a) Weakness zones intersecting excavation, which may cause loosening of rock mass when tunnel
is excavated
A. Multiple occurrences of weakness zones containing clay or chemically
disintegrated rock, very loose surrounding rock (any depth)
10.0
B. Single-weakness zones containing clay or chemically disintegrated rock (depth
of excavation ≤50 m)
5.0
C. Single-weakness zones containing clay or chemically disintegrated rock (depth
of excavation >50 m)
2.5
D. Multiple-shear zones in competent rock (clay-free), loose surrounding rock (any
depth)
7.5
E. Single-shear zones in competent rock (clay-free) (depth of excavation ≤50 m)
5.0
F. Single-shear zones in competent rock (clay-free) (depth of excavation >50 m)
2.5
G. Loose, open joints, heavily jointed or “sugar cube”, etc. (any depth)
5.0
Continued
56 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 5.6—Continued
(b) Competent rock, rock stress problems
qc/σ1
σθ/qc
SRF
SRF
(Old)
(New)
H. Low stress, near surface open joints
> 200
<0.01
2.5
2.5
J. Medium stress, favorable stress condition
200–10
0.01–0.3
1.0
1.0
K. High stress, very tight structure (usually favorable
to stability, may be unfavorable to wall stability
10–5
0.3–0.4
0.5–2
0.5–2.0
L. Moderate slabbing after >1 h in massive rock
5–3
0.5–0.65
5–9
5–50
M. Slabbing and rock burst after a few minutes in
massive rock
3–2
0.65–1.0
9–15
50–200
N. Heavy rock burst (strain-burst) and immediate
deformations in massive rock
<2
>1
15–20
200–400
(c) Squeezing rock; plastic ﬂow of incompetent rock under the inﬂuence of high rock pressures
σθ/qc
O. Mild squeezing rock pressure
1–5
5–10
P. Heavy squeezing rock pressure
>5
10–20
(d) Swelling rock; chemical swelling activity depending on presence of water
Q. Mild swelling rock pressure
5–10
R. Heavy swelling rock pressure
10–15
Notes: (i) Reduce these SRF values by 25–50% if the relevant shear zones only inﬂuence but do not intersect
the excavation. This will also be relevant for characterization. (ii) For strongly anisotropic virgin stress ﬁeld
(if measured): when 5 ≤σ1/σ3 ≤10, reduce qc to 0.75qc; when σ1/σ3 > 10, reduce qc to 0.50qc (where qc is
unconﬁned compressive strength), σ1 and σ3 are major and minor principal stresses, σθ the maximum tangential
stress (estimated from elastic theory). (iii) Few case records available where depth of crown below surface is less
than span width, suggest SRF increase from 2.5 to 5 for such cases (see H). (iv) Cases L, M and N are usually
most relevant for support design of deep tunnel excavation in hard massive rock masses, with RQD/Jn ratios
from about 50–200. (v) For general characterization of rock masses distant from excavation inﬂuences, the use
of SRF = 5, 2.5, 1.0 and 0.5 is recommended as depth increases from 0–5, 5–25, 25–250, >250 m. This will
help to adjust Q for some of the effective stress effects, in combination with appropriate characterization values
of Jw. Correlations with depth-dependent static modulus of deformation and seismic velocity will then follow
the practice used when these were developed. (vi) Cases of squeezing rock may occur for depth H > 350Q1/3
[Singh and Goel, 1999]. Rock mass compressive strength can be estimated from σcm ≈5γ(Qc)1/3 (MPa) where
γ is the rock density in t/m3, and Qc = Q( σc/100).
the major principal stress before excavation and (iii) squeezing or swelling pressures in
incompetent rock masses. SRF can also be regarded as a total stress parameter.
Note 1 – SRF should be reduced where micro-folding occurs and its axis is nearly parallel
to the strike of walls of cavern or tunnels. The accumulated high stresses may
be released locally during excavation (leading to failure of rock bolts in weak
rocks).
Note 2 – In jointed rocks under high overburden (H > 1000 m), rock burst may not
occur due to strength enhancement by intermediate stress (σ2) along axis of
underground opening (cases L, M, N in Table 5.6). So SRF should be selected
Rock mass quality Q
57
according to the actually observed rock burst condition and not expected rock
burst condition (from L, M, N cases in Table 5.6).
Ratings of all the six parameters are given in Tables 5.1 to 5.6. The ratings of these
parameters obtained for a given rock mass are substituted in equation (5.1) to get rock
mass quality Q.
As seen from equation (5.1), the rock mass quality (Q) may be considered as a function
of only three parameters which are approximate measures of:
a. Block size (RQD/Jn)
:
It represents overall structure of rock mass
b. Inter-block shear
strength (Jr/Ja)
:
It has been found that tan−1(Jr/Ja) is a fair approximation
to the actual peak sliding angle of friction along the clay
coated joints (Table 5.7)
c. Active stress (Jw/SRF)
:
It is an empirical factor describing the active effective
stress
Table 5.7 Estimation of angle of internal friction from the parameters Jr and Ja (Barton, 2002).
Description
Jr
tan−1(Jr/Ja)
(a) Rock wall contact
(Thin coatings)
Ja = 0.75
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
A. Discontinuous joints
4.0
79◦
76◦
63◦
53◦
45◦
B. Rough, undulating
3.0
76◦
72◦
56◦
45◦
37◦
C. Smooth, undulating
2.0
69◦
63◦
45◦
34◦
27◦
D. Slickensided, undulating
1.5
63◦
56◦
37◦
27◦
21◦
E. Rough, planar
1.5
63◦
56◦
37◦
27◦
21◦
F. Smooth, planar
1.0
53◦
45◦
27◦
18◦
14◦
G. Slickensided, planar
0.5
34◦
27◦
14◦
9.5◦
7.1◦
(b) Rock wall contact when sheared
(Thin ﬁlling)
Jr
Ja = 4.0
6
8
12
A. Discontinuous joints
4.0
45◦
34◦
27◦
18◦
B. Rough, undulating
3.0
37◦
27◦
21◦
14◦
C. Smooth, undulating
2.0
27◦
18◦
14◦
9.5◦
D. Slickensided, undulating
1.5
21◦
14◦
11◦
7.1◦
E. Rough, planar
1.5
21◦
14◦
11◦
7.1◦
F. Smooth, planar
1.0
14◦
9.5◦
7.1◦
4.7◦
G. Slickensided, planar
0.5
7◦
4.7◦
3.6◦
2.4◦
(c) No rock wall contact when sheared
(Thick ﬁllings)
Jr
Ja = 5
6
8
12
Nominal roughness of discontinuity rock walls
1.0
11.3◦
9.5◦
7.1◦
4.8◦
Jr
Ja = 13
16
20
–
1.0
4.4◦
3.6◦
2.9◦
–
58 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The ﬁrst quotient (RQD/Jn) represents the rock mass structure and is a measure of
block size or the size of the wedge formed by the presence of different joint sets. In a
given rock mass, the rating of parameter Jn could increase with the tunnel size in certain
situations where additional joint sets are encountered. Hence it is not advisable to use
Q-value obtained from a small drift to estimate the support pressure for a large tunnel
or a cavern. It would be more appropriate to obtain Jn from drill core observations or a
borehole camera.
The second quotient (Jr/Ja) represents the roughness and frictional characteristics of
joint walls or ﬁlling materials. It should be noted that value of Jr/Ja is collected for the
critical joint set, i.e., the joint set which is most unfavorable for stability of a key rock
block in roof.
The third quotient (Jw/SRF) is an empirical factor describing “active stress condition.”
The stress reduction factor SRF, is a measure of: (i) loosening pressure in the case of an
excavation through shear zones and clay bearing rocks, (ii) rock stress in competent rocks
and (iii) squeezing pressure in plastic incompetent rocks; and can be regarded as a total
stress parameter. The water reduction factor Jw is a measure of water pressure, which
has an adverse effect on the shear strength of joints due to reduction in effective normal
stress. Water, in addition, causes softening and possible outwash in the case of clay-ﬁlled
joints.
5.2 THE JOINT ORIENTATION AND THE Q-SYSTEM
Commenting on the joint orientation, Barton et al. (1974) stated that it was not found to be
an important parameter as expected. Part of the reason for this may be that the orientation of
many types of excavation can be, and normally are, adjusted to avoid the maximum effect
of unfavorably oriented major joints. Barton et al. (1974) also stated that the parameters
Jn, Jr and Ja appear to play a more important role than the joint orientation, because
the number of joint sets determines the degree of freedom for block movement (if any);
and the frictional and dilatational characteristics (Jr) can counter-balance the down-dip
gravitational component of weight of wedge formed by the unfavorably oriented joints.
If joint orientation had been included, the classiﬁcation system would be less general, and
its essential simplicity lost.
However, it is suggested to collect the rating for Jr and Ja for the most critical joint
set. The critical joint set or “very unfavorable joint set” with respect to tunnel axis may
be obtained from the Table 4.7 given by Bieniawski (1989).
5.3 UPDATING THE Q-SYSTEM
Updating the 1974 Q-system has taken place on several occasions during the last few
years, and is now based on 1260 case records where the installed rock support has been
correlated to the observed Q-values. The original parameters of the Q-system have not
Rock mass quality Q
59
been changed, but some of the ratings for the stress reduction factor (SRF) have been
altered by Grimstad and Barton (1993). The new ratings of SRF for competent rocks
are shown in Table 5.6. This was done because a hard massive rock under high stress
requires far more support than those recommended by the Q-value with SRF (old) ratings
as proposed by Barton et al. (1974). In the original 1974 Q-system, this problem was
addressed in a supplementary note instructing how to support spalling or rock burst zones
with closely spaced end-anchored rock bolts and triangular steel plates. Recent experience
from tunnels under high stresses in hard rocks suggests less bolting, but extensive use of
steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS), an unknown product when the Q-system was
ﬁrst developed in 1974. Updating the Q-system has shown that in the most extreme
case of high stress and hard massive (unjointed) rocks, the maximum SRF value has
to be increased from 20 to 400 in order to give a Q-value which correlates with the
modern rock supports shown in Fig. 10.2. In the case of moderately jointed rocks, SRF
needs to be reduced signiﬁcantly according to the actually observed tunnelling conditions
(Kumar, 2002).
Authors’ experience suggests that overburden height H should be considered in
addition to SRF in Table 5.6 for obtaining the ratings of squeezing ground conditions
(Section 5.6.2). It is our feeling that old values of SRF should be used in assessment of
Q-value in the jointed rocks.
5.4 COLLECTION OF FIELD DATA
The length of core or rock exposures to be used for evaluating the ﬁrst four parameters
(RQD, Jn, Jr and Ja) would depend on the uniformity of the rock mass. If there is little
variation, a core or wall length of 5–10 m should be sufﬁcient. However, in a few meters
wide closely jointed shear zone with alternate sound rock, it will be necessary to evaluate
these parameters separately if it is considered that the closely jointed shear zones are
wide enough to justify special treatment (i.e., additional shotcrete); compared to only
systematic bolting in the remainder of the excavation. If, on the other hand, the shear
zones are less than 1/2 meters and occur frequently, then an overall reduced value of Q
for the entire tunnel reach may be most appropriate since increased support is likely to
be applied uniformly along the entire length of such variable zones. In such cases, a core
or wall length of 10–50 m may be needed to obtain an overall picture of the reduced rock
mass quality (Fig. 28.5).
Notes:
1. Values of the rock mass quality Q be obtained separately for the roof, the ﬂoor
and the two walls, particularly when the geological description of the rock mass
is not uniform around the periphery of an underground opening.
2. In case of power tunnels, it is suggested that the value of Jw for calculation
of ultimate support pressures should be reduced assuming that seepage water
pressure in Table 5.5 is equal to the internal water pressure after commissioning
the hydro-electric projects.
60 Tunnelling in weak rocks
5.4.1 Suggestions for beginners
Beginners may ﬁnd difﬁculty in selecting a single rating for a particular parameter. They
may opt for a range of rating or two ratings or values for tension-free judgment. Subse-
quently, a geometrical mean may be obtained from the minimum and the maximum values
for obtaining a representative value of the parameter. According to authors’ experience,
this will not only reduce the bias but would also generate conﬁdence among the users.
It is proposed that for the purpose of eliminating the bias of an individual, the rating
for different parameters should be given a range in preference to a single value.
To overcome the problem of selecting a representative rating of various parameters,
NGI has proposed a geotechnical chart (Fig. 5.1). The main body of the geotechnical chart
consists of rectangular graduated areas for making numerous individual observations of
joints and jointing characteristics, in the form of a histogram. They proposed that efforts
should be made to estimate approximate percentages of the various qualities of each
V. Poor
Poor
Fair
Good
Exc.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
20
15
12
9
6
4
3
2
1
0.5
Block
Size
Earth Four
Three
Two
One
None
20
12
6
4
2
0.75
12
8
5
13
10
6
8
4
3
1
1.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
1.5
2.0
3.0
4.0
Thick Fills
Thin Fills
Coat
Unfill
Heat
Fills
Planar
Undulating
Disc
Shear
Strength
Core Pieces
> 10cm
RQD %
Joint Set
Number, Jn
Joint Roughness
Number (Least
Favorable), Jr
Joint Alteration
Number (Least
Favorable), Ja
PROJECT NAME:
LOCATION:
ROCK TYPE:
GEOLOGY:
OVERBURDEN/TUNNEL DEPTH:
Q (Typical Range):
Q (Mean):
Joint Water
Pressure, Jw
Exc. Inflow
High
Pressure
Wet
Dry
Squeeze
Swell
Faults
Stress/Strength
0.05
0.2
0.5
0.66
1.0
0.1
0.33
20
20
10
10
20
5 0.5 2.5
5
10
10
15
5
15
5
5
10
2
1
7.5 2.5
Stress Reduction
Factor, SRF
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
Soil
Fresh
Weathering
Grade As Per
ISRM
W
Active
Stress
Fig. 5.1
Data sheet for recording Q parameters (Barton, 1993).
Rock mass quality Q
61
Table 5.8 Weighted average method of obtaining Q-value (Barton, 1993).
Parameter
of Q
Poorest value
(10%)
Most typical
value (60%)
Maximum
value (30%)
Weighted
average
RQD
25
65
85
67
Jn
12
9
–
9.42
Jr
1.5
3
4
2.05
Ja
4
2
1
1.9
Jw
0.66
1
1
0.966
SRF
7.5
5
2.5
4.5
observed parameter, i.e., 10% poorest, 60% most typical, 30% best or maximum value,
since the weighted average from all the histograms masks the extreme values. For example,
the values of Q parameters collected at a location are shown in the following Table 5.8.
Using the weighted average value of each parameter, one can obtain a more realistic Q
from equation (5.1). The weighted average value has been obtained using the percentage
weightage mentioned above and as shown for RQD below.
A weighted average for RQD in above Table 5.8 is obtained as
(10 × 25 + 60 × 65 + 30 × 85)/100 = 67
Similarly, weighted averages can be obtained for other parameters like joint wall com-
pressive strength (JCS), joint wall roughness coefﬁcient (JCS), etc. as proposed by NGI.
5.5 CLASSIFICATION OF THE ROCK MASS
The rock mass quality Q is a very sensitive index and its value varies from 0.001 to
1000. Use of the Q-system is speciﬁcally recommended for tunnels and caverns with
arched roof. On the basis of the Q-value, the rock masses have been classiﬁed into nine
categories (Table 5.9). In case the rock mass quality varies from Qmin to Qmax, the average
rock mass quality of (Qmax × Qmin)1/2 may be assumed in the design calculations.
5.6 ESTIMATION OF SUPPORT PRESSURE
5.6.1 Using approach of Barton et al. (1974)
Barton et al. (1974, 1975) plotted support capacities of 200 underground openings against
the rock mass quality (Q) as shown in Fig. 5.2. They found the following empirical
correlation for ultimate support pressure:
pv = (0.2/Jr) Q−1/3
(5.2)
62 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 5.9 Classiﬁcation of rock mass based on Q-values.
Q
Group
Classiﬁcation
0.001–0.01
3
Exceptionally poor
0.01–0.1
Extremely poor
0.1–1
2
Very poor
1–4
Poor
4–10
Fair
10–40
1
Good
40–100
Very good
100–400
Extremely good
400–1000
Exceptionally good
Jr = 0.5
Jr = 1.5
Jr = 2.0
Jr = 1.0
Jr = 2.5
Jr = 4.0
Jr = 5.0
Jr = 3.0
Exc. Poor
Ext. Poor
V. Poor
Poor
Fair
Good
Very
Good
Ext. Good
Exc.
Good
0.001 .002 .004
0.01 0.02 0.04
0.1
0.2
0.4
1
2
4
10
20
40
100
200
400
1000
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.0
5.0
10
02
04
Rock Mass Quality (Q)
Support Pressure, kg/cm sq.
Fig. 5.2
Correlation between support pressure and rock mass quality Q (Barton et al., 1974).
ph = (0.2/Jr) Q−1/3
w
(5.3)
where
pv
= ultimate roof support pressure in MPa,
ph
= ultimate wall support pressure in MPa and
Qw = wall factor.
Rock mass quality Q
63
It may be noted that dilatant joints or Jr values play a dominant role in the stability
of underground openings. Consequently, support capacities may be independent of the
opening size, unlike as believed by Terzaghi (1946).
The wall factor (Qw) is obtained after multiplying Q by a factor which depends on the
magnitude of Q as given below:
Range of Q
Wall Factor Qw
>10
5.0Q
0.1–10
2.5Q
<0.1
1.0Q
Barton et al. (1974) further suggested that if the number of joint sets is less than three,
equations (5.2) and (5.3) are expressed as equations (5.4a) and (5.4b), respectively.
pv = 0.2 · J 1/2
n
3 · Jr
· Q−1/3
(5.4a)
ph = 0.2 · J 1/2
n
3 · Jr
· Q1/3
w
(5.4b)
They felt that the short-term support pressure can be obtained after substituting 5Q in
place of Q in equation (5.2). Thus, the ultimate support pressure is obtained as 1.7 times
the short-term support pressure.
Bhasin and Grimstad (1996) suggested the following correlation for predicting support
pressure in tunnels through poor rock masses (say Q < 4):
pv = 40B
Jr
· Q−1/3 kPa
(5.5)
where B is diameter or span of the tunnel in meters. Equation (5.5) shows that the support
pressure increases with tunnel size B in poor rock masses.
5.6.2 Correlation by Singh et al. (1992)
It may be mentioned that Q referred to in the above correlations is actually the post-
excavation quality of a rock mass, because, in tunnels the geology of the rock mass is
usually studied after blasting and on the spot decision is taken on support density.
5.6.2.1 Short-term support pressure
Vertical or roof support pressure
The observed roof support pressure is related to the
short-term rock mass quality (Qi) for 30 instrumented tunnels by the following empirical
correlation,
pv = 0.2
Jr
· Q−0.33
i
· f · f ′ · f ′′ MPa
(5.6)
64 Tunnelling in weak rocks
f = 1 + (H −320)/800 ≥1
(5.7)
where
Qi = 5Q = short-term rock mass quality soon after the underground excavation,
pv = short-term roof support pressure in MPa,
f
= correction factor for overburden (Fig. 5.3),
f ′
= correction factor for tunnel closure (Table 5.10) obtained from Fig. 5.4 for
squeezing ground condition (H > 350 Q1/3 and Jr/Ja < 1/2),
= 1 in non-squeezing ground,
f ′′ = correction factor for the time after excavation (equation (5.8)) and support
erection and
H
= overburden above crown or tunnel depth below ground level in meters.
While developing equation (5.6), the correction factors have been applied in steps.
Firstly, the correction factor for tunnel depth has been applied, secondly, the correction
for tunnel closure and ﬁnally the correction for time after support erection (Singh et al.,
1992). Grimstad and Barton (1993) have agreed to overburden correction factor from
equation (5.7).
Values of correction factors for tunnel closure (f ′) can be obtained from Table 5.10
on the basis of design value of tunnel closure. Table 5.10 has been derived from
Figs 5.4a and 5.4b between normalized tunnel closure (ua/a) and the correction factor
for tunnel closure f ′ deﬁned in equation (5.6). It may be noted that Figs 5.4a and 5.4b
represent normalized observed ground response (reaction) curves for tunnel roof and walls,
respectively in squeezing ground (See Section 19.7).
0
200
400
600
800
Non-Squeezing
Squeezing
0.8
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Overburden (H), m
Correction factor for Tunnel Depth (f)
Fig. 5.3
Correction factor f for tunnel depth or overburden (Singh et al., 1992).
Rock mass quality Q
65
Table 5.10 Correction factor f ′ for tunnel closure (Singh et al., 1992).
S.No. Rock condition
Support system
Tunnel closure
(ua/a), %
Correction
factor, f ′
1.
Non-squeezing
(H < 350 Q0.33)
–
<1
1.1
2.
Squeezing
(H > 350 Q0.33, Jr/Ja < 0.5)
Very stiff
<2%
>1.8
3.
As above
Stiff
2–4%
0.85
4.
As above
Flexible
4–6%
0.70
5.
As above
Very ﬂexible
6–8%
1.15
6.
As above
Extremely ﬂexible
>8%
1.8
Notes: (i)Tunnelclosuredependssigniﬁcantlyonmethodofexcavation. Inextremesqueezinggroundconditions,
heading and benching method may lead to tunnel closure >8%. (ii) Tunnel closures more than 4% of tunnel
span should not be allowed, otherwise support pressures are likely to build-up rapidly due to failure of rock
arch. In such cases, additional rock anchors should be installed immediately to arrest the tunnel closure within
a limiting value of 4% of width. (iii) Steel ribs with struts may not absorb more than 2% tunnel closure. Thus,
SFRS is suggested as an immediate support at the face to be supplemented with steel arches behind the face in
situations where excessive closures are encountered. (iv) The minimum spacing between the parallel tunnels is
5B center to center in squeezing ground, where B is the width of a tunnel.
0
5
10
15
0
1
2
3
4
Observed tunnel closure at crown, %
Normalized observed roof support pressure (f’r)
0
5
10
15
0
1
2
3
4
Observed tunnel wall closure, %
Normalized observed support pressure (f’w)
Onset of sympathetic
failure
Roof
Wall
(b)
(a)
Fig. 5.4
Correction factor for (a) roof closure and (b) wall closure under squeezing ground
condition (Singh et al., 1992).
66 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The correction factor f ′′ for time was found as
f ′′ = log (9.5 t0.25)
(5.8)
where t is time in months after support installation. Goel et al. (1995b) have veriﬁed
correction factors f and f ′ for Maneri–Uttarkashi tunnel (H = 700 to 900 m). Kumar (2002)
conﬁrmed all the three correction factors from study of behavior of 27 km long NJPC
tunnel in Himalaya, India (H< 1400 m). Incorporating the above three correction factors,
Singh et al. (1992) proposed the following correlation for ultimate tunnel support pressure
pult, after about 100 years (f ′′ = 51/3 = 1.7),
pult = 0.2
Jr
· Q−1/3 · f · f ′ MPa
(5.9)
Singh et al. (1992) have also studied the effect of tunnel size (2 m–22 m) on sup-
port pressures. They inferred no signiﬁcant effect of size on observed support pressure.
However, this aspect has been discussed in the chapter on rock mass number N.
Horizontal or wall support pressure
For estimating wall support pressure, equation (5.6)
may be used with short-term wall rock mass quality Qwi in place of Qi. The short-term
wall rock quality Qwi for short-term wall support pressure is obtained after multiplying
Qi by a factor which depends on the magnitude of Q as given below:
(i)
For
Q > 10;
Qwi = 5.0. Qi = 25Q,
(ii)
For 0.1 < Q < 10;
Qwi = 2.5. Qi = 12.5Q and
(iii)
For
Q < 0.1;
Qwi = 1.0. Qi = 5Q
The observed short-term wall support pressure is insigniﬁcant generally in non-
squeezing rock conditions. It is, therefore, recommended that these may be neglected
in the case of tunnels in rock masses of good quality of group 1 in Table 5.9 (Q > 10).
Note: Although the wall support pressure would be negligible in non-squeezing ground
conditions, high wall support pressure is common in poor grounds or squeezing ground
conditions. Therefore, invert struts with steel ribs be used when the estimated wall support
pressure requires the use of wall support in exceptionally poor rock conditions and highly
squeezing ground conditions. NATM or NTM are better choice otherwise.
5.6.2.2 Ultimate support pressure
Long-term monitoring at Chhibro cavern of Yamuna hydro-electric project in India has
enabled the researchers to study the support pressure trend with time and with satura-
tion. The study on the basis of 10 years monitoring has shown that the ultimate support
pressureforwater-chargedrockmasseswitherodiblejointﬁllingsmayriseupto6timesthe
Rock mass quality Q
67
short-term support pressure (Mitra, 1990). The monitoring also suggested that for tunnels
located near faults/thrusts (with plastic gouge) in seismic areas, the ultimate support
pressure might be about 25 percent more due to accumulated strains in the rock mass along
the fault.
On extrapolating the support pressure values for 100 years, a study of Singh et al.
(1992) has shown that the ultimate support pressure would be about 1.75 times the short-
term support pressure under non-squeezing ground conditions. Whereas in squeezing
ground condition, Jethwa (1981) has estimated that the ultimate support pressure would
be 2 to 3 times the short-term support pressure.
5.6.3 Evaluation of the approach of Barton et al. and Singh et al.
Support pressures estimated from equations (5.2) and (5.3) for various test-sections have
been compared with the measured values. The estimates are reasonable (correlation coefﬁ-
cient r = 0.81) for tunnel sections through non-squeezing ground conditions. In squeezing
ground conditions, the estimated support pressures never exceeded 0.7 MPa, whereas the
measured values were as high as 1.2 MPa for larger tunnels. Therefore, it is thought that the
Q-system may be unsafe for larger tunnels (diam. >9 m) under highly squeezing ground
conditions (Goel et al., 1995a).
The estimated support pressures from equation (5.6) are also compared with the mea-
sured values for non-squeezing and squeezing ground conditions. It has been found
that the correlation of Singh et al. (1992) provides reasonable estimates of support
pressures.
5.6.3.1 Limitations of the Q-system
Kaiser et al. (1986) opined that SRF is probably the most contentious parameter. He
concluded that it may be appropriate to neglect the SRF during rock mass classiﬁcation
and to assess the detrimental effects of high stresses separately. However, he has not
given any alternate approach to assess high stress effect. Keeping this problem in mind,
Goel et al. (1995a) have proposed rock mass number N, i.e., stress-free Q and incorporated
stress-effect in the form of tunnel depth H to suggest a new set of empirical correlations
for estimating support pressures. This aspect has been discussed in Chapter 7.
5.7 UNSUPPORTED SPAN
Barton et al. (1974) proposed the following equation for estimating equivalent dimension
(D′
e) of a self-supporting or an unsupported tunnel
D′
e = 2.0 (Q0.4) m
(5.10)
68 Tunnelling in weak rocks
if H < 350Q1/3 m
where
D′
e
= equivalent dimension,
= span, diameter or height in meters
ESR
,
Q
= rock mass quality and
ESR = excavation support ratio.
In equivalent dimension, the span or diameter is used for analyzing the roof support,
and the height of wall in case of wall support. Excavation support ratio (ESR) appropriate
to a variety of underground excavations is listed in Table 5.11.
General requirements for permanently unsupported openings are,
(a) Jn < 9, Jr > 1.0, Ja < 1.0, Jw = 1.0, SRF < 2.5
Further, conditional requirements for permanently unsupported openings are given
below.
(b) If RQD < 40, need Jn < 2
(c) If Jn = 9, need Jr > 1.5 and RQD > 90
(d) If Jr = 1.0, need Jw < 4
(e) If SRF > 1, need Jr > 1.5
(f) If span > 10 m, need Jn < 9
(g) If span > 20 m, need Jn < 4 and SRF < 1
The empirical design tables and charts for design of support system are presented
in Chapter 10.
Table 5.11 Values of excavation support ratio ESR (Barton et al., 1974).
S. No.
Type of excavation
ESR
1
Temporary mine openings, etc.
3–5
2
Vertical shafts:
(i) circular section
(ii) rectangular/square section
2.5
2.0
3
Permanent mine openings, water tunnels for hydropower (excluding high
pressure penstocks), pilot tunnels, drifts and headings for large
excavations, etc.
1.6
4
Storage rooms, water treatment plants, minor road and railway tunnels,
surge chambers, access tunnels, etc. (Cylindrical cavern?)
1.3
5
Oil storage caverns, power stations, major road and railway tunnels, civil
defence chambers, portals, intersections, etc.
1.0
6
Underground nuclear power stations, railway stations, sports and public
facilities, factories, etc.
0.8
Note: ESR should be increased by 1.5 times and Q by 5Q and Qw by 5Qw for temporary supports.
Rock mass quality Q
69
5.8 ROCK MASS CHARACTERIZATION
The Chaos theory appears to be applicable at micro-level only in nature and mostly near
surface. Further, Chaos is self-organizing. For engineering use, the overall (weighted
average) behavior is all that is needed. Since there is perfect harmony in nature at macro-
level, the overall behavior should also be harmonious. Hence, in civil engineering, Chaos
theory seems to ﬁnd only limited applications. In fact in civil engineering practice, simple
continuum characterization is more popular for large stable structures. Thus when one is
talking about the behavior of jointed rock masses, one is really talking about the most
probable behavior of rock masses.
In the case of caverns, empirical design should be checked by software packages like
UDEC/3DEC, FLAC or FEM. They require the knowledge of deformation and strength
characteristics of rock mass and joints.
5.8.1 Modulus of deformation of rock mass
In India a large number of hydro-electric power projects have been completed recently
and several projects are under construction. These projects have generated a bulk of
instrumentationdatawhichhavebeenanalyzedbyMitra(1990), Mehrotra(1992), Verman
(1993), Goel (1994) and Singh (1997). These new data and their analysis have led to a
revision of the existing empirical relations and formulation of new correlations which are
subsequently described in this chapter.
Modulus of deformation varies considerably. It is more in the horizontal direction
than in the vertical direction. However, a mean value of modulus of deformation can be
obtained by using the following relation (Barton, 2002).
Ed = 10
Q · qc
100
1/3
GPa [for Q = 0.1 to 100 and qc = 10–200 MPa]
(5.11)
This relation gives good agreement with the correlations of Bieniawski (1978) and
Seraﬁm and Pereira (1983). The value of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock
material (qc) may be chosen from Table 5.12, where test results are not available.
Analysis of the ﬁeld data has given the following correlation for modulus of defor-
mation (Ed) of weak and nearly dry rock masses with coefﬁcient of correlation as 0.85
(Singh, 1997),
Ed = H 0.2 · Q0.36 GPa
(5.12)
where Q is the rock mass quality at the time of uniaxial jacking test and H is
overburden above tunnel in meters >50 m. Mehrotra (1992) found signiﬁcant effect of
saturation on Ed of water sensitive rocks (argillaceous). It is thus seen that the modulus
of deformation of weak rock masses is pressure dependent. This correlation is suggested
70 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 5.12 Average uniaxial compressive strength (qc) of some rocks, measured on 50 mm diameter samples (Palmstrom, 2000).
Type of rock
qc (MPa)
Type of rock
qc (MPa)
Type of rock
qc (MPa)
Type of rock
qc (MPa)
Andesite (I)
150
Granite (I)
160
Marble (M)
<100>
Shale (S, M)
95
Amphibolite (M)
<160>
Granitic Gneiss (M)
100
Micagneiss (M)
90
Siltstone (S, M)
<80>
Augen Gneiss (M)
160
Granodiorite (I)
160
Micaquartzite (M)
85
Slate (M)
<190>
Basalt (I)
160
Granulite (M)
<90>
Micaschist (M)
<80>
Syenite (I)
150
Clay Schist (S, M)
55
Gneiss (M)
130
Phyllite (M)
<50>
Tuff (S)
<25>
Diorite (I)
140
Greenschist (M)
<75>
Quartzite (M)
<190>
Ultrabasic (I)
160
Dolerite (I)
200
Greenstone (M)
110
Quartzitic Phy. (M)
100
Clay (Hard)
0.7
Dolomite (S)
<100>
Greywacke (M)
80
Rhyolite (I)
85(?)
Clay (Stiff)
0.2
Gabbro (I)
240
Limestone (S)
90
Sandstone (S, M)
<100>
Clay (Soft)
0.03
Serpentine (M)
135
Silt, sand (approx)
0.0005
Notes: (I) = Igneous; (M) = Metamorphic; (S) = Sedimentary; < > Large Variation.
Rock mass quality Q
71
for static analysis of underground openings and concrete dams. Further, the test data of
30 uniaxial jacking tests suggested the following correlation for elastic modulus Ee during
unloading cycle (Singh, 1997).
Ee = 1.5 Q0.6 E0.14
r
GPa
(5.13)
where
Er = modulus of elasticity of rock material in GPa, and
Q = rock mass quality at the time of uniaxial jacking test in drift.
Equation (5.13) is valid for both dry and saturated rock masses. It is suggested
for dynamic analysis of concrete dams subjected to impulsive seismic loads due to
high intensity earthquake at a nearby epicenter (active fault). Some other correlations
are summarized in Table 5.13. The symbols used in Table 5.13 are explained in the
footnote.
Table 5.13 Empirical correlations for overall modulus of deformation of rock mass (GSI
and RMR ≪100).
Authors
Expression for Ed (GPa)
Conditions
Bieniawski (1978)
2 RMR −100
qc > 100 MPa and RMR > 50
Barton (2002)
10[Q·qc/100]1/3
Q = 0.1 – 100
qc = 10 – 200 MPa
Seraﬁm and Pereira
(1983)
10(RMR−10)/40
qc ≥100 MPa
Nicholson and Bieniawski
(1990)
Ed/Er = 0.0028 RMR2
+ 0.9 e(RMR/22.82)
–
Verman (1993)
0.3 Hα· 10(RMR−20)/38
α = 0.16 to 0.30 (higher for
poor rocks)
qc ≤100 MPa; H ≥50 m; Jw = 1
Coeff. of correlation = 0.91
Mitri et al. (1994)
Ed/Er = 0.5[1−cos(π RMR/100)]
–
Hoek and Brown (1997)
√qc
10 10(GSI−10)/40
qc ≤100 MPa
GSI = RMR−5
Singh (1997)
Ed = Q0.36H 0.2
Ee = 1.5Q0.6E0.14
r
Q < 10; Jw = 1
Coeff. of correlation for
Ee = 0.96; Jw ≤1
Note: The above correlations are expected to provide a mean value of the modulus of deformation.
72 Tunnelling in weak rocks
5.8.2 Anisotropy of rock mass
Jointed rock masses have very low shear modulii due to very low shear stiffness of joints.
The shear modulus of a jointed rock mass has been back-analyzed by Singh (1973) as
follows.
G ≈Ed/10 GPa
(5.14)
The axis of anisotropy are naturally along the weakest joint or a bedding plane. Low
shear modulus changes stress distribution drastically in the foundations. Kumar (1988)
studied its effect on lined tunnels and found it to be signiﬁcant.
5.8.3 Q vs P-wave velocity
A correlation between seismic P-wave velocity and rock mass quality Q has been proposed
by Barton (2002) on the basis of around 2000 measurements for a rough estimation of Q
ahead of the tunnel face using seismic P-wave velocity,
Q = 100
qc
10[(Vp−3500)/1000]
for 500 m > H > 25 m
(5.15)
Vs
Vp
= 0.50 to 0.66
where Vp is P-wave velocity in meters per second and qc is UCS of rock material in MPa.
The Vs is the shear wave velocity of rock masses.
For good and fair quality of granites and gneisses, an even better ﬁt is obtained using
the relation Q = (Vp −3600)/50 (Barton, 1991). Fig. 5.5 gives the approximate val-
ues of rock mass quality before underground excavation for a known P-wave velocity
for different values of depth of overburden (H ). It should be noted that P-wave velocity
increases rapidly with the depth of overburden. Fig. 5.5 also suggests the following corre-
lation between mean static modulus of deformation in roof (in GPa) and support pressure
(in MPa).
proof =
f · f ′
Ed(mean)
MPa
(5.16)
The advantage of this correlation is that cross-hole seismic tomography may be used
in more direct and accurate manner for specifying expected rock qualities and potential
rock support needs in tender documents. There is possibility in future to assess Q values
at great depths along tunnel by the seismic refraction survey on the ground level before
its excavation (Chapter 2). It may be noted that the Q values after squeezing or rock burst
or seepage erosion may be signiﬁcantly less than Q values before tunnelling, i.e., during
seismic survey.
Rock mass quality Q
73
Ext. Poor
V. Poor
Poor
Fair
Good
Very
Good Ext. Good Exc.
Good
0.01
0.1
1
4
10
40
100
400
1000
Rock Mass Quality (Q)
1000
750
500
250
100
50
25
1
2
5
10
20
30
Approximate
Porosity n %
Approximate
Depth H (m)
Rock Mass Quality
Seismic Velocity
Deformation Modulus
Qc
Vp
Ed
Vp = log Qc + 3.5 (km/sec.)
Ed = 10. Qc 1/3 (GPa)
Seismic Velocity (Vp), km/sec.
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
Approx.
Range of
Deform.
Moduli
Approx.
Range of
Support
Pressure
Ed(Min.) Ed(Mean)
proof
GPa
MPa
t/m2
100
68
46
32
22
15
10
7
5
3
2
1.5
1.0
100
53
30
17
9
5
3
2
1
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
100
50
20
10
5
2
1
Fig. 5.5
An integration of Vp, Q, qc, depth, porosity and static deformation modulus Ed which
was developed stage by stage by trial and error ﬁtting to ﬁeld data (Barton, 2002).
5.8.4 Improvement in Q by grouting
According to Barton (2002), the in situ permeability (k) of rock mass near surface is of
the order of (for Q = 0.01 to 100, H < 25 m and 1 lugeon = 1.3 × 10−5 cm/s),
k ≈Qc = Q · qc
100 lugeons
(5.17)
Thisissurprisinglyasimplecorrelation, yettrueforQbetween0.01and100. Evidently
the rock mass quality may be improved signiﬁcantly by grouting of rock masses with
cement grout, which would be proportional to the decrease in the maximum value of
permeability of a grouted rock mass in any direction. Thus the required capacity of support
systems for underground openings may be reduced substantially. Further, the long grout
holes will drain off any water in the rock masses effectively, thereby reducing construction
problems in the water-charged rock masses (ﬂowing ground condition).
Grouting of the rock mass with permeability above 1 lugeon is feasible at sites with
cement particles of maximum size of 100–150 µm (micrometer). Micro-ﬁne and ultra-ﬁne
cements with maximum size of particles of 15–30 µm may be used in fair rock masses
with physical apertures of about 0.05–0.10 µm. The thumb rule is that the maximum
size of particle should be more than three or four times the physical aperture of joints
(Barton, 2002). The assumption is that the grout will follow the path of least resistance
which is thus the most permeable and least normally stressed joint set predominantly.
Thus the least Jr/Ja value will also be improved. So, Barton (2002) has proved why
the construction engineers often grouted the weak rock masses to improve its quality
substantially in the past.
74 Tunnelling in weak rocks
5.9 CONCLUDING REMARKS (BARTON, 2001, 2002)
Some doubts have been expressed whether or not in situ stress and water pressure
should be considered in rock mass classiﬁcation. It is because they are external and inter-
nal boundary conditions of a rock structure which are taken into account in all software
packages. In fact the real response of rock masses is often highly coupled or interacting
(Fig. 13.2).
The stress reduction factor (SRF) depends upon the height of overburden. Hence, it is
external boundary condition. However, high overburden pressure causes damage to the
rock mass structure, which needs to be considered in a rock mass classiﬁcation system. It is
worth seeing the time-dependent squeezing and rock burst phenomenon in deep tunnels.
It helps to develop the total concept of rock mass quality.
The seepage water pressure in rock joints, on the other hand, represents the internal
boundary condition. The high water pressure softens weak argillaceous rock masses due
to seepage erosion and long-term weathering of rock joints particularly with coating of
soft material like clay. So, joint water reduction factor (Jw) also needs to be considered
for both rock mass classiﬁcation and rock mass characterization.
The classiﬁcation of rock mass does not mean that the correlation should be obtained
with rock mass classiﬁcation rating only. One should use intellect to search correlation
with rock mass classiﬁcation rating and other important parameters such as height of over-
burden, UCS, modulus of elasticity of rock material, size of opening, etc. The objective
should be to improve the coefﬁcient of correlation signiﬁcantly; to the extent it is practical
and simple to understand.
There is a world-wide appreciation on the utility of (post-excavation) rock mass quality
Q-system for empirical design of support system for tunnels and caverns in many parts of
the world in varying tunnelling conditions in over 1260 tunnels. Classiﬁcation approach
is really an amazing approach in civil engineering applications. Recently, Q-system has
been extended to the rock mass characterization successfully (Barton, 2002).
REFERENCES
Barton, N. (1991). Geotechnical design. World Tunnelling, Nov. 1991, 410-416.
Barton, N. (1993). Application of Q-system and index tests to estimate shear strength and deforma-
bility of rock masses. Workshop on Norwegian Method of Tunnelling, New Delhi, India,
66-84.
Barton, N. (2001). Letter to the Editor. News Journal ISRM, Nov. 2001.
Barton, N. (2002). Some new Q-value correlations to assist in site characterisation and tunnel
design. Int. J. Rock Mech. And Mining Sciences, 39, 185-216.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering Classiﬁcation of Rock Masses for the
Design of Tunnel Support. NGI Publication No. 106, Oslo, 48.
Rock mass quality Q
75
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1975). Estimation of support requirements for underground
excavations. XVIth Sym. on Rock Mechanics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA,
163-177.
Bhasin, R. and Grimstad, E. (1996). The use of stress-strength relationships in the assessment of
tunnel stability. Proc. Conf. on Recent Advances on Tunnelling Technology, New Delhi, 1,
183-196.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1978). Determining rock mass deformability, Experience from case histories.
Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., 15, 237-247.
Bieniawski, Z. T.(1989). Engineering Rock Mass Classiﬁcations. John Wiley & Sons, 251.
Goel, R. K. (1994). Correlations for predicting support pressures and closures in tunnels.
PhD thesis, Nagpur Univeristy, India, 308.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1995a). Indian experiences with Q and RMR
systems. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology, Elsevier Science, 10(1), 97-109.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1995b). Tunnelling through the young Himalayas -
A case history of the Maneri-Uttarkashi power tunnel. Engineering Geology, 39, 31-44.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating of the Q-system for NMT. Int. Symposium on Sprayed
Concrete - Modern use of wet mix sprayed concrete for underground support, Fagernes.
Eds: Kompen, Opsahll and Berg, Norwegian Concrete Association, Oslo.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1997). Practical estimates of rock mass strength. Int. J. Rock Mech. and
Min. Sci. and Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 34(8), 1165-1186.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressures in tunnels through squeezing ground in Lower
Himalayas. PhD thesis, University of Roorkee (Now IIT Roorkee), Roorkee, India, 272.
Kaiser, P. K., Mackay, C. and Gale, A. D. (1986). Evaluation of rock classiﬁcation at B.C.
rail tumbler ridge tunnels. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 19,
205-234.
Kumar, N. (2002). Rock mass characterisation and evaluation of supports for tunnels in Himalaya.
PhD thesis, WRDTC, IIT Roorkee, 289.
Kumar, P. (1988). Development and application of inﬁnite elements for analysis of openings in
rock mass. PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee, India, 192.
Mehrotra, V. K. (1992). Estimation of engineering properties of rock mass. PhD thesis, University
of Roorkee, India, 267.
Mitra, S. (1990). Studies on long-term behaviour of underground powerhouse cavities in soft rocks.
PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee, India.
Mitri, H. S., Edrissi, R. and Henning, J. (1994). Finite element modelling of cable bolted stopes in
hard rock underground mines. SME Annual Meeting, 14-17.
Nicholson, G. A. and Bieniawski, Z. T. (1990). A non-linear deformation modulus based on rock
mass classiﬁcation. Int. J. Min. & Geol. Engg., 8, 181-202.
Palmstrom, A. (2000). Recent developments in rock support estimates by the RMi. Journal of Rock
Mechanics and Tunnelling Technology, New Delhi, India, 2(1), 1-24.
Seraﬁm, J. L. and Pereira, J. P. (1983). Considerations of the geomechanics classiﬁcation of
Bieniawski. Int. Symp. Eng. Geol. Underground Constr., LNEC, Lisbon, 1, II.33-II.42.
76 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Singh, Bhawani (1973). Continuum characterization of jointed rock mass, Part II signiﬁcance of
low shear modulus. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci. & Geomec. Abstr., Pergamon, 10,
337-349.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (1999). Rock Mass Classiﬁcation - A Practical Approach in Civil
Engineering. Elsevier Science Ltd., U.K., 268.
Singh, Bhawani, Jethwa, J. L., Dube, A. K. and Singh, B. (1992). Correlation between observed sup-
port pressure and rock mass quality. Int. J. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology,
Pergamon, 7(1), 59-74.
Singh, S. (1997). Time dependent deformation modulus of rocks in tunnels. ME thesis, Dept. of
Civil Engineering, University of Roorkee, India, 65.
Terzaghi, K. (1946). Rock defects and loads on tunnel support. Introduction to Rock Tunnelling with
Steel Supports. Eds: R.V. Proctor and T. L. White, Commercial Sheering & Stamping Co.,
Youngstown, Ohio, USA, 271.
Verman, M. K. (1993). Rock mass-tunnel support interaction analysis. PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee,
India.
6
Rock mass number
“My attention is now entirely concentrated on Rock Mechanics, where my experience in
applied soil mechanics can render useful services. I am more and more amazed about
the blind optimism with which the younger generation invades this ﬁeld, without paying
any attention to the inevitable uncertainties in the data on which their theoretical
reasoning is based and without making serious attempts to evaluate the resulting errors.”
Annual Summary in Terzaghi’s Diary
6.1 INTRODUCTION
One of the reasons why rock mass classiﬁcations has become more popular over the
years is that these are easy to use and at the same time provide vital information about
the stability, etc. Thus, rock mass classiﬁcation is an amazingly successful approach.
Classiﬁcation leads to making fast decisions during tunnelling.
Despite their usefulness, one cannot deny the uncertainty in getting correct ratings of
a few parameters. How to manage these uncertainties? With this objective, two rock mass
indices – rock mass number N and rock condition rating RCR have been adopted. These
indices are the modiﬁed versions of the two most popular classiﬁcation systems, N from
the Q-system of Barton et al. (1974) and RCR from the RMR-system of Bieniawski (1984).
Rock mass number, denoted by N, is stress-free rock mass quality Q. Stress effect has
been considered indirectly in the form of overburden height H. Thus, N can be deﬁned by
the following equation, representing basic causative factors in governing the tunnelling
conditions.
N =
RQD
Jn
  Jr
Ja

[Jw]
(6.1)
This is needed because of the problems and uncertainties in obtaining the correct rating
of Barton’s SRF parameter (Kaiser et al., 1986; Goel et al., 1995a).
Rock condition rating is deﬁned as RMR without ratings for the crushing strength of
the intact rock material and the adjustment of joint orientation. This is explained as below:
RCR = RMR −(rating for crushing strength + adjustment of joint orientation ) (6.2)
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
78 Tunnelling in weak rocks
RCR, therefore, is free from the crushing strength which is a parameter sometimes dif-
ﬁcult to obtain at the site. Moreover, parameter wise, N and RCR have become equivalent
and can be used for the purpose of interrelation.
6.2 INTERRELATION BETWEEN Q AND RMR
Interrelations between the two most widely used classiﬁcation indices, the RMR of
Bieniawski (1976) and the rock mass quality Q of Barton et al. (1974), have been
proposed by many researchers. Bieniawski (1989) used 117 case histories involving
68 Scandinavian, 28 South African and 21 other documented case histories from the
United States of America covering the entire range of Q and RMR to propose the following
correlation.
RMR = 9 ln Q + 44
(6.3)
Based on case histories from New Zealand, Rutledge and Preston (1978) proposed a
different correlation as
RMR = 5.9 ln Q + 43
(6.4)
Moreno (1980), Cameron-Clarke and Budavari (1981) and Abad et al. (1984) have also
proposed different correlations between Q and RMR as presented in equations (6.5–6.7)
respectively.
RMR = 5.4 ln Q + 55.2
(6.5)
RMR = 5 ln Q + 60.8
(6.6)
RMR = 10.5 ln Q + 41.8
(6.7)
Evaluation of all the correlations, given in equations (6.3) through (6.7), on the basis
of 115 case histories including 77 reported by Bieniawski (1976), 4 from Kielder exper-
imental tunnel reported by Hoek and Brown (1980) and 34 collected from India, has
indicated that the correlation coefﬁcients of these approaches are not very reliable. The
correlation of Rutledge and Preston (1978) provides the highest correlation coefﬁcient
of 0.81, followed by Bieniawski (1976), Moreno (1980), Cameron-Clarke and Budavari
(1981) and Abad et al. (1984) in decreasing order as shown in Table 6.1 and Fig. 6.1.
These correlations, therefore, do not have high reliability for an interrelation between
Q and RMR.
6.2.1 The new approach
Attempts to correlate Q and RMR in equations (6.3) through (6.7) ignore the fact that the
two systems are not truly equivalent. It seems, therefore, that a good correlation can be
developed if N and RCR are considered.
Rock mass number
79
Table 6.1 Evaluation of various correlations between RMR and Q (Goel et al., 1995b).
Lines in Fig. 6.1
Approach
Correlation coefﬁcient
A
Bieniawski (1976)
0.77
B
Rutledge and Preston (1978)
0.81
C
Moreno (1980)
0.55
D
Cameron-Clarke and
Budavari (1981)
High scatter
E
Abad et al. (1984)
0.66
Case Histories
Indian
Scandinavia, USA
U.K.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Rock Mass Quality (Q)
Rock Mass Rating (RMR)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Fig. 6.1
Correlations between Q and RMR (Goel et al., 1995b).
Rock condition rating RCR and rock mass number N from 63 cases were used to obtain
a new interrelation. The 63 cases comprised of 36 from India, 4 from Kielder experimental
tunnel (reported by Hoek & Brown, 1980) and 23 NGI cases from Bieniawski (1984).
Details about the six parameters for Q and information about joint orientation vis-à-vis
tunnel axis in respect of these 23 NGI cases were picked up directly from Barton et al.
(1974). Estimates of uniaxial crushing strength qc of rock material were made from rock
descriptions given by Barton et al. (1974) using strength data for comparable rock types
from Lama and Vutukuri (1978). Using the ratings for joint orientation and qc, so obtained,
and RMR from Bieniawski (1984), it was possible to estimate values of RCR. Thus, the
values of N and RCR for the 63 case histories were plotted in Fig. 6.2 and the following
correlation is obtained:
RCR = 8 ln N + 30
for
qc > 5 MPa
(6.8)
Equation (6.8) has a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.92. Equation (6.8) is not applicable
on the borderline of soil and rock mass according to data of Sari and Pasamehmetoglu
(2004). The following example explains how equation (6.8) could be used to obtain
80 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Case Histories
Indian
Scandinavia, U.S.A.
U.K.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Rock Mass Number (N)
Rock Condition Rating (RCR)
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Fig. 6.2
Correlations between N and RCR (Goel et al., 1995b).
RMR from Q and vice versa. The values of the parameters of RMR and Q collected in
the ﬁeld are given in Table 6.2.
6.2.1.1 RMR from Q
N = (RQD Jr Jw)/(Jn Ja) = 26.66 as shown in Table 6.2
Corresponding to N = 26.66, RCR = 56.26 (equation (6.8))
RMR = RCR + (ratings for qc and joint orientation as per equation (6.2)
RMR = 56.26 + [4 + (−)12]
RMR = 48.26 (It is comparable to RMR 49 obtained from direct estimation as shown in
Table 6.2)
Table 6.2 Values of the parameters of RMR and Q collected in the ﬁeld.
RMR-System
Q-System
Parameters for RMR
Rating
Parameters for Q
Rating
RQD (80%)
17
RQD
80
Joint spacing
10
Jn
9
Joint condition
20
Jr
3
Ja
1
Ground water
10
Jw
1
RCR
57
N
26.66
Crushing strength qc
+4
SRF
2.5
Joint orientation
(−)12
–
–
RMR
49
Q
10.6
Rock mass number
81
6.2.1.2 Q from RMR
RCR = RMR −(ratings for qc and joint orientation as per equation (6.2))
RCR = 49 −(4 −12)
RCR = 57
Corresponding to RCR = 57, N = 29.22 (equation (6.8))
Q = (N/SRF) = 29.22/2.5
Q = 11.68 (almost equal to the ﬁeld estimated value, Table 6.2)
The slight difference in directly estimated values of Q and RMR and those obtained
by the proposed interrelation are due to the inherent scatter in equation (6.8).
6.3 PREDICTION OF GROUND CONDITIONS
All the correlations for predicting ground conditions have been discussed in Fig. 13.1.
The main advantage of rock mass number is that it does not assume ground condition but
it predicts them.
In practice, the rock mass is classiﬁed into categories I, II, III, etc. Accordingly
support systems are prescribed. There are unusual geological conditions at some sections.
These possible conditions (ﬂowing ground, etc.) should also be classiﬁed in the contract
and support system should also be suggested. Further, there should be ﬁrst and second
contingency clauses in the same contract for better preparedness.
6.4 PREDICTION OF SUPPORT PRESSURE
These correlations are based on measured support pressures and other related parameters
from several Indian tunnels having steel rib support. Detailed ﬁeld studies have been
carried out for eight tunnelling projects located in the Himalaya and the peninsular India.
Two sets of empirical correlations for estimating support pressure for tunnel sections
under non-squeezing and squeezing ground conditions have been developed using N and
the measured values of support pressures, the tunnel depth H, the tunnel radius a and the
expected tunnel closure ua from 25 tunnel sections (Goel et al., 1995a; Singh et al., 1997).
The correlations are as follows:
Non-squeezing ground condition
pv(el) =
0.12 H 0.1 · a0.1
N 0.33

−0.038 MPa
(6.9)
Kumar (2002) found that equation (6.9) is valid for overburden (H) up to 1400 m in case
of NJPC tunnel, India.
82 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 6.3 Correction factor for tunnel closure in equation (6.10) (Goel et al., 1995a).
S.No.
Degree of squeezing
Normalized tunnel
closure (%)
f (N)
1.
Very mild squeezing
(270 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H < 360 N 0.33 · B−0.1)
1–2
1.5
2.
Mild squeezing
(360 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H < 450 N 0.33 · B−0.1)
2–3
1.2
3.
Mild to moderate squeezing
(450 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H < 540 N0.33 · B−0.1)
3–4
1.0
4.
Moderate squeezing
(540 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H < 630 N 0.33 · B−0.1)
4–5
0.8
5.
High squeezing
(630 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H < 800 N 0.33 · B−0.1)
5–7
1.1
6.
Very high squeezing
(800 N 0.33 · B−0.1 < H)
>7
1.7
Notations: N = rock mass number; H = tunnel depth in meters; B = tunnel width in meters.
Note: Tunnel closure depends signiﬁcantly on the method of excavation. In highly squeezing ground condition,
heading and benching method of excavation may lead to tunnel closure >8%.
Squeezing ground condition
pv(sq) =
f (N)
30

· 10

H0.6·a0.1
50·N0.33

MPa
(6.10)
where
pv(el)
= short-term roof support pressure in non-squeezing ground condition in MPa,
pv(sq)
= short-term roof support pressure in squeezing ground condition in MPa,
f (N)
= correction factor for tunnel closure obtained from Table 6.3 and
H and a = tunnel depth and tunnel radius in meters, respectively.
The above correlations have been evaluated using measured support pressures and
the correlation coefﬁcient of 0.96 and 0.95 is obtained for equations (6.9) and (6.10),
respectively (Goel et al., 1995a). It is also found that even for larger tunnels in squeezing
ground conditions, the estimated support pressures (equation (6.10)) are matching with
the measured values.
6.5 EFFECT OF TUNNEL SIZE ON SUPPORT PRESSURE
Prediction of support pressures in tunnels and the effect of tunnel size on support pressure
are the two important problems of tunnel mechanics which attracted the attention of
Rock mass number
83
many researchers. The information presented here on the effect of tunnel size on support
pressure has been taken from Goel et al. (1996).
Various empirical approaches of predicting support pressures have been developed in
the recent past. Some researchers demonstrated that the support pressure is independent
of tunnel size (Barton et al., 1974; Daemen, 1975; Jethwa, 1981; Singh et al., 1992),
whereas others advocated that the support pressure is directly dependent on tunnel size
(Terzaghi, 1946; Deereetal., 1969; Wickhametal., 1972; Unal, 1983; Bhasin&Grimstad,
1996). A review on the effect of tunnel size on support pressure with a concept pro-
posed by Goel (1994) is presented for highlighting the effect of tunnel size on support
pressure.
6.5.1 Review of existing approaches
Empirical approaches of estimating support pressure have been presented in Table 6.4
to study the effect of tunnel size on support pressure. A discussion is presented
below.
Table 6.4 Important empirical approaches and their recommendations (Goel et al., 1996).
Approach
Results based on
Recommendations
Terzaghi (1946)
a. Experiments in sand
b. Rectangular openings with
ﬂat roof
c. Qualitative approach
Support pressure increases with
the opening size
Deere et al. (1969)
a. Based on Terzaghi’s theory
and classiﬁcation on the
basis of RQD
Support pressure increases with
the opening size
Wickham et al. (1972)
RSR-system
a. Arched roof
b. Hard rocks
c. Quantitative approach
Support pressure increases with
the opening size
Barton et al. (1974);
Barton (2002)
Q-system
a. Hard rocks
b. Arched roof
c. Quantitative approach
Support pressure is independent
of the opening size
Unal (1983) using
RMR of Bieniawski
(1976)
a. Coal mines
b. Rectangular openings with
ﬂat roof
c. Quantitative approach
Support pressure increases with
the opening size
Singh et al. (1992)
a. Arched roof (tunnel/cavern)
b. Both hard and weak rocks
c. Quantitative approach
Support pressure is observed to be
independent of the opening size
(2–22 m)
84 Tunnelling in weak rocks
6.5.1.1 Inﬂuence of shape of the opening
Some empirical approaches listed in Table 6.4 have been developed for ﬂat roof and some
for arched roof. In case of an underground opening with ﬂat roof, the support pressure
is generally found to vary with the width or size of the opening, whereas in arched roof
the support pressure is found to be independent of tunnel size (Table 6.4). RSR-system of
Wickham et al. (1972) is an exception in this regard, probably because the system, being
conservative, was not backed by actual ﬁeld measurements for caverns. The mechanics
suggests that the normal forces and therefore the support pressure will be more in case
of a rectangular opening with ﬂat roof by virtue of the detached rock block in the tension
zone which is free to fall.
6.5.1.2 Inﬂuence of rock mass type
The support pressure is directly proportional to the size of the tunnel opening in the
case of weak or poor rock masses, whereas in good rock masses the situation is reverse
(Table 6.4). Hence, it can be inferred that the applicability of an approach developed for
weak or poor rock masses has a doubtful application in good rock masses.
6.5.1.3 Inﬂuence of in situ stresses
Rock mass number N does not consider in situ stresses, which govern the squeezing or
rock burst conditions. Instead the height of overburden is accounted for in equations (6.9)
and (6.10) for estimation of support pressures. Thus, in situ stresses are taken into account
indirectly.
Goel et al. (1995a) have evaluated the approaches of Barton et al. (1974) and Singh
et al. (1992) using the measured tunnel support pressures from 25 tunnel sections. They
found that the approach of Barton et al. is unsafe in squeezing ground conditions and
the reliability of the approaches of Singh et al. (1992) and that of Barton et al. depend
upon the rating of Barton’s stress reduction factor (SRF). It has also been found that
the approach of Singh et al. is unsafe for larger tunnels (B > 9 m) in squeezing ground
conditions. Kumar (2002) has evaluated many classiﬁcation systems and found rock mass
number to be the best from the case history of NJPC tunnel, India.
6.5.2 New concept on effect of tunnel size on support pressure
Equations (6.9) and (6.10) have been used to study the effect of tunnel size on support
pressure which is summarized in Table 6.5.
It is cautioned that the support pressure is likely to increase signiﬁcantly with the
tunnel size for tunnel sections excavated through the following situations:
(i) slickensided zone,
(ii) thick fault gouge,
(iii) weak clay and shales,
Rock mass number
85
Table 6.5 Effect of tunnel size on support pressure (Goel et al., 1996).
S.No.
Type of rock mass
Increase in support pressure due to
increase in tunnel span or diam.
from 3 m to 12 m
A.
Tunnels with arched roof
1. Non-squeezing ground conditions
Up to 20 percent only
2. Poor rock masses/squeezing ground conditions
(N = 0.5 to 10)
20–60 percent
3. Soft-plastic clays, running ground, ﬂowing
ground, clay-ﬁlled moist fault gouges,
slickensided shear zones (N = 0.1 to 0.5)
100 to 400 percent
B.
Tunnels with ﬂat roof (irrespective of ground
conditions)
400 percent
(iv) soft-plastic clays,
(v) crushed brecciated and sheared rock masses,
(vi) clay-ﬁlled joints and
(vii) extremely delayed support in poor rock masses.
Further, both Q and N are not applicable to ﬂowing grounds or piping through
seams. They also do not take into account mineralogy (water-sensitive minerals, soluble
minerals, etc.).
6.6 CORRELATIONS FOR ESTIMATING TUNNEL CLOSURE
Behavior of concrete, gravel and tunnel-muck backﬁlls, commonly used with steel-arch
supports, has been studied. Stiffness of these backﬁlls has been estimated using mea-
sured support pressures and tunnel closures. These results have been used ﬁnally to
obtain effective support stiffness of the combined support system of steel rib and backﬁll
(Goel, 1994).
On the basis of measured tunnel closures from 60 tunnel sections, correlations have
been developed for predicting tunnel closures in non-squeezing and squeezing ground
conditions (Goel, 1994). The correlations are given below:
Non-squeezing ground condition
ua
a =
H 0.6
28 · N 0.4 · K0.35 %
(6.11)
86 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Squeezing ground condition
ua
a =
H 0.8
10 · N 0.3 · K0.6 %
(6.12)
where
ua/a
= normalized tunnel closure in percent,
K
= effective support stiffness (= pv · a/ua) in MPa and
H and a = tunnel depth and tunnel radius (half of tunnel width) in meters, respectively.
These correlations can also be used to obtain desirable effective support stiffness
so that the normalized tunnel closure is contained within 4 percent (in the squeezing
ground).
6.7 EFFECT OF TUNNEL DEPTH ON SUPPORT PRESSURE AND
CLOSURE IN TUNNELS
It is known that the in situ stresses are inﬂuenced by the depth below the ground sur-
face. It is also learned from the theory that the support pressure and the closure for
tunnels are inﬂuenced by the in situ stresses. Therefore, it is recognized that the depth
of tunnel or the overburden is an important parameter while planning and designing the
tunnels. The effects of tunnel depth or the overburden on support pressure and closure
in tunnel have been studied using equations (6.9) to (6.12) under both squeezing and
non-squeezing ground conditions which is summarized below.
(i) The tunnel depth has a signiﬁcant effect on support pressure and tunnel closure
in squeezing ground conditions. It has smaller effect under non-squeezing ground
conditions, however (equation (6.9)).
(ii) The effect of tunnel depth is higher on the support pressure than the tunnel closure.
(iii) The depth effect on support pressure increases with deterioration in rock mass quality
probably because the conﬁnement decreases and the degree of freedom for the
movement of rock blocks increases.
(iv) This study would be of help to planners and designers to take decisions on realigning
a tunnel through a better tunnelling media or a lesser depth or both in order to reduce
the anticipated support pressure and closure in tunnels.
6.8 APPROACH FOR OBTAINING GROUND REACTION
CURVE (GRC)
According to Daemen (1975), ground reaction curve is quite useful for designing the
supports specially for tunnels through squeezing ground conditions. An easy to use
Rock mass number
87
empirical approach for obtaining the ground reaction curve has been developed using
equations (6.10) and (6.12) for tunnels in squeezing ground conditions. The approach has
been explained with the help of an example.
For example, the tunnel depth H and the rock mass number N have been assumed as
500 m and 1, respectively and the tunnel radius a as 5 m. The radial displacement of the
tunnel is ua for a given support pressure pv(sq).
GRC using equation (6.10)
In equation (6.10), as described earlier, f (N) is the correction factor for tunnel closure.
For different values of permitted normalized tunnel closure (ua/a), different values of
f (N) are proposed in Table 6.3. The ﬁrst step is to choose any value of tunnel wall
displacement ua in column 1 of Table 6.6. Then the correction factor f (N) is found from
Table 6.3 as shown in column 2 of Table 6.6. Finally, equation (6.10) yields the support
Table 6.6 Calculations for constructing GRC using equation (6.10).
Assumed ua/a (%)
Correction factor ( f )
pv(sq) from equation
(6.10) (MPa)
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.5
2.7
0.86
1
2.2
0.7
2
1.5
0.475
3
1.2
0.38
4
1.0
0.317
5
0.8
0.25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Boundary Conditions
Tunnel depth = 500m
Tunnel radius = 5m
Rock mass number = 1
Ground Reaction Curve
from Eq. 6.10
Normalised Tunnel Closure (ua/a), %
Support Pressure (pv), MPa
Fig. 6.3
Ground reaction curve obtained from equation (6.10).
88 Tunnelling in weak rocks
pressure in roof (pv) as mentioned in column 3 [Using Table 6.3 and equation (6.10), the
support pressures [pv(sq)] have been estimated for the assumed boundary conditions and
for various values of ua/a (column 1) as shown in Table 6.6]. Subsequently, using value
of pv (column 3) and ua/a (column 1) from Table 6.6, GRC has been plotted for ua/a up to
5 percent (Fig. 6.3).
It may be highlighted here that the approach is simple, reliable and user-friendly
because the values of the input parameters can be easily obtained in the ﬁeld.
REFERENCES
Abad, J., Caleda, B., Chacon, E., Gutierrez, V. and Hidalgo, E. (1984). Application of geome-
chanical classiﬁcation to predict the convergence of coal mine galleries and to design
their supports. 5th Int. Congress on Rock Mech., Melbourne, (E), 15-19.
Barton, N. (2002). Some new Q-value correlations to assist in site characterisation and tunnel design.
Int. J. Rock Mech. and Mining Sciences, 39, 185-216.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the designs
of tunnel supports. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Bhasin, R. and Grimstad, E. (1996). The use of stress-strength relationships in the assessment
of tunnel stability. Proc. Conf. on Recent Advances in Technology, New Delhi, India, 1,
183-196.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1976). Rock mass classiﬁcations in rock engineering. Proc. of the Sym. on
Exploration for Rock Engineering, Johannesburg, A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, 97-106
[in Bieniawski, 1984].
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1984). Rock Mechanics Design in Mining and Tunnelling, A. A. Balkema,
Rotterdam, 133.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1989). Engineering Rock Mass Classiﬁcations, John Wiley, Rotterdam, 251.
Cameron-Clarke, I. S. and Budavari, S. (1981). Correlation of rock mass classiﬁcation parameters
obtained from borecore and insitu observations. Engineering Geology, Elsevier Science,
17, 19-53.
Daemen, J. J. K. (1975). Tunnel support loading caused by rock failure. PhD thesis, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, U.S.A.
Deere, D. U., Peck, R. B., Monsees, J. E. and Schmidt, B. (1969). Design of Tunnel Liners and
Support System. U.S. Department of Transportation, Highway Research Record No. 339,
Washington DC.
Goel, R. K. (1994). Correlations for predicting support pressures and closures in tunnels.
PhD thesis, Nagpur University, India, 308.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1995a). Indian experiences with Q and RMR
systems. Tunnelling and Underground Space technology, Pergamon, 10(1), 97-109.
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1995b). Correlation between Barton’s Q and
Bieniawski’s RMR - A new approach, technical note. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. &
Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 33(2), 179-181.
Rock mass number
89
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Dhar, B. B. (1996). Effect of tunnel size on support pressure, tech.
note. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 33(7), 749-755.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressure under squeezing rock conditions for tunnels in
Himalayas. PhD thesis, University of Roorkee, India.
Kaiser, P. K., Mackay, C. and Gale, A. D. (1986). Evaluation of rock classiﬁcations at B. C. Rail
tumbler ridge tunnels. Rock Mechanics & Rock Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 19, 205-234.
Kumar, N. (2002). Rock mass characterization and evaluation of supports for tunnels in Himalaya.
PhD thesis, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India, 295.
Lama, R. D. and Vutukuri, V. S. (1978). Handbook on Mechanical Properties of Rocks. Trans Tech
Publications, Clausthal, 2, 481.
Moreno Tallon, E. (1980). Application de Las Classiﬁcaciones Geomechnicas a Los Tuneles de
Parjares, II Cursode Sostenimientos Activosen Galeriasy Tunnels. Madrid: Foundation
Gomez - Parto [referred in Kaiser et al. (1986)].
Rutledge, J. C. and Preston, R. L. (1978). Experience with engineering classiﬁcations of rock.
Proc. Int. Tunnelling Sym., Tokyo, A3.1-A3.7.
Sari, D. and Pasamehmetoglu, A. G. (2004). Proposed support design, Kaletepe tunnel, Turkey.
Engineering Geology, 72, 201-216.
Singh, Bhawani, Jethwa, J. L., Dube, A. K. and Singh, B. (1992). Correlation between observed
support pressure and rock mass quality. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology,
Pergamon, 7, 59-75.
Singh, Bhawani, Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Dube, A. K. (1997). Support pressure assess-
ment in arched underground openings through poor rock masses. Engineering Geology,
Elsevier Science, 48, 59-81.
Terzaghi, K. (1946). Rock defects and load on tunnel supports. Introduction to Rock Tunnelling with
Steel Supports. Eds: R. V. Proctor and T. C. White, Commercial Shearing and Stamping,
Youngstown, Ohio, USA.
Unal, E. (1983). Design guidelines and roof control standards for coal mine roofs. PhD thesis,
Pennsylvania State University [reference Bieniawski (1989)].
Wickham,
G. E.,
Tiedmann,
H. R. and Skinner,
E. H. (1972).
Support determination
based on geologic predictions. Proc. Rapid Excavation Tunnelling Conference, AIME,
New York, 43-64.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
7
Strength of discontinuities
“Failure is success if we learn from it.”
Malcom S. Forbes
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Rock mass is a heterogeneous, anisotropic and discontinuous mass. When civil engineer-
ing structures like dams are founded on rock, they transmit normal and shear stresses
on discontinuities in rock mass. Failure may be initiated by sliding along a joint plane,
near or along the foundation or along the abutments of dam. For a realistic assessment
of the stability of structure with wedge, estimation of the shear resistance of a rock mass
along any desired plane of potential shear or along the weakest discontinuity becomes
essential. The shear strength of discontinuities depends upon the alteration of joints or
the discontinuities, the roughness, the thickness of inﬁllings or the gouge material, the
moisture content, etc.
The mechanical difference between contacting and non-contacting joint walls will
usually result in widely different shear strengths and deformation characteristics. In the
case of unﬁlled joints, the roughness and compressive strength of the joint walls are
important, whereas in the case of ﬁlled joints the physical and mineralogical properties of
the gouge material separating the joint walls are of primary concern.
To quantify the effect of these on the strength of discontinuities, various researchers
have proposed different parameters and correlations for obtaining strength parameters.
Barton et al. (1974), probably for the ﬁrst time, have considered joint roughness (Jr) and
joint alteration (Ja) in their Q-system to take care of the strength of clay-coated discon-
tinuities in the rock mass classiﬁcation. Later, Barton and Choubey (1977) deﬁned two
parameters – joint roughness coefﬁcient (JRC) and joint wall compressive strength(JCS)
– and proposed an empirical correlation for friction of rock joints without ﬁllings, which
can be used for predicting the shear strength data accurately.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
92 Tunnelling in weak rocks
7.2 JOINT WALL ROUGHNESS COEFFICIENT (JRC)
The wall roughness of a joint or discontinuity is potentially a very important component
of its shear strength, especially in the case of undisplaced and interlocked features (e.g.,
unﬁlled joints). The importance of wall roughness declines as the thickness of aperture
ﬁlling or the degree of any previous shear displacement increases.
Joint roughness coefﬁcent, JRC0 (JRC at laboratory scale) may be obtained by visual
matching of actual roughness proﬁles with the set of standard proﬁles proposed by Barton
and Choubey (1977). As such, the joint roughness coefﬁcients are suggested for ten types
of roughness proﬁles of joints (Fig. 7.1). The core sample will be intersected by joints
at angles varying from 0 to 90◦to the axis. Joint samples will therefore vary in some
cases from a meter or more in length (depending upon the core length) to 100 mm (core
diameter). Most samples are expected to be in the range of 100–300 mm in length.
The recommended approximate sampling frequency for the above proﬁle-matching
procedure is 100 samples per joint set per 1000 m of core. The two most adverse prominent
sets should be selected, which must include the adverse joint set selected for Jr and Ja
characterization.
Typical Roughness Profile for JRC Range
0 - 2
2 - 4
4 - 6
6 - 8
8 - 10
10 - 12
12 - 14
14 - 16
16 - 18
18 - 20
Scale
0
50
100mm
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Fig. 7.1
Standard proﬁles for visual estimation of JRC (Barton & Choubey, 1977).
Strength of discontinuities 93
Roughness amplitude per length, i.e., a and L measurements will be made in the ﬁeld
for estimating JRCn (JRC, at a natural large scale). The maximum amplitude of roughness
(in millimeter) should be usually estimated or measured on proﬁles of at least two lengths
along the joint plane, for example, 100 mm and 1 m length.
It has been observed that the JRCn can also be obtained from JRC0 using the following
equation,
JRCn = JRC0(Ln/L0)−0.02 JRC0
(7.1)
where, L0 is the laboratory scale length, i.e., 100 mm and Ln represents the natural larger
scale length. A chart from Barton (1982) presented in Fig. 7.2 is easier for evaluating JRCn
according to the amplitude of asperities and the length of joint proﬁle which is studied in
the ﬁeld.
Joint Roughness Coefficient (JRC)
Amplitude
(a)
Length
(L)
a2
a1
Length of Profile, m
Amplitude of Asperities, mm
20
16
12
10
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5
1.0
2
3
5
10
20
30
50
100
200
300
0.1
0.2 0.3
0.5
1.0
2
3
5
10
Fig. 7.2
Assessment of JRC from amplitude of asperities and length of joint proﬁle (Barton, 1982).
94 Tunnelling in weak rocks
7.2.1 Relationship between Jr and JRC roughness descriptions
The description of roughness given in the Q-system by the parameter Jr, and JRC are
related. Fig. 7.3 has been prepared by Barton (1993) for the beneﬁt of users of these
rock mass descriptions. The ISRM (1978) suggested methods for visual description of
joint roughness proﬁles which have been combined with proﬁles given by Barton et al.
(1980) and with equation (7.1), to produce some examples of the quantitative description
of joint roughness that these parameters provide. Increasing experience leads to better
visual assessment of JRC on the basis of Fig. 7.3.
The roughness proﬁles shown in Fig. 7.3 are assumed to be at least 1 m in length. The
column of Jr values could be used in Q-system, while the JRC values for 20 and 100 cm
block size could be used to generate appropriate shear stress displacement and dilation –
displacement curves.
Planar
Undulating
Rough
Smooth
Slickensided
Rough
Smooth
Slickensided
Stepped
Slickensided
Smooth
Rough
Relation between Jr and JRCn
(Subscripts refer to block size in cm)
Jr
JRC20
JRC100
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
4
3
2
20
14
11
11
9
8
3
2
1.5
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.5
1.5
2.5
7
11
14
9
8
6
2.3
0.9
0.6
Fig. 7.3
Suggested methods for the quantitative description of different classes of joints using
Jr and JRCn. Subscript n refers to block size in centimeter.
Strength of discontinuities 95
7.3 JOINT WALL COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (JCS)
The joint wall compressive strength (JCS) of a joint or discontinuity is an impor-
tant component of its shear strength, especially in case of undisplaced and interlocked
discontinuities, e.g., unﬁlled joints (Barton & Choubey, 1977). As in the case of JRC, the
wall strength JCS decreases as aperture or ﬁlling thickness or the degree of any previous
shear displacement increases. JCS, therefore, need not be evaluated for thickly (>10 mm)
ﬁlled joints.
In the ﬁeld, JCS is measured by performing Schmidt hammer (L-type) tests on the two
most prominent joint surfaces where it is smooth and averaging the highest 10 rebound
values. JCS0, the small scale value of wall strength relative to a nominal joint length (L0)
of 100 mm, can be obtained from the Schmidt hammer rebound value (r) as follows or by
using Fig. 7.4.
80
100
200
60
10
0
15
20
30
40
50
60
80
100
150
200
250
300
350
10
20
30
40
50
60
Hammer vertical
downwards
Schmidt Hardness (r)  L-Hammer
Compressive Strength (σc) of Rock Surface, MPa
20
21
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
32 31
25
Unit Weight, kN/m3
Average Dispersion of
Strength for Most Rocks (MPa)
40
20
Fig. 7.4
Correlation chart for compressive strength with rock density and Schmidt hammer
rebound number on smooth surfaces (Miller, 1965).
96 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 7.1 Corrections for the orientation of Schmidt hammer (Barton & Choubey, 1977).
Rebound
Downward
Upward
Horizontal
r
α = −90◦
α = −45◦
α = +90◦
α = +45◦
α = 0◦
10
0
−0.8
–
–
−3.2
20
0
−0.9
−8.8
−6.9
−3.4
30
0
−0.8
−7.8
−6.2
−3.1
40
0
−0.7
−6.6
−5.3
−2.7
50
0
−0.6
−5.3
−4.3
−2.2
60
0
−0.4
−4.0
−3.3
−1.7
JCS0 = 10(0.00088 r γ + 1.01) MPa
(7.2)
where
r = rebound number on smooth weathered joint and
γ = dry unit weight of rocks (kN/m3).
In case Schmidt hammer is not used vertically downward, the rebound values need
correction as given in Table 7.1.
The joint wall compressive strength may be equal to the uniaxial compressive strength
(UCS) of the rock material for unweathered joints; otherwise it should be estimated indi-
rectly from the Schmidt hammer index test. It is experienced that Schmidt hammer is
found to give entirely wrong results on rough joints. Therefore, it is advisable not to use
Schmidt hammer rebound for JCS in case of rough joints. Lump tests on saturated small
lumps of asperities will give better UCS or JCS0. Quartz-coated joints in weak rocks may
give high Schmidt hammer rebound number which is a surface property (Bhasin, 2004).
Calcite and gypsum inﬁllings may dissolve very slowly in hydroprojects. Coatings of
chlorite, talc and graphite reduce strength on wetting. Clay minerals may be washed out
by seepage.
For larger blocks or joint lengths (Ln), the value of JCS reduces to JCSn, where the
two are related by the following empirical equation:
JCSn = JCS0(Ln/L0)−0.03 JRC0 MPa
(7.3)
where JCSn is the joint wall compressive strength at a larger scale.
7.4 JOINT MATCHING COEFFICIENT (JMC)
Zhao (1997) suggested a new parameter, joint matching coefﬁcient (JMC), in addition to
JRC and JCS for obtaining shear strength of joints. JMC may be obtained by observing
the approximate percentage area in contact between the upper and the lower walls of a
Strength of discontinuities 97
joint. Thus, JMC has a value between 0 and 1.0. A JMC value of 1.0 represents a perfectly
matched joint, i.e., with 100 percent surface contact. On the other hand, a JMC value close
to 0 (zero) indicates a totally mismatched joint with no or minimum surface contact.
7.5 RESIDUAL ANGLE OF FRICTION
The effective basic or residual friction angle φr of a joint is an important component
of its total shear strength, whether the joint is rock-to-rock interlocked or clay ﬁlled.
The importance of φr increases as the clay coating or ﬁlling thickness increases, of course
upto a certain critical limit.
An experienced ﬁeld observer may make a preliminary estimate of φr. The quartz-
rich rocks and many igneous rocks have φr between 28 and 32◦, whereas, mica-rich rock
masses and rocks having considerable effect of weathering have somewhat lower values
of φr than mentioned above.
In the Barton–Bandis joint model, it is proposed to add an angle of primary roughness
for obtaining the ﬁeld value of effective peak friction angle for a natural joint (φj) without
ﬁllings,
φj = φr + i + JRC log10 (JCS/σ) < 70◦; for σ/JCS < 0.3
(7.4)
where JRC accounts for secondary roughness in laboratory tests, ‘i’ represents angle of
primary roughness (undulations) of natural joint surface and is generally ≤6◦and σ is the
effective normal stress across joint.
It can be noted here that the value of φr is important, as roughness (JRC) and wall
strength (JCS) reduces through weathering. Residual frictional angle φr can also be
estimated by the equation:
φr = (φb −20◦) + 20 (r/R)
(7.5)
where φb is the basic frictional angle obtained by sliding or tilt tests on dry, planar (but
not polished) or cored surface of the rock (Barton & Choubey, 1977). R is the Schmidt
rebound on fresh, dry–unweathered–smooth surfaces of the rock and r is the rebound
number on the smooth natural, perhaps weathered and water-saturated joints (Jw = 1.0).
According to Jaeger and Cook (1969) enhancement in the dynamic angle of sliding
friction φr of smooth rock joints can be about 2◦only.
7.6 SHEAR STRENGTH OF JOINTS
Barton and Choubey (1977) have proposed the following non-linear correlation for shear
strength of natural joints which is found surprisingly accurate.
τ = σ · tan [φr + JRCn log10 (JCSn/σ)]
(7.6)
98 Tunnelling in weak rocks
where τ is the shear strength of joints, JRCn can be obtained easily from Fig. 7.3, JCSn
from equation (7.3) and rest of the parameters are deﬁned above. Further, under very high
normal stress levels (σ >> qc or JCSn) the JCSn value increases to the triaxial compressive
strength (σ1 −σ3) of the rock material in equation (7.6) (Barton, 1976). It can be noted
that at high normal pressure (σ = JCSn), no dilation will take place as all the asperities
will be sheared.
The effect of mismatching of joint surface on its shear strength has been proposed by
Zhao (1997) in his JRC–JCS shear strength model as,
τ = cj + σ · tan [φr + JMC · JRCn log10 (JCSn/σ)]
(7.7)
and dilatation (∆) across joint is as follows,
∆∼= 1
2 · JMC · JRCn · log10
JCSn
σ

∴∆∼=
φj −φr
2

(7.8)
The minimum value of JMC in the above equation should be taken as 0.3. The cohesion
along discontinuity is cj. Field experience shows that natural joints are not continuous as
assumed in theory and laboratory tests. There are rock bridges in between them. The
shear strength of these rock bridges add to the cohesion of overall rock joint (0−0.1 MPa).
The real discontinuous joint should be simulated in the theory or computer program.
In the case of highly jointed rock masses, failure takes place along the shear band (kink
band) and not along the critical discontinuity, due to rotation of rock blocks. The apparent
angle of friction may be signiﬁcantly lower in case of slender blocks. Laboratory tests
on models with three continuous joint sets show some cohesion cj (Singh, 1997). More
attention should be given to strength of discontinuity in the jointed rock masses.
For joints ﬁlled with gouge or clay-coated joints, the following correlation of shear
strength is used for low effective normal stresses (Barton & Bandis, 1990);
τ = σ · (Jr/Ja)
(7.9)
Sinha and Singh (2000) have proposed an empirical criterion for shear strength of ﬁlled
joints. The angle of internal friction is correlated to the plasticity index (PI) of normally
consolidated clays (Lamb & Whitman, 1979). The same may be adopted for thick and
normally consolidated clayey gouge in the rock joints as follows:
sin φj = 0.81 −0.23 log10 PI
(7.10)
Choubey (1998) suggested that the peak strength parameters should be used in the
case of designing rock bolt system and retaining walls, where control measures do not
permit large deformations along joints. For long-term stability of unsupported rock and
soil slopes, residual strength parameters of rock joint and soil should be chosen in the
analyses, respectively; as large displacement may reduce the shear strength of rock joint
to its residual strength eventually.
Strength of discontinuities 99
It should be realized that there is a wide statistical variation in the shear strength
parameters as found from direct shear tests. Generally, average parameters are evaluated
from median values rejecting too high and too low values for the purpose of designs.
Barton et al. (1985) have related the hydraulic aperture (e) to the measured (geometric)
aperture (t) of rock joints as follows when shear displacement is less than 0.75 × peak slip,
e = JRC2.5
(t/e)2
(7.11)
where t and e are measured in µm (micrometer). The permeability of rock mass may then
be estimated approximately, assuming laminar ﬂow of water through two parallel plates
with spacing (e) for each joint.
7.7 DYNAMIC SHEAR STRENGTH OF ROUGH ROCK JOINTS
Jain (2000) performed large number of dynamic shear tests on dry rock joints at Nanyang
Technological University (NTU), Singapore. He observed that signiﬁcant dynamic normal
stress (σdyn) is developed across the rough rock joints. Hence there is a high rise in the
dynamic shear strength. Thus, the effective normal stress (σ′) in equation (7.8) can be
as follows:
σ′
dyn = σstatic −ustatic + σdyn −udyn
(7.12)
≥σ′
static
It is also imagined that negative dynamic pore water pressure (udyn) will develop in
the water-charged joints due to dilatancy. This phenomenon is likely to be similar to
undrained shearing of dilatant and dense sand/over-consolidated clay. Further research is
needed to develop correlations for σdyn and udyn from dynamic shear tests on rock joints.
There is likely to be a signiﬁcant increase in the dynamic shear strength of rock joints due
to shearing of more asperities.
7.8 THEORY OF SHEAR STRENGTH AT VERY HIGH
CONFINING STRESS
Barton (1976) suggested a theory of the critical state of rock materials at very high con-
ﬁning stresses. It appears that the Mohr’s envelopes representing the peak shear strength
of rock materials (intact) eventually reach a point of saturation (zero gradient on crossing
a certain critical state line).
Fig. 7.5 integrates all the three ideas on shear strength of discontinuities. The effec-
tive sliding angle of friction is about φr + i at a low effective normal stresses, where
i = angle of asperities of rough joint. The shear strength (τ) cannot exceed shear strength
100 Tunnelling in weak rocks
φr + I
φr
T
Effective Normal Stress
Shear Strength
C
B
A
O
I
Critical state
Fig. 7.5
Shear strength of discontinuities at very high conﬁning pressure (OA – sliding above
asperities, AB – shearing of rock asperities and BC – critical state of rock material at very high
conﬁning stress).
of the asperities (= c + σ tan φr), where φr = effective angle of internal friction of
the ruptured asperities of rock material. In fact the non-linear equation, equation (7.7)
(with JCS = triaxial strength of rock) is closer to the experimental data than the bilinear
theoretical relationship.
Further there is a critical limit of shear strength of rock joint which cannot be higher
than the shear strength of weaker rock material at very high conﬁning stress. Fig. 7.5
illustrates this idea by τ = constant saturation (critical state) line. It follows that the
(sliding) angle of friction is nearly zero at very high conﬁning stresses which exist at
great depth in the earth plates along interplate boundaries. It is interesting to note that
the sliding angle of friction at great depth (>40 km) is back-analyzed to be as low as
5◦in the Tibet Himalayan plate (Shankar et al., 2002). This analysis makes a sense.
Re-crystallization of soft minerals is likely to occur creating smooth surface. The sliding
angle of friction between earth plate and underlying molten rock is assumed to be zero, as
the coefﬁcient of friction between a ﬂuid and any solid surface is governed by the mini-
mum shear strength of the material. Thus, it is the need of the time to perform shear tests at
both very high conﬁning stresses and high temperatures to ﬁnd a generalized correlation
between τ and σ along mega-discontinuities. Chapter 29 summarizes further experiences
on critical state.
It is interesting to note that lesser the frictional resistance along the intercontinen-
tal and colliding plate boundaries, lesser will be the locked-up elastic strain energy in
Strength of discontinuities 101
the large earth plates and so lesser are the chances of great earthquakes in that area.
In fact a highest earthquake of only about 7.0 M on Richter scale has occurred in Tibetan
plateau.
7.9 NORMAL AND SHEAR STIFFNESS OF ROCK JOINTS
The values of static normal and shear stiffness are used in ﬁnite element method and
distinct element method of analysis of rock structures. Singh and Goel (2002) list their
suggested values on the basis of experiences of back analysis of uniaxial jacking tests in
USA and India.
Barton and Bandis (1990) have also found correlation for shear stiffness. The shear
stiffness of joint is deﬁned as the ratio between shear strength τ in equation (7.7) above
and the peak slip. The latter may be taken equal to (S/500) (JRC/S)0.33, where S is equal to
the length of a joint or simply the spacing of joints. Laboratory tests also indicate that the
peak slip is nearly constant for a given joint, irrespective of the normal stress. The normal
stiffness of a joint may be 10 to 30 times its shear stiffness. This is the reason why the
shear modulus of jointed rock masses is considered to be very low as compared to that
for an isotropic elastic medium (Singh, 1973). Of course the dynamic stiffness is likely
to be signiﬁcantly more than their static values. The P-wave velocity and so the dynamic
normal stiffness may increase after saturation and net decrease.
REFERENCES
Barton, N. (1976). The shear strength of rock and rock joints. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. &
Geomech. Abstracts, 13, 255-279.
Barton, N. (1982). Shear strength investigations for surface mining. Chapter 7, 3rd Int. Conf. on
Surface Mining, Vancouver, SME 1982, 171-196.
Barton, N. (1993). Predicting the behaviour of underground openings in rock. Proc. Workshop
on Norwegian Method of Tunnelling, CSMRS-NGI Institutional Co-operation Programme,
September, New Delhi, India, 85-105.
Barton, N. and Bandis, S. (1990). Review of predictive capabilities of JRC-JCS model in engineering
practice. Rock Joints - Proc. of a regional conf. of the International Society for Rock Mech.,
Reprinted from: Eds: N. R. Barton and O. Stephansson, Leon, 820.
Barton, N., Bandis, S. and Bakhtar, K. (1985). Strength deformation and conductivity coupling of
rock joints. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstracts, 22, 121-140.
Barton, N. and Choubey, V. D. (1977). The shear strength of rock joints in theory and practice.
Rock Mech., Springer-Verlag, 1/2, 1-54. Also NGI-Publ. 119, 1978.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6(4), 189-236.
102 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Barton, N., Loset, F., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1980). Application of Q-system in design decisions
concerning dimensions and appropriate support for underground installations. Int. Conf. on
Sub-surface Space, Rock Store, Stockholm, Sub-Surface Space, 2, 553-561.
Bhasin, R. (2004). Personal communication, IIT Roorkee, India.
Choubey, V. D. (1998). Landslide hazard assessment and management in Himalayas. Int. Conf.
Hydro Power Development in Himalayas, Shimla, India, 220-238.
ISRM (1978), Suggested methods for the quantitative description of discontinuities in rock masses,
(Co-ordinator N. Barton). Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 15,
319-368.
Jaeger, J. C. and Cook, N. G. W. (1969). Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics. Mathew and Co. Ltd.,
Art. 3.4.
Jain, M. (2000). Personal communication.
Lamb, T. W. and Whitman, R. V. (1979). Soil Mechanics. Wiley Eastern Ltd., Art. 21.1, 553.
Miller, R. P. (1965). Engineering classiﬁcation and index properties for intact rock. PhD thesis,
University of Illinois, USA, 282.
Shankar, D., Kapur, N. and Singh, Bhawani. (2002). Thrust-wedge mechanics and development
of normal and reverse faults in the Himalayas. J. of the Geological Society, London, 159,
273-280.
Sinha, U. N. and Singh, Bhawani. (2000). Testing of rock joints ﬁlled with gouge using a triaxial
apparatus. Int. Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, 37, 963-981.
Singh, Bhawani. (1973). Continuum characterization of jointed rock mass: part II - signiﬁcance
of low shear modulus. Int. J. of Rock Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon,
10, 337-349.
Singh, B., and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and Tunnelling
Hazards. A. A. Balkema (Swets & Zeitlinger), The Netherlands, 344.
Singh, M. (1997). Engineering behaviour of joints model materials. PhD thesis, IIT Delhi,
India, 339.
Zhao, J. (1997). Joint surface matching and shear strength, part B: JRC-JMC shear strength criterion.
Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 34(2), 179-185.
8
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels
“The behaviour of macroscopic systems is generally described by non-linear laws. (The
non-linear laws may explain irreversible phenomena like instabilities, dualism, unevolving
socities, cycles of growth and decay of societies. The linear laws are only linear
approximation of the non-linear laws at a point in time and space.)”
Ilya Prigogine, Nobel Laureate
8.1 CAUSES OF STRENGTH ENHANCEMENT
Instrumentation and monitoring of underground openings in complex geological envi-
ronment is the key to success. Careful back-analysis of the data observed in the initial
stages of excavation provides valuable knowledge of the constants of the selected con-
stitutive model, which may then be used in the forward analysis to predict performance
of the support system. Experience of back-analysis of data from many project sites has
shown that there is a signiﬁcant enhancement of rock mass strength around tunnels. Rock
masses surrounding the tunnel perform much better than theoretical expectations, except
near thick and plastic shear zones, faults, thrusts, intra-thrust zones and in water-charged
rock masses.
Rock masses have shown constrained dilatancy in tunnels. Failure, therefore, does not
occur along rough joints due to interlocking. Further, tightly packed rock blocks are not
free to rotate unlike soil grains. The strength of a rock mass in tunnels thus tends to be
equal to the strength of a rock material (Pande, 1997).
It has been seen that empirical criteria of rock mass failure are trusted more than the
theoretical criteria. Sheorey (1997) evaluated them critically. However, designers like the
linear approximtion for practical applications.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
104 Tunnelling in weak rocks
8.2 EFFECT OF INTERMEDIATE PRINCIPAL STRESS ON
TANGENTIAL STRESS AT FAILURE IN TUNNELS
The intermediate principal stress (σ2) along the tunnel axis may be of the order of half the
tangential stress (σ1) in some deep tunnels (Fig. 8.1). According to Wang and Kemeny
(1995), σ2 has a strong effect on σ1 at failure even if σ3 is equal to zero. Their polyaxial
laboratory tests on hollow cylinders led to the following strength criterion:
σ1
qc
= 1 + A

eσ3/σ2

·
σ2
qc
1−f ·e(σ3/σ2)
(8.1)
∴σ1 ≈qc + (A + f ) · (σ3 + σ2)
for
σ3 ≪σ2
where
f
= material constant (0.10–0.20),
A = material constant (0.75–2.00) and
qc = average uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock material (σ2 = σ3 = 0)
for various orientations of planes of weakness.
σ2
σ3
σ1
σ3
σ2
σ1
σ1
σ2
σ3
σ2 = Po
σ3
σ3
σ1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Cross-section
σθ max
Longitudinal section
Fig. 8.1
(a) Anisotropic rock material with one joint set (slate, schist, etc.), (b) mode of failure in
rock mass with 2 joint sets, (c) phorizontal ≫pvertical and (d) direction of σ1, σ2 and σ3 in the tunnel.
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 105
In the case of unsupported tunnels, σ3 = 0 on its periphery. So, equation (8.1)
simpliﬁes to,
σ1
qc
= 1+A
σ2
qc
(1−f )
(8.2)
It may be inferred from equation (8.2) that σ2 will enhance σ1 at failure by 75–200
percent when σ2 ≈qc. In fact, strength enhancement may be much more as propagation of
fracture will be behind the excavated face (Bazant et al., 1993). Murrell (1963) suggested
100 percent increase in σ1 at failure when σ2 = 0.5, σ1 and σ3 = 0. Thus, the effective
conﬁning pressure appears to be an average of σ2 and σ3 and not just equal to σ3 in the
anisotropic rocks and weak rock masses.
Hoek (1994) suggested the following modiﬁed criterion for estimating the strength of
jointed rock masses at high conﬁning stresses (around σ3 > 0.10 qc),
σ1 = σ3 + qc

m
σ3
qc

+ s
n
(8.3)
where
σ1 and σ3 = maximum and minimum effective principal stresses, respectively,
m
= Hoek–Brown rock mass constant,
s and n
= rock mass constants,
s
= 1 for rock material,
n
= 0.5
= 0.65 −(GSI/200) ≤0.60 for GSI < 25,
qc
= UCS of the intact rock core of standard NX size,
GSI
= geological strength index ≈RMR −5 for RMR > 23,
(m/mr)
= s1/3 for GSI > 25 and
(8.4)
mr
= Hoek–Brown rock material constant.
Hoek and Brown (1980) criterion (equation (8.3)) is applicable to rock slopes and
open cast mines with weathered and saturated rock masses. They have suggested values
of m and s. Hoek and Brown criterion may be improved as a polyaxial criterion after
replacing σ3 (within bracket in equation (8.3) by effective conﬁning pressure (σ2 + σ3)/2
as mentioned above for weak and jointed rock masses. It can be noted that parameters mr
and qc should be calculated from the upper bound Mohr’s envelope of triaxial test data
on rock cores in the case of anisotropic rock materials (Hoek, 1998).
According to Hoek (2000), rock mass strength (qcmass) is as follows:
qcmass = (0.0034 m0.8
r )qc {1.029 + 0.025 exp(−0.1 mr)}GSI
(8.5)
Further, the limitations should be kept in mind that most of the strength criteria are
not valid at low conﬁning stresses and tensile stresses, as modes of failure are different.
106 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Hoek’s criteron is applicable for high conﬁning stresses only where a single mode of
failure by faulting takes place. Hence, the quest for a better model to represent jointed
rock masses.
8.3 UNIAXIAL COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF ROCK MASS
Equation (8.3) deﬁnes that UCS of a rock mass is given by
qcmass = qcsn
(8.6)
Past experience shows that equation (8.6) underestimates mobilized rock mass strength
in tunnels. For making use of equation (8.3) in tunnels, value of constant s be obtained
from equations (8.6) and (8.9) as follows.
s =

7γQ1/3
/qc
1/n
(8.7)
Ramamurthy (1993) and his co-workers (Roy, 1993; Singh & Rao, 2005) have con-
ducted extensive triaxial tests on dry models of jointed rock mass using plaster of Paris
(qc = 9.46 MPa). They varied in joint frequency, inclination of joints and thickness of
joint ﬁllings, etc. and simulated a wide variety of rock mass conditions. Their extensive
test data suggests the following approximate correlation for all the rock masses,
qcmass/qc = [Emass/Er]0.7
(8.8)
where,
qcmass = UCS of model of jointed rock mass in σ1 direction,
qc
= UCS of model material (plaster of Paris),
= UCS of in situ block of rock material after size correction,
Emass = average modulus of deformation of jointed rock mass model (σ3 = 0) in σ1
direction and
Er
= average modulus of deformation of model material (σ3 = 0).
The power in equation (8.8) varies from 0.5 to 1.0. Grifﬁth’s theory of failure suggests
that the power is 0.5, whereas Sakurai (1994) is of the opinion that the above power is
about 1.0 for jointed rock masses. Further research at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),
Delhi, suggests that power in equation (8.8) is in the range of 0.56 and 0.72 (Singh & Rao,
2005). As such it appears that the power of 0.7 in equation (8.8) is realistic. Equation (8.8)
may be used reliably to estimate strength of a rock mass (qcmass) from the values of Emass
or Ed obtained from uniaxial jacking tests both within openings and slopes.
Considerable strength enhancement of the rock mass in tunnels has been observed by
Singh et al. (1997). Therefore, on the basis of analysis of data collected from 60 tunnels,
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 107
they recommended that the mobilized crushing strength of the rock mass is
qcmass = 7γQ1/3 MPa
(for Q < 10, 100 > qc > 2 MPa,
(8.9)
Jw = 1 and Jr/Ja < 0.5)
qcmass = [(5.5γN 1/3)/B0.1] MPa
(as per equation (13.1))
(8.10)
where
γ = unit weight of rock mass (gm/cc),
N = rock mass number, i.e., stress-free Barton’s Q soon after the underground
excavation,
Q = rock mass quality soon after the underground excavation and
B = tunnel span or diameter in meters.
Kalamaras and Bieniawski (1995) suggested the following relationship between
qcmass and RMR,
qcmass = qc · exp
RMR −100
24

(8.11)
Barton (2002) has modiﬁed equation (8.9) on conservative side as follows for
calculating QTBM for tunnel boring machines (according to equation (16.1)),
σcm = 5γ(Q · qc/100)1/3 MPa
(8.12)
where
qc = Is/25 for anisotropic rocks (schists, slate, etc.) and
Is = standard point load strength index of rock cores (corrected for size effect for
NX size cores).
Barton (2005) has clariﬁed that equation (8.12) should be used only for QTBM.
On the basis of block shear tests, Singh et al. (1997) have proposed the following
correlation for estimating the UCS of the saturated rock mass for use in rock slopes in
hilly areas.
qcmass = 0.38γ · Q1/3 MPa
(8.13)
Equation (8.13) suggests that the UCS would be low on slopes. This is probably
because joint orientation becomes a very important factor in the case of slopes due to
unconstrained dilatancy and low intermediate principal stress unlike tunnels. Further,
failure takes place along joints near slopes. In slopes of deep open cast mines, joints may
be tight and of smaller length. The UCS of such a rock mass may be much higher and may
be found from Hoek’s criterion (equation (8.5)) for analysis of the deep seated rotational
slides.
The equations (8.8) and (8.9) are intended only for a 2D stress analysis of underground
openings. The strength criterion for 3D analysis is presented below.
108 Tunnelling in weak rocks
8.4 REASON FOR STRENGTH ENHANCEMENT IN TUNNELS
AND A NEW FAILURE THEORY
Consider a cube of rock mass with two or more joint sets as shown in Fig. 8.1. If high
intermediate principal stress is applied on the two opposite faces of the cube, then the
chances of wedge failure are more than the chances of planar failure as found in the triaxial
tests. The shear stress along the line of intersection of joint planes will be proportional
to σ1 −σ3 because σ3 will try to reduce shear stress. The normal stress on both the joint
planes will be proportional to (σ2 + σ3)/2. Hence the criterion for peak failure at low
conﬁning stresses can be as follows (σ3 < 2qc/3 and σ2 < 2qc/3):
σ1 −σ3 = qcmass + A[(σ2 + σ3)/2],
(8.14)
qcmass = qc
Ed
Er
0.70
·
 d
Srock
0.20
,
(8.15)
∆= φp −φr
2
(8.16)
where
qcmass
= average UCS of rock mass for various orientation of principal stresses,
σ1, σ2, σ3 = ﬁnal compressive and effective principal stresses which are equal to
in situ stress plus induced stress minus seepage pressure,
A
= average constants for various orientation of principal stress (value of A
varies from 0.6 to 6.0),
= 2 · sin φp/(1 −sin φp),
φp
= peak angle if internal friction of rock mass,
∼= tan−1 [(Jr/Ja) + 0.1] at a low conﬁning stress,
< peak angle of internal friction of rock material,
= 14–57◦
Srock
= average spacing of joints,
qc
= average UCS of rock material for core of diameter d (for schistose
rock also),
∆
= peak angle of dilatation of rock mass at failure,
φr
= residual angle of internal friction of rock mass = φp −10◦≥14◦,
Ed
= modulus of deformation of rock mass (σ3 = 0) and
Er
= modulus of elasticity of the rock material (σ3 = 0).
The peak angle of dilatation is approximately equal to (φp −φr)/2 for rock joints
(Barton & Brandis, 1990) at low σ3. This correlation (equation (7.8)) may be assumed for
jointed rock masses also. The proposed strength criterion reduces to Mohr criterion for
triaxial conditions.
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 109
The signiﬁcant rock strength enhancement in underground openings is due to σ2 or
in situ stress along tunnels and caverns which pre-stresses rock wedges and prevents
their failure both in the roof and the walls. However, σ3 is released due to stress-free
excavation boundaries (Fig. 8.1d). In the rock slopes σ2 and σ3 are nearly equal and
negligible. Therefore, there is an insigniﬁcant or no enhancement of the strength. As
such, block shear tests on a rock mass gives realistic results for rock slopes and dam
abutments only; because σ2 = 0 in this test. Thus, equation (8.14) may give a general
criterion of jointed rock masses for underground openings, rock slopes and foundations.
Another cause of strength enhancement is higher UCS of rock mass (qcmass) due
to higher Ed because of constrained dilatancy and restrained fracture propagation near
excavation face only in the underground structures. In rock slopes, Ed is found to be less
due to complete stress release and low conﬁning pressure on account of σ2 and σ3, and
long length of weathered ﬁlled-up joints. So, qcmass will also be low near rock slopes for
the same Q-value (equation (8.13)).
Through careful back-analysis, both the model and its constants should be deduced.
Thus, A, Ed and qcmass should be estimated from the feedback of instrumentation data
at the beginning of construction stage. With these values, forward analysis should be
attempted carefully as mentioned earlier. At present, a non-linear back-analysis may be
difﬁcult and it does not give unique (or most probable) parameters.
The proposed strength criterion is different from Mohr’s strength theory which works
well for soils and isotropic materials. There is a basic difference in the structure of soil
and rock masses. Soils generally have no pre-existing planes of weaknesses and so planar
failure can occur on a typical plane with dip direction towards σ3. However, rocks have
pre-existing planes of weaknesses like joints and bedding planes, etc. As such, failure
occurs mostly along these planes of weaknesses. In the triaxial tests on rock masses,
planar failure takes place along the weakest joint plane. In polyaxial stress ﬁeld, a wedge
type of failure may be the dominant mode of failure, if σ2 ≫σ3. Therefore, Mohr’s theory
needs to be modiﬁed for anisotropic and jointed rock masses.
The new strength criterion is proved by extensive polyaxial tests on anisotropic tuff
(Wang & Kemeny, 1995). It is interesting to note that the constant A is the same for
biaxial, triaxial and polyaxial tests (Singh et al., 1998). Further, the effective in situ stresses
(upper bound) on ground level in mountainous areas appear to follow equation (8.14)
(qcmass = 3 MPa, A = 2.5) which indicates a state of failure of earth crust near the water-
charged ground due to the tectonic stresses.
The output of computer program SQUEEZE shows that the predicted support pressures
are of the order of those observed in 10 tunnels in the squeezing ground condition in the
Himalaya, India. There is a rather good cross-check between the theory of squeezing and
the observations (reported by Singh et al., 1992) except in a few cases. Thus, the equations
(8.14)–(8.15) assumed in the theory of squeezing are again justiﬁed partially (Singh &
Goel, 2002).
In the NJPC project, tunnel excavated under high rock cover of 1400 m through
massive to competent gneiss and schist gneiss, the theory predicted rock burst condition
110 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(Jr/Ja = 3/4, i.e., > 0.5). According to site geologists, Pundhir, Acharya and Chadha
(2000), initially cracking noise was heard which was followed by the spalling of 5–25 cm
thick rock columns/slabs and rock falls. This is a mild rock burst condition. Another cause
of rock burst is the Class II behavior of gneiss according to the tests at IIT, Delhi, India.
Although according to Mohr’s theory, most severe rock burst or squeezing conditions
were predicted under rock cover more than 300 m (qc = 27 MPa and qcmass = 15.7 MPa).
Actually mild rock burst conditions were met where overburden is more than 1000 m.
However, polyaxial theory equation (8.14) suggested mild rock burst condition above
overburden of 800 m. Thus, polyaxial theory of strength is validated further by SQUEEZE
program (Singh & Goel, 2002). Recently, Rao, Tiwari and Singh (2003) developed the
polyaxial testing system. Their results were re-plotted and parameter A was found to
increase slightly from 3.8 to 4.2 for dips of joints from 0 to 60◦, though qcmass changed
drastically.
The suggested hypothesis appears applicable approximately for the rock masses with
three or more joint sets. Chapter 29 presents extension of equation (8.14) to a parabolic
criterion considering the critical state rock mechanics.
8.4.1 Poor rock masses
Squeezing is found to occur in tunnels in the nearly dry weak rocks where overburden
H is more than 350Q1/3 m. The tangential stress at failure may be about 2γH assum-
ing hydrostatic in situ stresses. Thus, mobilized compressive strength is 2γ350Q1/3 =
700γQ1/3 T/m2. In other words (Singh & Goel, 1999),
qcmass = 0.70 γQ1/3 MPa
for
Q < 10 and Jw = 1.0
(8.17)
where
γ = unit weight of rock mass in kN/m3 (22–29) and
Q = rock mass quality soon after the underground excavation.
Singh proposed originally equation (8.17) in a lecture at Workshop of Norwegian
Method of Tunnelling, New Delhi, India, in 1993 and reported it later after due conﬁrma-
tion (Singh et al., 1997). Since the criterion for squeezing is found to be independent of
UCS (qc < 50 MPa) surprisingly, so, no correction for UCS (qc) is needed in their opinion
for the weak rocks.
Many investigators have agreed with the above correlation (Barla, 1995; Barton,
1995; Grimstad & Bhasin, 1996; Choubey, 1998; Aydan et al., 2000 and others). It may
be argued that qcmass should be same for given RQD, Jn, Jr, Ja values irrespective of
overburden depth and water pressure in joints. In fact high overburden and water pressure
can cause damage to the rock mass in long-term due to induced fractures, opening of
fractures, softening and seepage erosion, etc. Hence, equation (8.17) is justiﬁed logically
also if Q is obtained soon after excavation in the nearly dry weak rock masses.
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 111
Ten case histories of tunnels in the squeezing ground have also been analyzed by
Singh and Goel (2002). In poor rocks, the peak angle of internal friction (φp) is back-
analyzed and related as follows,
tan φp = Jr
Ja
+ 0.1 ≤1.5
(8.18)
The addition of 0.1 accounts for interlocking of rock blocks. It may be visualized
that interlocking is more in jointed rock mass due to low void ratio than in soils. Further,
Kumar (2000) has shown theoretically that the internal angle of friction of laminated rock
mass is slightly higher than the sliding angle of friction of its joints.
8.4.2 Failure of inhomogeneous geological materials
In an inhomogeneous geological material, the process of failure is initiated by its weakest
link (zone of loose soil and weak rock, crack, bedding plane, soft seam, etc.). Thus, natural
failure surfaces are generally three-dimensional (perhaps four-dimensional) which starts
from this weakest link and propagate towards a free surface (or face of excavation).
As such the intermediate principal stress (σ2) plays an important role and governs the
failure and the constitutive relations of the naturally inhomogeneous geological materials
(both in rock masses and soils) in the ﬁeld. Since micro-inhomogeneity is rather unknown,
assumption of homogeneity is popular among the engineers. Therefore, the intuition is
that the effective conﬁning stress is about [(σ2 + σ3)/2] in naturally inhomogeneous soils
and fault-gouges also.
Further, the failure in an inhomogeneous geological material is progressive, whereas
a homogeneous rock fails suddenly. Hence the advantage of inhomogeneous materials
which is offered by nature is that it gives an advance warning of the failure process
starting slowly from the weakest zone.
8.4.3 Failure of laminated rock mass
The laminated rock mass is generally found in the roof of underground coal mines and
in the bottom of open cast coal mines. The thin rock layers may buckle under high
horizontal in situ stresses ﬁrst and then they may rupture progressively by violent brittle
failure (Table 8.1). Therefore, the assumption of shear failure along joints is not valid
here. As such, the proposed hypothesis of effective conﬁning stress [(σ2 + σ3)/2] may not
be applicable in the unreinforced and laminated rock masses. The suggested hypothesis
appears applicable approximately for the rock masses with three or more joint sets.
8.5 CRITICAL STRAIN OF ROCK MASS
The basic concept of design of structures cannot be applied in the tunnels, as stresses and
strains are not known reliably. Critical strain is a better measure of failure.
112 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 8.1 Overall coefﬁcient of volumetric expansion of
failed rock mass (K) within broken zone (Jethwa, 1981;
Goel, 1994).
S.No.
Rock type
K
1.
Phyllites
0.003
2.
Claystones/siltstones
0.01
3.
Black clays
0.01
4.
Crushed sandstones
0.004
5.
Crushed shales
0.005
6.
Metabasics (Goel, 1994)
0.006
The critical strain (εmass) is deﬁned as a ratio between UCS (qcmass) and the modulus
of deformation (Ed) of rock mass (Sakurai, 1997). He found that the critical strain is
nearly independent of joints, water content and temperature. Hence equation (8.15) may
be rewritten to deduce εmass as follows,
εmass = εr
 Er
Ed
0.30 
d
Srock
0.20
(8.19)
≥εθ = ua/a
where
εr
= qc/Er = critical strain of rock material (obtained from tests in the laboratory),
εθ
= tangential strain around opening,
= (observed deﬂection of crown in downward direction/radius of tunnel),
= ua/a (Fig. 8.2),
Srock = average spacing of joints and
qc
= UCS of rock material for core of diameter, d.
The experience in Japan is that there were not many construction problems in tunnels
where εθ < εmass or εr. It can be noted that critical strain appears to be somewhat size
dependent according to equation (8.19).
There is a lot of difference in predictions and actual observations in the tunnels. One
has to give more attention to the joints. It is easier to observe strains than stresses in
the rock mass. Sakurai (1997) classiﬁed the hazard warning level into three stages in
relation to the degree of stability as shown in Fig. 8.2. He observed that where strains
in the roof (εθ = ua/a) are less than the warning level I, there were no problems in
the tunnels. Whereas tunnelling problems were encountered where strains approached
warning level III. Swarup, Goel and Prasad (2000) have conﬁrmed these observations in
19 tunnels in weak rocks in the Himalaya.
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 113
1.0
10.0
100.0
0.1
1.0
10.0
Warning Level III
Warning Level II
Warning Level I
ua
εθ=ua/a
a
Uniaxial Compressive Strength σc (MPa)
Strain ε (%)
Fig. 8.2
Hazard warning levels for assessing the stability of tunnels (Sakurai, 1997).
8.6 CRITERION FOR SQUEEZING/ROCK BURST
OF ROCK MASSES
Equation (8.14) suggests the following criterion for squeezing/rock burst (σ1 = σθ,
σ3 = 0, σ2 = P0 along the tunnel axis in Fig. 8.1d),
σθ > qcmass + A · P0
2
= q′
cmass
(8.20)
Palmstrom (1995) has observed that σθ/qcmass or σθ/RMi may be much higher than 1,
i.e., 1.5 to 3 for squeezing. Thus, his experience tends to conﬁrm the proposed criterion
(equation (8.20)) which shows that squeezing may occur when the constant A is small
(<1.5). There is now need for in situ truely triaxial test data for further proof.
Experience from eleven tunnels in the Himalaya has shown that squeezing ground
conditions are generally encountered where the peak angle of internal friction φp is less
than 30◦, Jr/Ja is less than 0.5 and overburden is higher than 350Q1/3 m in which Q is
Barton’s rock mass quality. The predicted support pressures using equation (8.14) are in
better agreement with the observed support pressure in the roof and wall than those by
Mohr’s theory (Chaturvedi, 1998).
Kumar (2002) observed the behavior of 27 km long NJPC tunnel and found that
the mild rock burst occurred where A is more than 2.0 and Jr/Ja > 0.5. In 15 sections
with rock cover more than 1000 m, his studies validated equation (8.20) for predicting
mild rock burst/slabbing conditions approximately, estimating qcmass from equation (8.9)
(Table 22.1). He also inferred from 50 tunnel sections that the ratio between tangential
114 Tunnelling in weak rocks
stress and mobilised strength (σθ/q′
cmass) is a better criterion for predicting the degree of
squeezing condition than Mohr’s theory (σθ/qcmass).
8.7 TENSILE STRENGTH ACROSS DISCONTINUOUS JOINTS
The length of joints is generally less than say 5 m in tunnels in young rock masses
except for bedding planes. Discontinuous joints thus have tensile strength. Mehrotra
(1996) has conducted 44 shear block tests on both nearly dry and saturated rock masses.
He also obtained non-linear strength envelopes for various rock conditions. These strength
envelopes were extrapolated carefully in tensile stress region so that it is tangential to the
Mohr’s circle for uniaxial tensile strength as shown in Fig. 8.3. It was noted that the
non-linear strength envelopes for both nearly dry and saturated rock masses converged to
nearly the same uniaxial tensile strength across discontinuous joints (qtj) within the blocks
of rock masses. It is related to Barton’s rock mass quality (Fig. 8.4) as follows:
qtj = 0.029 γQ0.31 MPa
(8.21)
where γ is the unit weight of the rock mass in kN/m3. In case of tensile stresses, the
criterion of failure is as follows,
−σ3 = qtj
(8.22)
0
4
8
12
16
20
4
8
12
16
0
Normal Stress (σ), kg/cm2
Shear Strength (τ)
τsat=2.0(σ+ 0.65)0.675
τnmc=2.8(σ + 0.70)0.672
?
Fig. 8.3
Estimation of tensile strength of rock mass from Mohr’s envelope (Mehrotra, 1992).
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 115
01
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
0.10
0.20
qtj=0.029 γ Q0.31 MPa
γ Q0.31
qtj, MPa
0
Fig. 8.4
Plot between qtj and γ · Q0.31.
The tensile strength across discontinuous joints is not zero as generally assumed, but
it is found to be signiﬁcant specially in the hard rocks.
The tensile stress in tunnel roof of span B will be of the order of γB in the vertical
direction. Equating this with qtj, the span of self-supporting tunnels obtained from
equation (8.21) would be 2.9Q0.31 m. Barton et al. (1974) found the self-supporting span
to be 2Q0.4 m. This comparison is very encouraging. Thus, it is understood that the wedge
analysis considering qtj and in situ stress along tunnel axis may give more accurate value
of the self-supporting tunnel span.
8.8 DYNAMIC STRENGTH OF ROCK MASS
It appears logical to assume that dynamic strain at failure should be of the same order as
the static strain at failure for a given conﬁning stress. Dynamic strain at failure should be
proportional to modulus of elasticity of rock mass (Ee) and static strain at failure should be
proportional to Ed. Therefore, a following hypothesis for dynamic strength enhancement
is proposed.
qcmdyn/qcmass = (Ee/Ed)0.7
(8.23)
where
qcmdyn = dynamic strength of rock mass.
In seismic analysis of concrete dams, dynamic strength enhancement may be quite
high, particularly for a weathered rock mass, as the instantaneous modulus of elasticity
(Ee from equation (5.14)) will be much higher than the long-term modulus of deformation
Ed (equation (5.13)).
116 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Extensive research is needed to obtain more realistic correlations for dynamic strength
enhancement.
8.9 RESIDUAL STRENGTH PARAMETERS
Mohr’s theory will be applicable to residual failure as a rock mass would be reduced
to non-dilatant soil-like condition. The mobilized residual cohesion cr is approximately
equal to 0.1 MPa and is not negligible unless tunnel closure is more than 5.5 percent of
its diameter. The mobilized residual angle of internal friction φr is about 10◦less than the
peak angle of internal friction φp but more than 14◦. The rock mechanics helps in judging
the support system.
REFERENCES
Aydan, O., Dalgic, S. and Kawamoto, T. (2000). Prediction of squeezing potential of rocks in
tunnelling through a combination of an analytical method and rock mass classiﬁcation.
Italian Geotechnical Journal, Anno XXXIV(1), 41-45.
Barla, G. (1995). Squeezing rocks in tunnels. ISRM News Journal, 2(3&4), 44-49.
Barton, N. (1995). The inﬂuence of joint properties in modelling jointed rock masses. Eight Int.
Rock Mech. Congress, Tokyo, 3, 1023-1032.
Barton, N. (2002). Some new Q-value correlations to assist in site characterisation and tunnel
design. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci., 39, 185-216.
Barton, N. (2005). Personal communication with R. K. Goel.
Barton, N. and Brandis, S. (1990). Review of predictive capabilities of JRC-JCS model in
engineering practice. Rock Joints - Proc. of a regional conf. of the International Society
for Rock Mechanics, Reprinted from: Eds: N. R. Barton and O. Stephansson, Leon, 820.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Bazant, Z. P., Lin, F. B. and Lippmann, H. (1993). Fracture energy release and size effect in borehole
breakout. Int. J. Num. & Analytical Methods in Geomech., John Wiley, 17, 1-14.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1976). Rock mass classiﬁcation in rock engineering. Exploration for Rock
Engineering, Proc. of the Symp., Ed: Z. T. Bieniawski, Cape Town, 1, 97-106.
Chaturvedi, A. (1998). Strength of anisotropic rock masses. ME thesis, Department of Civil
Engineering, University of Roorkee, India, 82.
Choubey, V. D. (1998). Potential of rock mass classiﬁcation for design of tunnel supports - hydro
electric projects in Himalayas. Int. Conf. on Hydro Power Development in Himalayas,
Shimla, India, 305-336.
Goel, R. K. (1994). Correlations for predicting support pressures and closures in tunnels.
PhD thesis, Visvesvaraya Regional College of Engineering, Nagpur, India, 347.
Strength enhancement of rock mass in tunnels 117
Goel, R. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Paithankar, A. G. (1996). Correlation between Barton’s Q and
Bieniawski’s RMR - a new approach. Technical Note Int. J. of Rock Mech. Min. Sci. &
Geomech. Abstr., Pergamon, 33(2), 79-181.
Grimstad, E. and Bhasin, R. (1996). Stress strength relationships and stability in hard rock.
Proc. Conf. on Recent Advances in Tunnelling Technology, New Delhi, India, I, 3-8.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London, England, Revised Edition.
Hoek, E. (1994). Strength of rock and rock masses. ISRM News Journal, 2, 4-16.
Hoek, E. (1998). Personal Discussions with Prof. Bhawani Singh on April 4, 1998 at Tehri Hydro
Development Corporation Ltd., Rishikesh, India.
Hoek, E. (2000). Practical Rock Engineering. Chapter 12, 2000 edition, http://www.rocscience.
com/hoek/practicalrockengineering.asp.
Kalamaras, G. S. and Bieniawski, Z. T. (1995). A rock strength concept for coal seams incorporating
the effect of time. Proc. 8th Int. Congr. Rock Mech., 1, 295-302.
Kumar, N. (2002). Rock mass characterisation and evaluation of supports for tunnels in Himalaya.
PhD thesis, WRDTC, IIT Roorkee, India, 289.
Kumar, P. (2000). Mechanics of excavation in jointed underground medium. Symp. Modern
Techniques in Underground Construction, CRRI, New Delhi, ISRMTT, 49-75.
Lecture Notes of Workshop on Behaviour of Concrete Under Multiaxial States of Stress. Organised
by Central Board of Irrigation & Power and Central Soils & Material Research Station,
New Delhi, 1987, 1.1-5.75.
Mehrotra, V. K. (1992). Estimation of engineering parameters of rock mass. PhD thesis, University
of Roorkee, Roorkee, India, 267.
Mehrotra, V. K. (1996). Failure envelopes for jointed rocks in lesser Himalaya. J. Rock Mech. and
Tunnelling Technology, Indian Society of Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling Technology,
2(1), 59-74.
Murrell, S. A. K. (1963). A criterion for brittle fracture of rocks and concrete under triaxial
stress and the effect of pore pressure on the criteria. Vth Sym. on Rock Mech., University of
Minnesota, Ed: C. Fairhurst, Oxford, Pergamon, 563-577.
Pande, G. N. (1997). SQCC Lecture on Application of the Homogeneisation Techniques in Soil
Mechanics and Structure. Sept. 26, IIT Roorkee, India.
Pundir, G. S., Acharya, A. K. and Chadha, A. K. (2000). Tunnelling through rock cover of
more than 1000 m - a case study. Int. Conf. Tunnelling Asia 2000, New Delhi, India,
1, 3-8.
Ramamurthy, T. (1993). Strength and modulus responses of anisotropic rocks. Comprehensive Rock
Engineering, Pergamon, Chapter 13, l, 313-329.
Rao, K. S., Tiwari, R. P. and Singh, J. (2003). Development of a true triaxial system (TTS) for rock
mass testing. Conf. Geotechnical Engineering for Infrastructural Development, IGC-2003,
IIT Roorkee, I, 51-58.
Roy, N. (1993). Engineering behaviour of rock masses through study of jointed models. PhD thesis,
Civil Engineering Department, IIT, New Delhi, 365.
Sakurai, S. (1993). Back analysis in rock engineering. ISRM News Journal, 2(2), 4-16.
118 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Sakurai, S. (1997). Lessons learned from ﬁeld measurements in tunnelling. Tunnelling and
underground space technology, 12(4), 453-460.
Sheorey, P. R. (1997). Empirical Rock Failure Criterion. Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. and
A.A. Balkema, 176.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and
Tunnelling Hazard. Swets & Zeitlinger (A. A. Balkema), The Netherlands, 344.
Singh, Bhawani, Goel, R. K., Mehrotra, V. K., Garg, S. K. and Allu, M. R. (1998). Effect
of intermediate principal stress on strength of anisotropic rock mass. J. Tunnelling &
Underground Space Technology, Pergamon, 13(1), 71-79.
Singh, Bhawani, Viladkar, M. N., Samadhiya, N. K. and Mehrotra, V. K. (1997). Rock mass strength
parameters mobilized in tunnels. J. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology,
Pergamon, 12(1), 47-54.
Singh, M. and Rao, K. S. (2005). Empirical methods to estimate the strength of jointed rock masses.
Engineering Geology, 77, 127-137.
Swarup, A. K., Goel, R. K. and Prasad, V. V. R. (2000). Observational approach for stability of
tunnels. Tunnelling Asia 2000, New Delhi, 38-44.
Verman, M. (1993). Rock mass - tunnel support interaction analysis. PhD thesis, IIT Roorkee,
Roorkee, India, 267.
Wang, R. and Kemeny, J. M. (1995). A new empirical failure criterion under polyaxial com-
pressive stresses. Rock Mechanics: Proc. 35th U. S. Symposium, Reprinted from:
Eds: J. J. K. Daemen and R. A. Schultz, Lake Tahoe, 4–7 June 1995, 950.
9
The new Austrian tunnelling method
“Let us learn to live with landslide danger.”
Evert Hoek (1998)
9.1 OLD TUNNELLING PRACTICE
In the conventional tunnelling practice of the past, masonry in dressed stone or brick
was regarded as the most suitable lining material in unstable rock. Concrete was rejected
because possible deformation during the setting and hardening process was supposed
to cause irreparable damage. The space between masonry lining and rock face was
dry packed. Timber lagging, which was subject to decay when left in place, generally
could not be removed, particularly from the roof, because of the danger of loosening and
rock falls.
The situation was further aggravated by an unfavorable time factor. Merely to bring
a full section, a 9 m long section of a double-track railway tunnel by the old Austrian
tunnelling method, after the bottom and top headings had been driven, it took about four
weeks, and another month was needed to complete the masonry of the section. The amount
of timber used in more difﬁcult cases was so enormous that one-third and sometimes even
more of the excavated space was ﬁlled by solid timber.
Allthesecircumstances, togetherwiththetendencyofthetemporarytimberframework
to yield, necessarily produced violent loosening pressures, which frequently caused roof
settlement up to 40 cm before the masonry could be closed. Years after construction had
been ﬁnished, a slow decrease in the volume of the compressible and sometimes badly
executed dry packing often deformed the lining asymmetrically, causing damage and
costly repairs. Damage to the surrounding rock as well as to the lining itself was further
increased locally by the mechanical and chemical effects of water.
It is evident that in this period of rather inadequate methods and materials for temporary
andpermanentsupports, looseningpressureswereasourceofthegreatestconcerntotunnel
engineers. All attempts to design a lining during this period were consequently carried out
with sole regard to loosening pressures. Occasional subsequent deformation of linings led
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
120 Tunnelling in weak rocks
to the erroneous conclusion that the linings designed in this way still lacked the necessary
margin of safety, whereas the failures almost without exception were due to incorrect
treatment of the surrounding rock and fundamental shortcomings of the methods.
Though methods and means of temporary and permanent support have improved
fundamentally since the earlier period of the twentieth century, linings are still made as
thick as they were about half a century ago. Loosening pressure is still considered by
many to be the main active force to be reckoned with in tunnel design, although modern
tunnelling methods actually make it possible to avoid loosening signiﬁcantly.
9.2 DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTRUCTION AND
LINING METHODS
Shortly after the turn of the twentieth century, grouting was introduced as an effective
means of consolidating the rock surrounding a tunnel. By ﬁlling the voids, unsymmetrical
local loads on the lining are avoided, and portions of loose or soft rock are strengthened
by cementation.
The next stage was the introduction of steel for supports and which, compared with
timber, constituted a remarkable improvement as a temporary lining material because of
its better physical properties, its higher resistance to weathering, and its reduced tendency
to yield. Decreased deformability of the temporary support made it possible to replace
masonry as a lining material by concrete. Dry packing then became obsolete, since the
concrete ﬁlled the spaces outside the A-line (circumference of the tunnel for payment to
a contractor).
One of the most important advantages of steel supports is that they allow tunnels
to be driven full-face to a very large cross section. The resulting unrestricted working
area enables powerful drilling and mucking equipment to be used, increasing the rate
of advance and reducing costs. Nowadays, dividing the face into headings which are
subsequently widened is done only under most unfavorable geological conditions.
Remarkable progress in drilling and rock blasting especially in Sweden, has also
helped to reduce damage to the surrounding rock.
9.3 MODERN TUNNELLING METHODS
Finally, during the last few decades, rock bolting and shotcrete were introduced in tun-
nelling practice. To judge from the results obtained up to now, the introduction of these
methods of support and surface protection can be considered as a most important event,
especially in the ﬁeld of soft rock and earth tunnelling.
The advantages of these methods can be best shown by comparing the rock mechanics
of tunnels lined by the new and by older methods [Figs 9.1 to 9.15 (Dhawan & Joshi, 1982)
The new Austrian tunnelling method
121
depicting modern and old practices of tunnelling]. Whereas all the older methods of
temporary support without exception are bound to cause loosening and voids by yielding
of the different parts of the supporting structure. A thin layer of shotcrete together with a
suitable system of rock bolting applied to the excavated rock immediately after blasting
entirely prevents loosening and reduces decompression to a certain degree, transforming
the surrounding rock into a self-supporting arch.
A layer of shotcrete with a thickness of only 15 cm applied to a tunnel of 10 m diameter
can safely carry a load of 45 tons/m2 corresponding to a burden of 23 m of rock, which
is more than the observed support pressure. If a steel-support structure incorporating
No.20-type wide-ﬂanged arches at 1 m centers was used under these conditions, it would
fail with 65 percent of the load carried by the shotcrete lining. A timber support of the
conventional Austrian type would be able to carry only a very small proportion of the
same load. If the temporary support deforms or fails, the erroneous conclusion is usually
drawn that the proposed permanent linings are not strong enough. In this way permanent
linings that are already over-designed becomes still heavier.
9.4 TEMPORARY SUPPORTS
9.4.1 Conventional shotcrete
A temporary support designed to prevent loosening must attain a high carrying capacity as
quickly as possible, and it must be strong and adhesive so that it seals off the surface closely
and almost hermetically. The carrying capacity of a temporary support is determined by
the material as well as by its structural design. Timber, especially when humid, is by far
the worst; as it combines low physical properties with a great tendency for the structure
to yield. Although steel has much better physical properties, the efﬁciency of steel-arch
depends mainly on the quality of packing between the arches and the rock face, which
is always unsatisfactory. On the contrary, concrete, particularly shotcrete, meets all the
requirements for an ideal temporary support.
Shotcrete’s high early strength is of the greatest importance in attaining a high support
capacity rapidly, and this is particularly true of its early ﬂexural (tensile) strength, which
amounts to 30 and 50 percent of the compressive strength after one-half and two days.
A recently introduced hardening accelerating admixture based on siliciﬁcation gives still
better results. The setting time for shotcrete is 3 min now.
The most conspicuous feature of shotcrete as a support against loosening and stress-
rearrangement pressure lies in its interaction with the neighboring rock. A shotcrete layer
applied immediately after opening up a new rock face acts as an adhesive surface by which
a jointed rock of weak strength is transformed into a stable one. The shotcrete absorbs
the tangential stresses which build up to a peak close to the surface of a cavity after it
is opened up. As a result of the close interaction between shotcrete and rock blocks, the
neighboring portions of rock mass remain almost in their original undisturbed state and are
122 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.1
The main load carrying member is the rock mass.
thus enabled to participate effectively in the arch action. The statically effective thickness
of the zone of arch action is in this way increased to a multiple of that of the shotcrete.
In this way, tensile stresses due to bending are diminished and compressive stresses are
easily absorbed by the surrounding rock mass. The thickness zone of arch action can be
increased at will by rock bolting.
Disintegration always starts by the opening of a thin surface ﬁssure; if this movement
is prevented at the outset by applying a shotcrete layer, the rock mass behind the shotcrete
remains stable. This explains why cavities in weak rock mass lined with a skit of only
a few centimeters of shotcrete remain in perfect equilibrium. Shallow tunnels in rock of
medium quality built by conventional methods need a fairly strong temporary support and
concrete lining. Thus only a thin layer of shotcrete, possibly locally strengthened by rock
bolts, may provide both temporary support and a satisfactory permanent lining.
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.2
Maintenance of original rock mass strength.
The new Austrian tunnelling method
123
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.3
Loosening must be prevented as it reduces strength.
Experience so far has shown that shotcrete, especially when combined with rock bolt-
ing, has proved excellent as a temporary support for all qualities of rock with standing time
down to less than one hour and even for ground which normally could only be mastered
by careful forepoling. Exceptionally, even almost cohesionless and plastic, ground has
been successfully handled. In worst cases of plastic, water-bearing ground where steel
forepoling failed, shotcrete has been successfully employed as a stabilizing reinforcement
for steel support. Rock anchors can also be used to improve the behavior of rock mass.
σ
τ
pi
τ
σ
σ
σ
pi
pi
r
r
Fig. 9.4
Uniaxial stress condition should be prevented.
124 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.5
Mobilization of the protective ring (rock carrying ring) without strength reduction.
The rock anchors stabilize the rock mass. If the anchors are placed in a radial pattern,
the displacement also takes place in a radial manner. The development of shear zones
can be prevented by the anchors. It also helps in improving the bearing capacity of rocks
as the anchors act as reinforcement. Light steel sets and wire mesh could also be used
as temporary supports. The special advantages of using these are that psychologically it
looks more stable. It provides the connection between anchorage points and the weak rock
and therefore increases the bearing capacity of the support system.
The name new Austrian tunnelling method (NATM) is a misnomer as it is not a method
of tunnelling but a strategy for tunnelling which does have a considerable uniformity and
sequence.
9.5 PHILOSOPHY OF NATM
The NATM is based on the philosophy of “Build as you go” approach with the following
caution.
“Not too stiff ,
Nor too ﬂexible
Not too early,
Nor too late.”
The new Austrian tunnelling method
125
R / R
Too
Early
R / R
R / R
R / R
Too Late
Ground Reaction
Curve
Too Stiff
Too Flexible
pr
pr
pr
pr
pr
R
Optimum
Fig. 9.6
Support (external lining) not too early, not too late, not too stiff, not too ﬂexible.
The NATM accomplishes tunnel stabilization by controlled stress release. The sur-
rounding rock is thereby transformed from a complex load system to a self-supporting
structure together with the installed support elements, provided that the detrimental loos-
ening, resulting in a substantial loss of strength, is avoided. The self-stabilization by
controlled stress release is achieved by the introduction of the so called “Semi-Rigid
Lining,” i.e., systematic rock bolting with the application of a shotcrete lining. On one
side, this offers a certain degree of immediate support, and on the other hand, the ﬂexibil-
ity to allow stress release through radial deformation. The development of shear stresses
in shotcrete lining in arched roof is thus reduced to a minimum. The function of NATM
support system is as follows (Rabcewicz, 1964–1965; Rabcewicz et al., 1973).
(a) NATM is based on the principle that utmost advantage of the capacity of the rock
mass should be taken to support itself by carefully controlling the forces in the
redistribution process which takes place in the surrounding rock mass when an
opening is made. This is also called “tunnelling with rock support.” The main
feature is that the rock mass in the immediate vicinity of the tunnel excavation is
made to act as a load bearing member, together with the supporting system. The
outer rock mass ring is activated by means of systematic rock bolting together with
shotcrete. The main carrying member of the NATM is not only the shotcrete but
also the systematically anchored rock arch.
(b) The installation of systematic rock bolting with shotcrete lining allows limited defor-
mations but prevents loosening of the rock mass. In the initial stage it requires small
forces to prevent rock mass from moving in, but once movement has started, large
forces are required. Therefore, NATM advocates installation of supports within
126 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.7
Supports must be effective not at spots but overall.
stand-up time to prevent movements. It is also added that in non-squeezing ground
conditions, the stresses in the shotcrete may be reduced signiﬁcantly if the spray of
the shotcrete is slightly delayed. The delay, however, should be within the stand-up
time. But a safe practice is spraying ﬁrst of all a sealing shotcrete layer (2.5 cm
thick), immediately after excavation.
(c) In static consideration, a tunnel should be treated as a thick wall tube, consisting
of a load-bearing ring of rock arch and supporting lining. Since, a tube can act as a
tube only if it is closed, the closing of the ring becomes of paramount importance,
specially where the foundation rock is not capable of withstanding high support
pressure in squeezing ground condition.
A conduit is different than a tunnel of same diameter and depth; as trench is ﬁrst
excavated, then conduit is laid and soil back-ﬁlled. Thus conduit carries full cover
pressure. In the case of tunnel, opening is excavated and some deformations take
place before lining is sprayed. Thus the support pressures are much less than the
cover pressure due to the arching action (Fig. 3.1).
(d) Due to stress-redistribution, when an opening is being excavated, a full-face heading
is considered most favorable. Drivage in different stages complicates the stress-
redistribution phenomenon and destroys the rock mass. In cases where full-face
tunnelling is not possible, as in Chhibro–Khodri Tunnel and many other tunnels in
Himalaya due to little stand-up time and the associated chances of rock falls and
cavities. Consequently, engineers had to change to heading and benching method
and struggled to achieve the targeted drivage rates in the absence of the beneﬁcial
effect of the shotcrete support.
(e) The question arises how to use the capacity of a jointed rock to support itself. This
is accomplished by providing an initial shotcrete layer followed by systematic rock
bolting, spraying additional shotcrete and using steel rib, if necessary. As in the case
The new Austrian tunnelling method
127
F = 102m2
F = 152m2
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.8
Support should consist of thin linings which are ﬂexible to bending. Ability to carry
bending moments and bending failure is reduced.
of the Loktak Tunnel (India), NATM without steel arches in high squeezing grounds
would have required several layers of shotcrete which could not be accommodated
without compromising with the available ﬁnished bore. The spacing of steel arches
is adjusted to suit the squeezing ground condition. The behavior of the protective
support and the surrounding rock during the stress-redistribution process should be
monitored and controlled, if necessary, by different measurements.
(f) Shotcrete in a water-charged rock mass should be applied in small patches leaving
the radial gaps for effective drainage.
Modern
Anchor
Old
Fig. 9.9
Additional support should be provided by wire meshes, steel arches and anchorage. Not
by increase of concrete thickness.
128 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The New Austrian Tunnelling Method appears most suitable for soft ground which
can be machine or manually excavated, where jointing and overbreak are not dominant,
where a smooth proﬁle can often be formed by smooth blasting and where a complete
load-bearing ring can (and often should) be established. Monitoring plays a signiﬁcant
role in deciding the timing and the extent of secondary support.
Despite the comments by an experienced NATM pioneer that “it is not usually neces-
sary to provide support in hard rocks,” Norwegian tunnels require more than 50,000 m3
of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete and more than 100,000 rock bolts each year (An article in
World Tunnelling, June 1992). Two major tunnelling nations, Norway and Austria, have
in fact long traditions of using shotcrete and rock bolts for tunnel supports, yet there
are signiﬁcant differences in philosophy and areas of application for NATM and NMT
(Norwegian Method of Tunnelling).
Thus, the basic principles of NATM are summarized as
(i) Mobilization of rock mass strength,
(ii) Shotcrete protection to preserve the load-carrying capacity of the ring of rock mass,
(iii) Monitoring the deformation of the excavated rock mass,
(iv) Providing ﬂexible but active supports and
(v) Closing of invert to form a load-bearing support ring to control deformation of the
rock mass.
9.6 FINAL DIMENSIONING BY MEASUREMENT
Inseparablyconnected withthe NATM,and a basic featureof the method, isa sophisticated
measuring programme. Deformations and stresses are controlled systematically, allowing
determination of whether the chosen support-capacity corresponds with the type of rock
mass in question, and what kind of additional reinforcing measures are needed if any.
In case of the lining being over-dimensioned, the reinforcing measures can straight
away be reduced accordingly when the same or similar mechanical conditions of the rock
are encountered during further tunnel driving. An empirical dimensioning is carried out
in this way, based on the scientiﬁc principles.
During the execution of a series of important tunnelling works using the NATM during
the last few decades, a reasonably satisfactory measuring system has been developed.
In order to control the behavior of the outer arch and surrounding rock during the
different construction stages in practice, main measuring sections are chosen at distances
determinedbythesalientgeologicalandrockmechanicsconsiderations. Thesesectionsare
equipped with the double extensometers and convergence measuring devices to measure
deformations and the pressure pads to measure radial and tangential stresses (details on
instrumentation can be seen in the Chapter 14).
In addition, roof and ﬂoor points are monitored geodetically using a modern elec-
tronic theodolite with sensors attached to the excavated faces. In between the main
The new Austrian tunnelling method
129
Anchoring
Convergence
Monitoring
Extensometer
Fig. 9.10
Necessary support and its timing should be adjusted according to the measuring of the
displacement.
ph
ph
pv
pv
Modern
Old
pi
Fig. 9.11
According to rock mechanics, the tunnel is a tube which consists of the rock carrying
ring and the support, not a conduit.
measuring sections, secondary ones are selected at suitable distances where only
convergence readings are made between the roof and ﬂoor.
Readings are taken every other day at the beginning, decreasing to once a month
according to the rate of deformation and change of stresses. The observations are plotted
in graphs as a function of time. Stability of a support system is indicated if tunnel closure
is stabilizing with time otherwise the reverse is true.
130 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.12
Behavior of the rock will be inﬂuenced by the delay of ring closure, advanced crown,
increase delay, bending effect on the crown and increasing loads on the rock foundation.
This method of establishing stress-time graphs gives a high degree of safety, allowing
any situation to be recognized long before it becomes dangerous. They are comparable
with the function of temperature charts or electrocardiograms in medical science.
Since the readjustment process takes a long time, possibly inﬂuenced locally by sub-
sequent alterations of the geological conditions (e.g., increase in the water content of the
surrounding rock), it is essential from both the practical and theoretical point of view to
measure also the stresses and deformations of the inner lining. This is done by placing
a series of tangential pressure pads or strain gauges, both in pairs outside and inside the
lining, and also by using convergence measuring devices.
9.7 CONCLUDING REMARKS
The NATM has evolved from the long practical experience. The behavior of the linings
and their surrounding rocks has been observed closely by measurements in many tunnels
and galleries in all kinds of rock. The efforts have been made to ﬁnd a relationship between
the phenomena observed and the laws of modern rock mechanics, and also to establish
possible new ones.
The greatly simpliﬁed analytical formulae have emerged from practical experience to
describe complicated processes observed in nature. Greatest accuracy would certainly not
suit the complexity of the problems caused by a large scattering of parameter values and
frequent changes of rock types and quality even on short stretches of tunnel.
One needs both experience and theoretical knowledge to design the standard sections
adequately. These qualities are even more important when applying these standard types
correctly during construction. It is inevitable that alterations will be needed, following
the results of in situ measurements, and this will eventually lead to the most economical
solution being achieved.
The new Austrian tunnelling method
131
Modern
Old
1
2
1
4
2
5
3
5
2
4
1
Fig. 9.13
Full-face heading helps to keep rock mass strength. Many partial headings reduce rock
strength according to stress superposition.
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.14
Procedure of construction is important for safety of the structure. Variation of duration
of a round, timing of support and ring closure, length of the crown and lining resistance are used to
help the self-stabilization of the rock and the support.
Sometimes judgment on the support system goes wrong, the lining of shotcrete cracks,
the rate of tunnel closure does not stabilize with time. In fact the best advantage of NATM
over steel supports is that NATM is a ﬂexible construction technology. One may decide
to spray additional layers of shotcrete until cracking of the last layer of shotcrete does not
take place. One may go for spot-bolting if instrumentation gives a clear picture of a local
geological problem. Thus design of support system is by trial and error in NATM. This
scientiﬁc empirical method of dimensioning seems to be downright indispensable. It can
certainly be assisted, but never be replaced, by analytical considerations.
132 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Modern
Old
Fig. 9.15
Smoothly rounded shapes help to prevent stress concentrations.
The NATM is now not a new tunnel support method. This is based on practical
experience and is designed to suit the actual ﬁeld conditions. Thus it is leading to an
efﬁcient method of carrying out tunnelling operation in difﬁcult conditions. However, it
may be noted that NATM is not a method of excavation. The choice of excavation method
is based on practical considerations.
The Norwegian method of tunnelling (NMT) is inspired by the NATM. NMT (Barton
et al., 1974; Hoek & Brown, 1980) has evolved tables and a chart for design of NATM
support system, although construction approach is quite ﬂexible.
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, 6, 189-236 (N.G.I. Publication No. 106).
Dhawan, A. K. and Joshi, A. B. (1982). The basic approach to new Austrian tunnelling method.
Proc. Symposium on Design and Construction of Diversion Tunnels, Outlet Tunnels, Gate
Structures and Intake Structures, Publication No. 159, 1, Central Board of Irrigation and
Power, New Delhi, India, 1-34.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London, Chapters 5 & 9.
Rabcewicz, L. V. (1964–1965). The new Austrian tunnelling method. Water Power, Part I, 1964,
453-457; Part II, 1964, 511-515; and Part III, Jan. 1965, 19-24.
Rabcewicz, L. V. and Golser, J. (1973). Principles of dimensioning the supporting system for the
new Austrian tunnelling method. Water Power, 25(3), 83.
10
Norwegian method of tunnelling
“The word impossible in itself says, I am possible!”
Anonymous
10.1 INTRODUCTION
According to Fairhurst (1993), designers should develop design solutions and design
strategies that are robust, i.e., able to perform well and are adequate even in unknown
geological conditions and fail in the desired (ductile) manner. For example, the shotcreted
reinforced-rock arch is a robust design strategy. Historically, the Norwegian Method
of Tunnelling (NMT) has evolved a successful strategy out of 30 years of experience
which may be adopted in supporting tunnels in widely different rock conditions. There
are 1260 case records to prove efﬁcacy of this design approach.
A tunnelling revolution has occurred in the last 30 years with advent of wet-process
shotcrete and stainless steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS). Since steel ﬁbers are not
continuous, they do not experience corrosion like mesh and RCC. Another revolution
is the development of full-column-grouted resin (thermo-mechanically treated (TMT))
bolts. As far as life of these “light” support systems is concerned, they are stable for
last 30 years. Their cost is only a fraction of the concrete lining. The key to success in
polluted environment is the shotcrete of good quality which is dense, impermeable and
strong (UCS > 45 MPa).
New Austrian Tunnelling Method (NATM) appears most suitable for soft ground,
where a smooth proﬁle can be formed. Thus all round load-bearing ring can be created
with the help of rock anchors/bolts. It is an essential practice in NTM also. In the NTM,
great emphasis is placed on extensive geological and geotechnical investigations unlike
NATM. Chapter 5 describes Q-system of classiﬁcation in detail. Experience has proved
that a combination of RMR–Q classiﬁcation is not systematic. Hence, only one system
should be adopted in a tunnel.
NMT appears most suitable for good (hard) rock masses even where jointing and high
overbreaks are dominant, and where drill and blast method or hard rock TBM’s are the
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
134 Tunnelling in weak rocks
most usual methods of excavation. Bolting is the dominant form of rock support since it
mobilizes the strength of the surrounding rock mass in the best possible way. Potentially
unstable rock masses with clay-ﬁlled joints and discontinuities would increasingly need
shotcrete and steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete SFRS [S(fr)] to supplement systematic
bolting (B). It is understood that NMT and NATM are the two most versatile tunnel
support methods. These are devised and used extensively, because they can be applied to
any proﬁle as temporary or as a permanent support, just by changing the thickness and
bolt spacing. A thick load bearing ring (reinforced ribs of shotcrete (RRS)) can be formed
as needed, and it matches an uneven proﬁle better than lattice girders or steel sets. These
support requirements based on the Q-system are shown in Fig. 10.1. The essential features
of the NMT are summarized in Table 10.1 (Barton et al., 1992).
10.2 UNSUPPORTED SPAN
Barton et al. (1974) proposed equation (5.11) for estimating equivalent dimension (D′
e) of
a self-supporting or an unsupported tunnel. The D′
e is the ratio between tunnel width and
ESR. The excavation support ratio (ESR) is given in Table 5.11. However, seepage erosion
may be serious after a few decades in the initially self-supporting tunnels in water-soluble
rocks near slopes.
Section 5.7 lists more conditions for no-support requirement. Needless to mention that
no supports are needed in a self-supporting opening in the rock mass.
0.001
0.1
1
100
10
0.1
0.10
1.0
10
100
1000
Exc. Poor
Ext. Poor
Very Poor
Poor
Fair
Good
Very
Good
Ext.
Good
Exc.
Good
Rock Mass Quality Q = RQD
_____
Jn
X
Jr
_____
Ja
X
Jw
_____
SRF
Equivalent Dimension = Span or Height in m
ESR
36
37
38
35
34
33
29
30
31
32
28
27
26
25
21
22
23
24
20
16
15
19
18
14
17
13
12
11
10
9
5
8
7
6
2
1
4
3
Fig. 10.1
Tunnel support chart showing 38 support categories (Barton et al., 1974).
Norwegian method of tunnelling 135
Table 10.1 Essential features of NMT (Barton et al., 1992).
S.No.
Features
1.
Areas of usual application:
Jointed rock giving overbreak, harder end of scale (qc = 3 to 300 MPa)
Clay bearing zones, stress slabbing (Q = 0.001 to 10 or more)
2.
Usual methods of excavation:
Drill and blast, hard rock TBM, hand excavation in clay zones
3.
Temporary rock reinforcement and permanent tunnel support may be any of the
following:
CCA, S(fr) + RRS + B, B + S(fr), B + S, B, S(fr), S, sb, (NONE)
* Temporary reinforcement forms part of permanent support
* Mesh reinforced shotcrete not used
* Dry process shotcrete not used
* Steel sets or lattice girders not used, RRS and S(fr) are used in clay zones and in weak,
squeezing rock masses
* Contractor chooses temporary support
* Owner/consultant chooses permanent support
* Final concrete lining are less frequently used; i.e., B + S(fr) is usually the ﬁnal support
4.
Rock mass characterization for:
* Predicting rock mass quality
* Predicting support needs
* Updating both during tunnelling (monitoring in critical cases only)
5.
The NMT gives low costs and
* Rapid advance rates in drill and blast tunnels
* Improved safety
* Improved environment
Notations: CCA = cast concrete arches; S(fr) = steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete; RRS = reinforced ribs of
shotcrete; B = systematic bolting; S = conventional shotcrete; sb = spot bolts; NONE = no support needed.
10.3 DESIGN OF SUPPORTS
The Q-value is related to the tunnel support requirements with the equivalent dimensions
of the excavation. The relationship between Q and the equivalent dimension of an exca-
vation determines the appropriate support measures as depicted in Fig. 10.1. Barton et al.
(1974) have identiﬁed 38 support categories (Fig. 10.1) and speciﬁed permanent sup-
ports for these categories. The bolt length l, which is not speciﬁed in the support details,
136 Tunnelling in weak rocks
can be determined in terms of excavation width, B in meters using the following equations
of Barton et al. (1974).
l = 2 + (0.15 B/ESR), m for pre-tensioned rock bolts in roof
(10.1)
l = 2 + (0.15 H/ESR), m for pre-tensioned rock bolts in walls of height (H) (10.2)
and
l = 0.40 B/ESR, m for the untensioned rock anchors in roof
(10.3)
l = 0.35 H/ESR, m for the untensioned rock anchors in walls
(10.4)
Table 10.2 (Barton et al., 1974) suggests the type of bolt, its spacing and the thickness
of conventional shotcrete for a given rock mass quality Q, equivalent span B/ESR, RQD/Jn
and Jr/Ja values. For design of wall support system of a cavern, Q should be replaced
by Qw. In case of shaft, Qw may be used for designing the support system for equivalent
span(ordiameterorsizeofshaft/ESR)andcorrespondingboltlengthfromequations(10.1)
or (10.3) (Barton, 2001). Many supplementary notes are given at the end of Table 10.2.
Other practical recommendations on shotcrete are compiled in Table 10.3.
It should be realized that shotcrete lining of adequate thickness and quality is a long-
term support system. This is true for rail tunnels also. It must be ensured that there is a
good bond between shotcrete and rock surface. Tensile bending stresses are not found
to occur even in the irregular shotcrete lining in the roof due to a good bond between
shotcrete and the rock mass in an arched-roof opening. Rock bolts help in better bonding.
Similarly, contact grouting is essential behind the concrete lining to develop a good bond
between the lining and rock mass to arrest its bending. However, bending stresses may
develop in lining within the faults.
Rock has ego (Extraordinary Geological Occurrence) problems. As such, where cracks
appear in the shotcrete lining, more layers of shotcrete should be sprayed. The opening
should also be monitored with the help of borehole extensometers at such locations par-
ticularly in the squeezing ground. If necessary, expert tunnel engineers should be invited
to identify and solve construction problems. At this point in time, NTM does not suggest
the tunnel instrumentation in hard rocks, unlike NATM.
In the over-stressed brittle hard rocks, rock anchors should be installed to make the
reinforced rock arch a ductile arch. Thus, a mode of failure is designed to be ductile from
the brittle failure. Hence, failure would be slow giving enough time for local strengthening
(or retroﬁtting) of the existing support system.
10.4 DESIGN OF STEEL FIBER REINFORCED SHOTCRETE
Wet process SFRS has the following advantages (Barton et al., 1992).
(i) high application-capacity rate upto 25 m3 per hour,
(ii) efﬁcient reinforcement,
Table 10.2 Recommended support based upon NGI rock mass quality Q (Hoek & Brown, 1980).
Rock mass quality Q or Qw or Qav or
Qseismic
Equivalent dimension (Span/ESR)
Block size (RQD/Jn)
Inter-block strength (Jr/Jn)
Approx. support pressure (proof ), MPa
Spot reinforcement with untensioned
grouted dowels
Untensioned grouted dowels on grid
pattern
Tensioned rock bolts on grid with
spacing
Chainlink mesh anchored to bolts at
intermediate points
Shotcrete applied directly to rock,
thickness indicated
Shotcrete reinforced with weld-mesh,
thickness indicated
Unreinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Steel reinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Notes by Barton et al. (1974)
Notes by Hoek and Brown (1980)
1000–400
20–100
<0.001
≤
1
a
400–100
12–88
0.005
≤
1
a
100–40
8.5–19
>20
0.025
≤
1
a
100–40
8.5–19
>20
0.025
2.5–3 m
100–40
14–30
>30
0.025
2–3 m
100–40
14–30
>30
0.025
1.5–2 m
≤
b
100–40
23–72
>30
0.025
2–3 m
100–40
23–72
>30
0.025
1.5–2 m
≤
b
40–10
5–14
>10
>1.5
0.05
≤
2
40–10
5–14
>10
<1.5
0.05
1.5–2 m
2
40–10
5–14
>10
>1.5
0.05
1.5–2 m
2
40–10
5–14
>10
<1.5
0.05
1.5–2 m
20–30 mm
2
40–10
15–23
>10
0.05
1.5–2 m
≤
2,3
b
40–10
15–23
>10
0.05
1.5–2 m
50–100 mm
2,3
c
40–10
9–15
0.05
1.5–2 m
≤
2,4
b
40–10
15–40
>10
0.05
1.5–2 m
≤
2,3,5
b
40–10
15–40
>10
0.05
1.5–2 m
50–100 mm
2,3,5
c
Continued
Table 10.2—Continued
Rock mass quality Q or Qw or Qav or
Qseismic
Equivalent dimension (Span/ESR)
Block size (RQD/Jn)
Inter-block strength (Jr/Jn)
Approx. support pressure (proof ), MPa
Spot reinforcement with untensioned
grouted dowels
Untensioned grouted dowels on grid
pattern
Tensioned rock bolts on grid with
spacing
Chainlink mesh anchored to bolts at
intermediate points
Shotcrete applied directly to rock,
thickness indicated
Shotcrete reinforced with weld-mesh,
thickness indicated
Unreinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Steel reinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Notes by Barton et al. (1974)
Notes by Hoek and Brown (1980)
40–10
30–65
>15
0.05
1.5–2 m
≤
2,6,7,13
b
40–10
30–65
>15
0.05
1.5–2 m
50–100 mm
2,6,7,13
c
10–4
3.5–9
>30
0.10
≤
2
a
10–4
3.5–9
>10<30
0.10
1–1.5 m
2
10–4
6–9
<10
0.10
1–1.5 m
20–30 mm
2
10–4
<6
<10
0.10
20–30 mm
2
10–4
10–15
>5
0.10
1–1.5 m
≤
2,4
a
10–4
7–10
>5
0.10
1–1.5 m
≤
2
a
10–4
10–15
<5
0.10
1–1.5 m
20–30 mm
2,4
10–4
7–10
<5
0.10
1–1.5 m
20–30 mm
2
10–4
20–29
0.10
1–2 m
100–150 mm
2,3,5
c
10–4
12–20
0.10
1–1.5 m
50–100 mm
2,3
c
10–4
35–52
0.10
1–2 m
200–250 mm
2,6,7,13
c
10–4
24–35
0.10
1–2 m
100–200 mm
2,3,5,13
c
4–1
2.1–6.5
>12.5
<0.75
0.15
1 m
20–30 mm
2
4–1
2.1–6.5
>12.5
<0.75
0.15
20–30 mm
2
4–1
2.1–6.5
<0.75
0.15
1 m
2
4–1
4.5–11.5
>10
<30>1
0.15
1 m
≤
2
a
4–1
4.5–11.5
<10
>1
0.15
25–75 mm
2
4–1
4.5–11.5
<30
<1
0.15
1 m
25–50 mm
2
c
4–1
4.5–11.5
>30
0.15
1 m
2
4–1
15–24
0.15
1–1.5 m
100–150 mm
2,3,5,8
c
4–1
8–15
0.15
1–1.5 m
50–100 mm
2
c
4–1
30–46
0.15
1–1.5 m
150–300 mm
2,6,7,13
c
4–1
18–30
0.15
1–1.5 m
100–150 mm
2,3,5
c
1–0.4
1.5–4.2
>10
>0.5
0.225
1 m
≤
2
d
1–0.4
1.5–4.2
<10
>0.5
0.225
1 m
50 mm
2
c
1–0.4
1.5–4.2
<0.5
0.225
1 m
50 mm
2
c
1–0.4
3.2–7.5
0.225
1 m
50–75 mm
14,11,12
c
1–0.4
3.2–7.5
0.225
1 m
25–50 mm
2,10
1–0.4
12–18
0.225
1 m
75–100 mm
2,10
c
1–0.4
6–12
0.225
1 m
50–75 mm
2,10
c
1–0.4
12–18
0.225
1 m
200–400 mm
14,11,12
c
1–0.4
6–12
0.225
1 m
100–200 mm
14,11,12
c
1–0.4
30–38
0.225
1 m
300–400 mm
2,5,6,10,13
c,f
1–0.4
20–30
0.225
1 m
200–300 mm
2,3,5,10,13
c
1–0.4
15–20
0.225
1 m
150–200 mm
1,3,10,13
c
1–0.4
15–38
0.225
1 m
300 mm–1 m
5,9,10,12,13
0.4–0.1
1–3.1
>5
>0.25
0.3
1 m
20–30 mm
0.4–0.1
1–3.1
<5
>0.25
0.3
1 m
50 mm
c
0.4–0.1
1–3.1
<0.25
0.3
1 m
50 mm
c
0.4–0.1
2.2–6
>5
0.3
1 m
25–50 mm
10
c
0.4–0.1
2.2–6
<5
0.3
50–75 mm
10
c
0.4–0.1
2.2–6
0.3
1 m
50–75 mm
9,11,12
c
0.4–0.1
4–14.5
>4
0.3
1 m
50–125 mm
10
c
0.4–0.1
4–14.5
<4>1.5
0.3
75–250 mm
10
c
0.4–0.1
4–14.5
<1.5
0.3
1 m
200–400 mm
10,12
c
0.4–0.1
4–14.5
0.3
1 m
300–500 mm
9,11,12
0.4–0.1
20–34
0.3
1 m
400–600 mm
3,5,10,12,13
f
0.4–0.1
11–20
0.3
1 m
200–400 mm
4,5,10,12,13
c
0.4–0.1
11–34
0.3
1 m
400 mm–1.2 m
5,9,11,12,13
Continued
Table 10.2—Continued
Rock mass quality Q or Qw or Qav or
Qseismic
Equivalent dimension (Span/ESR)
Block size (RQD/Jn)
Inter-block strength (Jr/Jn)
Approx. support pressure (proof ), MPa
Spot reinforcement with untensioned
grouted dowels
Untensioned grouted dowels on grid
pattern
Tensioned rock bolts on grid with
spacing
Chainlink mesh anchored to bolts at
intermediate points
Shotcrete applied directly to rock,
thickness indicated
Shotcrete reinforced with weld-mesh,
thickness indicated
Unreinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Steel reinforced cast concrete arch,
thickness indicated
Notes by Barton et al. (1974)
Notes by Hoek and Brown (1980)
0.1–0.01
1–3.9
>2
0.6
1 m
25–50 mm
10
c
0.1–0.01
1–3.9
<2
0.6
50–100 mm
10
c
0.1–0.01
1–3.9
0.6
75–150 mm
9,11
c
0.1–0.01
2–11
>2
>0.25
0.6
1 m
50–75 mm
10
c
0.1–0.01
2–11
<0.25
0.6
150–250 mm
10
c
0.1–0.01
2–11
0.6
1 m
200–600 mm
9,11,12
0.1–0.01
15–28
0.6
1 m
300–1 m
3,10,12,13
c,f
0.1–0.01
15–28
0.6
1 m
600 mm–2 m
3,9,11,12,13
0.1–0.01
6.5–15
0.6
1 m
200–750 mm
4,10,12,13
c,f
0.1–0.01
6.5–15
0.6
1 m
400 mm–1.5 m
3,9,11,12,13
0.01–0.001
1–2
1.2
100–200 mm
10
c
0.01–0.001
1–2
1.2
0.5–1 m
100–200 mm
9,11,12
c
0.01–0.001
1–6.5
1.2
200–600 mm
10
c,f
0.01–0.001
1–6.5
1.2
0.5–1 m
200–600 mm
9,11,12
c,f
0.01–0.001
10–20
1.2
1–3 m
10–14
0.01–0.001
10–20
1.2
1 m
1–3 m
3,9,11,12,14
0.01–0.001
4–10
1.2
700 mm–2 m
10,14
c,f
0.01–0.001
4–10
1.2
1 m
700 mm–2 m
4,9,10,11,14
c,f
Norwegian method of tunnelling 141
Table 10.3 Summary of recommended shotcrete applications in tunnelling, for different rock mass conditions.
Rock mass description
Rock mass behavior
Support requirement
Shotcrete application
Massive metamorphic or
igneous rock. Low stress
conditions
No spalling, slabbing or failure
None
None
Massive sedimentary rock.
Low stress conditions
Surfaces of some shales, siltstones,
or claystones may slake as a result
of moisture content change
Sealing surface to prevent
slaking
Apply 25 mm thickness of plain shotcrete
to permanent surfaces as soon as
possible after excavation. Repair
shotcrete damage due to blasting
Massive rock with single
wide fault or shear zone
Fault gouge may be weak and
erodible and may cause stability
problems in adjacent jointed rock
Provision of support and
surface sealing in
vicinity or weak fault or
shear zone
Remove weak material to a depth equal to
width of fault or shear zone and grout
rebar into adjacent sound rock. Weld
mesh can be used if required to provide
temporary rockfall support. Fill void
with plain shotcrete. Extend steel ﬁber
reinforced shotcrete laterally for at least
width or gouge zone
Massive metamorphic or
igneous rock. High stress
conditions
Surface slabbing, spalling and
possible rockburst damage
Retention of broken rock
and control of rock
mass dilation
Apply 50 mm shotcrete over weld mesh
anchored behind bolt faceplates, or
apply 50 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete on rock and install rock bolts
with faceplates; then apply second
25 mm shotcrete layer
Extend shotcrete application down
sidewalls where required
Continued
142 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 10.3—Continued
Rock mass description
Rock mass behavior
Support requirement
Shotcrete application
Massive sedimentary
rock. High stress
conditions
Surface slabbing, spalling and
possible squeezing in shales and
soft rocks
Retention of broken
rock and control of
squeezing
Apply 75 mm layer of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
directly on clean rock. Rock bolts or dowels are
also needed for additional support
Metamorphic or igneous
rock with a few widely
spaced joints. Low
stress conditions
Potential for wedges or blocks to fall
or slide due to gravity loading.
Provision of support in
addition to that
available from rock
bolts or cables
Apply 50 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete to
rock surfaces on which joint traces are exposed
Sedimentary rock with a
few widely spaced
bedding planes and
joints, low stress
conditions
Potential for wedges or blocks to fall
or slide due to gravity loading.
Bedding plane exposures may
deteriorate in time
Provision of support in
addition to that
available from rock
bolts or cables.
Sealing or weak
bedding plane
exposures
Apply 50 mm of steel ﬁbre reinforced shotcrete
on rock surface on which discontinuity traces
are exposed, with particular attention to
bedding plane traces
Jointed metamorphic or
igneous rock. High
stress conditions
Combined structural and stress
controlled failures around
opening boundary
Retention of broken
rock and control of
rock mass dilation
Apply 75 mm plain shotcrete over weld mesh
anchored behind bolt faceplates or apply
75 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete on
rock, install rock bolts with faceplates and then
apply second 25 mm shotcrete layer
Thicker shotcrete layers may be required at high
stress concentrations
Bedded and jointed weak
sedimentary rock. High
stress conditions
Slabbing, spalling and possibly
squeezing
Control of rock mass
failure and
squeezing
Apply 75 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete to
clean rock surfaces as soon as possible, install
rock bolts, with faceplates, through shotcrete,
apply second 75 mm shotcrete layer
Norwegian method of tunnelling 143
Highly jointed
metamorphic or
igneous rock. Low
stress conditions
Revelling or small wedges and
blocks deﬁned by intersecting
joints
Prevention of
progressive
ravelling
Apply 50 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete on clean rock surface in roof of
excavation
Rock bolts or dowels may be needed for
additional support for large blocks
Highly jointed and bedded
sedimentary rock. Low
stress conditions
Bed separation in wide span
excavations and revelling or
bedding traces in inclined faces
Control of bed
separation and
ravelling
Rock bolts or dowels required to control bed
separation
Apply 75 mm of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete to
bedding plane traces before bolting
Heavily jointed igneous or
metamorphic rock,
conglomerates or
cemented rock ﬁll.
High stress conditions
Squeezing and “plastic” ﬂow of rock
mass around opening
Control of rock mass
failure and dilation
Apply 100 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete as soon as possible and install
rock bolts, with faceplates, through
shotcrete. Apply additional 50 mm of
shotcrete if required. Extend support down
sidewall if necessary
Heavily jointed
sedimentary rock with
clay coated surfaces.
High stress conditions
Squeezing and “plastic” ﬂow of rock
mass around opening. Clay rich
rocks may swell
Control of rock mass
failure and dilation
Apply 50 mm of steel ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete as soon as possible, install lattice
girders or light steel sets, with invert struts
where required, then more steel ﬁber
reinforced shotcrete to cover sets or girders.
Forepoling or spiling may be required to
stabilize face ahead of excavation
Mild rockburst conditions
in massive rock
subjected to high stress
conditions
Spalling, slabbing and mild
rockbursts
Retention of broken
rock and control of
failure propagation
Apply 50 to 100 mm of shotcrete over mesh or
cable lacing which is ﬁrmly attached to the
rock surface by means of yielding rock
bolts or cablebolts
144 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(iii) lesser rebound in the range of 5–10% which is lower than that in the dry process,
(iv) uniform and high quality SFRS,
(v) less dust than in dry process,
(vi) no mesh is needed and so no air gaps behind shotcrete,
(vii) low permeability due to low water–cement ratio,
(viii) no corrosion of short-stainless steel ﬁbers and
(ix) cost-effective in long tunnels or large caverns. However, technology calls for
skilled workers, engineering geologists and rock engineers.
It can be noted that compression structures have longer life than the tension structures.
The analysis shows that the shotcrete with good bond with the homogeneous rock mass
is likely to be in compression in the tunnels with arched roof. Thus structures may have
long life upto 60 years in dry rock masses.
Since the early 1980s, wet mix steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) together with
rock bolts have been the main components of a permanent rock support in underground
openings in Norway. Based on the experience, Grimstad and Barton (1993) suggested a
different support design chart using the SFRS on the basis of 1260 case records as shown in
Fig. 10.2. This chart is recommended for tunnelling in poor rock conditions and moderate
squeezing ground conditions also.
Shear zones are encountered in the underground openings specially in the tectonically
disturbed geological conditions. The average value of rock mass quality Qav is estimated
as suggested by Bhasin et al. (1995) in Section 28.7. This value is then used in Table 10.2
and Fig. 10.2 for designing the support system in the neighborhood of shear zones. In
fact, the rock masses are classiﬁed into various grades I, II, III, etc. at the tunnel projects.
The drawings of temporary and or permanent support systems are prepared for all grades
in advance of tunnelling. This is called ﬂexible and robust planning strategy. Thus, all
that is needed is on-the-spot decision of choice of the support system according to actual
tunnelling conditions.
Supplementary notes by Barton et al. (1974):
(i) The type of support used in extremely good and exceptionally good rock will
depend upon the blasting technique. Smooth wall blasting and thorough scaling-
down may remove the need for support. Rough wall blasting may result in the
need for a quick single application of shotcrete, especially where the excavation
height exceeds 25 m.
(ii) For cases of heavy rock bursting or “popping,” tensioned bolts with enlarged
bearing plates often used, with spacing of about 1 m (occasionally 0.8 m). Final
support is installed when “popping” activity ceases.
(iii) Several bolt lengths often used in same excavation, i.e., 3, 5 and 7 m.
(iv) Several bolt lengths often used in same excavation, i.e., 2, 3 and 4 m.
Norwegian method of tunnelling 145
Exceptionally 
poor
Extremely
poor
Very
poor 
Poor
Fair
Good
V.
good
Ext.
good
Exc.
good
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100
1000
1
2
100
50
10
5
25cm
1m
1.3m
1.6m
2.0m
2.7m
3.5m
1m
1.2m
1.3m
1.5m
1.7m
2.1m
2.3m
2.5m
9)
8)
7)
6)
5)
4)
3)
2)
1)
15cm
12cm
9cm
5cm
4cm
20
1.5
2.4
3.0
5.0
7.0
11.0
20.0
Bolt spacing in unshotcreted area
Bolt spacing in shotcreted area
Bolt Length in m for ESR = 1
Rock Mass Quality Q = RQD
_____
Jn
×
Jr
_____
Ja
×
Jw
_____
SRF
REINFORCEMENT CATEGORIES
1)  Unsupported
2)  Spot bolting, sb
3)  Systematic bolting, B
4)  Systematic bolting (and unreinforced
     4 to10cm, B(+S)shotcrete,
5)  Fiber reinforced shotcrete and bolting,
     5 to 9cm, S(fr)+B
6)  Fiber reinforced shotcrete and bolting,
     9 to 12cm, S(fr)+B
7)  Fiber reinforced shotcrete and bolting,
     12 to 15cm, S(fr)+B
8)  Fiber reinforced shotcrete > 15cm, reinforced
     ribs of shotcrete and bolting, S(fr), RRS+B
9)  Cast concrete lining,CCA
Equivalent Dimension =
Span or Height in m
ESR
Fig. 10.2
Chart for the design of SFRS support (Grimstad & Barton, 1993).
(v) Tensioned cable anchors often used to supplement bolt support pressures. Typical
spacing 2 to 4 m.
(vi) Several bolt lengths often used in same excavation, i.e. 6, 8 and 10 m.
(vii) Tensioned cable anchors often used to supplement bolt support pressures. Typical
spacing 4 to 6 m.
(viii) Several older generation power stations in this category employ systematic or
spot bolting with chain link mesh, and a concrete arch roof (250–400 mm) as a
permanent support.
(ix) Cases involving swelling, for instance montmorillonite clay (with access to
water). Room for expansion behind the support is used in cases of heavy swelling.
Drainage measures are used where possible.
(x) Cases not involving swelling clay or squeezing rock.
(xi) Cases involving squeezing rock. Heavy rigid support is generally used as a
permanent support.
(xii) According to the experience of Barton et al. (1974), in cases of swelling or
squeezing, the temporary support required before concrete (or shotcrete) arches
146 Tunnelling in weak rocks
are formed, may consist of bolting (tensioned shell-expansion type) if the value of
RQD/Jn is sufﬁciently high (i.e., >1.5), possibly combined with shotcrete. If the
rock mass is very heavily jointed or crushed (i.e., RQD/Jn < 1.5, for example
a “sugar cube” shear zone in quartzite), then the temporary support may consist
of up to several applications of layers of shotcrete to reduce the uneven loading
on the concrete. But it may not be effective when RQD/Jn < 1.5 or when a lot
of clay is present, unless the bolts are grouted before tensioning. A sufﬁcient
length of anchored bolt might also be obtained using quick setting resin anchors
in these extremely poor quality rock masses. Serious occurrences of swelling
and/or squeezing rock may require that the concrete arches be taken right up to
the face, possibly using a shield as temporary shuttering. Temporary support of
the working face may also be required in these cases.
(xiii) For reasons of safety the multiple drift method will be often needed during
excavation and supporting of roof arch. For Span/ESR > 15 only.
(xiv) Multiple drift method usually needed during excavation and support of arch, walls
and ﬂoor in cases of heavy squeezing. For Span/ESR > 10 in exceptionally poor
rock only.
Supplementary notes by Hoek and Brown (1980):
a. In Scandinavia, the use of “Perfobolts” is common. These are perforated hollow
tubes which are ﬁlled with grout and inserted into drillholes. The grout is extruded
to ﬁll the annular space around the tube when a piece of reinforcing rod is pushed
into the grout ﬁlling the tube. Obviously, there is no way in which these devices
can be tensioned although it is common to thread the end of the reinforcing rod and
place a normal bearing plate or washer and nut on this end (see Fig. 12.4).
In North America, the use of “Perfobolts” is rare. In mining applications a device
known as a “Split set” or “Friction set” (developed by Scott) has become pop-
ular. This is a split tube which is forced into a slightly smaller diameter hole
than the outer diameter of the tube. The friction between the steel tube and the
rock, particularly when the steel rusts, acts in the same way as the grout around
a reinforcing rod. For temporary support these devices are very effective (see
Fig. 12.5).
In Australian mines, untensioned grouted reinforcement is installed by pumping
thick grout into drillholes and then simply pushing a piece threaded reinforcing rod
into the grout. The grout is thick enough to remain in an up-hole during placing of
the rod.
b. Chain link mesh is sometimes used to catch small pieces of rock which can become
loose with time. It should be attached to the rock at intervals between 1 and 1.5 m
and short grouted pins can be used between bolts. Galvanized chain link mesh
should be used where it is intended to be permanent, e.g., in an underground
powerhouse.
Norwegian method of tunnelling 147
c. Weld mesh, consisting of steel wires set on a square pattern and welded at each
intersection, should be used for the reinforcement of shotcrete since it allows
easy access of the shotcrete to the rock. Chain link mesh should never be used for
this purpose since the shotcrete cannot penetrate all the spaces between the wires,
and air pockets are formed with consequent rusting of the wire. When choosing
weld mesh, it is important that the mesh can be handled by one or two men working
from the top of a high-lift vehicle and hence the mesh should not be too heavy.
Typically, 4.2 mm diam. wires set at 100 mm intervals (designated 100 × 4.2 weld
mesh) are used for reinforcing shotcrete.
d. In poorer quality rock, the use of untensioned grouted dowels as recommended by
Barton et al. (1974) depends upon the immediate installation of these reinforcing
elements behind the face. This depends upon integrating the support drilling and
installation into the drill–blast–muck cycle and many non-Scandinavian contrac-
tors are not prepared to consider this system. When it is impossible to ensure that
untensioned grouted dowels are going to be installed immediately behind the face,
consideration should be given to use tensioned rock bolts which can be grouted at a
later stage. This ensures that support is available during the critical excavation stage.
e. Many contractors would consider that a 200 mm thick cast concrete arch is too
difﬁcult to construct because there is not enough room between the shutter and the
surrounding rock to permit easy access for pouring concrete and placing vibrators.
The US Army Corps of Engineers suggests 10 in. (254 mm) as a normal minimum
thickness while some contractors prefer 300 mm.
f. Barton et al. (1974) suggested shotcrete thicknesses of up to 2 m. This would require
manyseparateapplicationsandmanycontractorswouldregardshotcretethicknesses
of this magnitude as both impractical and uneconomical, preferring to cast concrete
arches instead. A strong argument in favor of shotcrete is that it can be placed
very close to the face and hence can be used to provide early support in poor
quality rock masses. Many contractors would argue that a 50 to 100 mm layer is
generally sufﬁcient for this purpose, particularly when used in conjunction with
tensioned rock bolts as indicated by Barton et al. (1974), and that the placing of
a cast concrete lining at a later stage would be a more effective way to tackle the
problem. Obviously, the ﬁnal choice will depend upon the unit rates for concreting
and shotcreting offered by the contractor and, if the shotcrete is cheaper, upon a
practical demonstration by the contractor that he can actually place shotcrete to this
thickness.
In North America, the use of concrete or shotcrete linings of up to 2 m thickness
would be considered unusual and a combination of heavy steel sets and concrete
would normally be used to achieve the high support pressures required in a very
poor ground.
Further recommendations on the application of shotcrete in different rock mass
conditions are given in Table 10.3.
148 Tunnelling in weak rocks
10.5 DRAINAGE MEASURES
The drainage system should be fully designed before the construction of a tunnel and
cavern. NATM (New Austrian Tunnelling Method) and NMT specify drainage measures
also. For example, radial gaps are left unshotcreted for drainage of seepage in the case of
hard rock mass which is charged with water.
Very often one may observe that the seepage of water is concentrated to only one or
just a few, often tubular, openings in ﬁssures and joints. It may be worthwhile to install
temporary drainage pipes in such areas before applying the shotcrete. These pipes can
be plugged when the shotcrete has gained sufﬁcient strength. Further Swellex (inﬂated
tubular) bolts are preferred in water-charged rock masses. Cement grouted bolts are not
feasible here, as grout will be washed out. Resin grout may not also be reliable. It may be
mentioned that the seals used in the concrete lining for preventing seepage in the road/rail
tunnels may not withstand heavy water pressure.
The pressure tunnels are grouted generally all round its periphery so that the ring of
grouted rock mass is able to withstand heavy ground water pressure. Polyurethane may be
used as grout in rock joints under water as it swells 26 times and cements the rock mass.
10.6 EXPERIENCES IN POOR ROCK CONDITIONS
Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) has proved very successful in the 6.5 km long tun-
nel for the Uri Hydel Project and desilting underground chambers of NJPC in Himalaya.
The main advantage is that a small thickness of SFRS is needed. No weld mesh is
required to reinforce the shotcrete. Provided that the shotcrete is graded and sprayed
properly, there is less rebound, thanks to the steel ﬁbers. This method is now economical,
safer and faster than the conventional shotcrete. Contour blasting technique is adopted
to excavate the tunnel where SFRS is to be used (Section 11.8.7). Further, selection
of right ingredients and tight quality control over application are the key to success
of SFRS.
Experience with the use of mesh (weld mesh, etc.) has been unsatisfactory when
there were overbreaks in the tunnel after blasting. In these cases, soon after the weld
mesh was spread between bolts and shotcrete, the mesh started rebounding the shotcrete
and it could not penetrate inside the mesh and ﬁll the gap between the mesh and the
overbreak. Consequently, gaps were left above the shotcrete; the sound when a hammer
was struck indicated the hollow areas above the mesh. Further, loosely ﬁtted welded wire
mesh vibrates as a result of blast vibrations, causing subsequent loosening of the shotcrete
(Fig. 28.1a).
Because the overall experience with mesh-reinforced shotcrete has been unsatisfactory
in handling overbreak situations, it is recommended that mesh with plain shotcrete should
not be used where uneven surface of tunnel is available due to high overbreaks. In such
cases, the thickness of shotcrete should be increased sufﬁciently (say by 10 mm).
Norwegian method of tunnelling 149
10.7 CONCLUDING REMARKS
(i) In a poor rock mass, the support capacity of the rock bolts (or anchors) is small in
comparison to that of shotcrete and SFRS which is generally the main element of
the long-term support system for resisting heavy support pressures in tunnels in
weak rock masses.
(ii) The untensioned full-column grouted bolts (called anchors) are more effective than
pre-tensioned rock bolts in supporting weak rock masses.
(iii) The design experience suggests that the thickness of SFRS is about half of the
thickness of plain shotcrete without reinforcement.
(iv) The SFRS has been used successfully in mild and moderate squeezing ground
conditions and tectonically disturbed rock masses with thin shear zones.
(v) The NTM is based on philosophy of NATM to form a load bearing ring all round
a tunnel. NTM offers site speciﬁc design tables for plain shotcrete and a design
chart for SFRS. It is recommended that tunnel engineers should take the beneﬁt of
extensive experiences of the past NATM and the modern NTM.
Example 1
In a major hydroelectric project in the dry quartzitic phyllite, the rock mass quality is
found to be in the range of 6 – 10. The joint roughness number Jr is 1.5 and the joint
alteration number Ja is 1.0 for critically oriented joint in the underground machine hall.
The width of the cavern is 25 m, height is 50 m and the roof is arched. The overburden is
450 m. Suggest a design of support system.
The average rock mass quality is (6×10)1/2 = 8 (approx). The overburden above
the crown is less than 350 (8)1/3 = 700 m. Hence the rock mass is non-squeezing. The
correction factor for overburden f = 1 + (450−320)/800 = 1.16. The correction for tunnel
closure f ′ = 1.0. Short-term support pressure in roof from equation (5.6) is (f ′′ = 1)
= (0.2/1.5)(5 × 8)−1/3 1.16 = 0.045 MPa
Short-term wall support pressure is
= (0.2/1.5)(5 × 2.5 × 8)−1/3 1.16 = 0.033 MPa (practically negligible)
Ultimate support pressure in roof from equation (5.10) is given by
proof = (0.2/1.5)(8)−1/3 1.16 = 0.077 MPa
Ultimate wall support pressure is (see Section 5.6) given by
pwall = (0.2/1.5)(2.5 × 8)−1/3 1.16 = 0.057 MPa
The modulus of deformation of the rock mass is given by equation (5.13),
Ed = (8)0.36(450)0.2 = 7.0 GPa
150 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The ESR is 1.0 for important structures. Fig. 10.2 gives the following support system
in the roof,
Bolt length
= 6 m
Bolt spacing
= 2.2 m
Thickness of SFRS = 90 mm
Fig. 10.2 is also useful in recommending the following wall support system of the
cavern (Q = 2.5 × 8 = 20, ESR = 1, H = 50 m)
Bolt length
= 11 m
Bolt spacing
= 2.5 m
Thickness of SFRS = 70 mm
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Grimstad, E., Aas, G., Opsahl, O. A., Bakken, A., Pederson, L. and Johansen, E. D.
(1992). Norwegian method of tunnelling. World Tunnelling, June and August, 1992.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Barton, N. (2001). Personal Communication to Dr. R. K. Goel.
Bhasin, R., Singh, R. B., Dhawan, A. K. and Sharma, V. M. (1995). Geotechnical evaluation and
a review of remedial measures in limiting deformations in distressed zones in a power-
house cavern. Conf. on Design and construction of underground structures, New Delhi,
India, 145-152.
Fairhurst, C. (1993), Analysis and design in rock mechanics – the general context. Comprehensive
Rock Engineering, Chapter 1, 3, 1-29.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating of the Q-system for NMT. Int. Symposium on
Sprayed Concrete – Modern Use of Wet Mix Sprayed Concrete for Underground Support,
Eds: Kompen, Opsahl and Berg, Fagernes, Norwegian Concrete Association, Oslo.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavations in Rock. Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy, London, UK.
11
Blasting for tunnels and roadways∗
“An approximate solution to the right problem is more desirable than a precise solution to
the wrong problem.”
U.S. Army (1971)
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Excavations of mine roadways, drifts and tunnels are common features in mining and civil
engineering projects. In the absence of initial free face, solid blasting method is employed
for excavation of tunnels, drifts and mine roadways, which have many similarities in con-
ﬁgurations and in different cycles of operation followed during excavation. Henceforth,
for convenience, such blasting will be termed as tunnel blasting. Extensive knowledge
has been gained in mining which is relevant to the tunnelling.
In tunnelling, a greater proportion of world’s annual advance is still achieved by
drilling and blasting. While suffering from the inherent disadvantages of damaging the
rock mass, drilling and blasting has an unmatched degree of ﬂexibility and can over-
come the limitations of machine excavations by tunnel boring machine (TBM) or road
headers. In spite of no major technical breakthrough, the advantages like low investment,
availability of cheap chemical energy in the form of explosives, easy acceptability to the
practicing engineers, the least depreciation and wide versatility have collectively made
the drilling and blasting technique prevail so far over the mechanical excavation methods.
The trend seems to continue in the near future, specially in the developing nations.
Blasting for tunnelling is a difﬁcult operation involving both skill and technique.
Since tunnels of different sizes and shapes are excavated in various rock mass condi-
tions, appropriate blast design including drilling pattern, quantity and type of explosive,
initiation sequence is essential to achieve a good advance rate causing minimal damage
to the surrounding rock mass. The cost and time beneﬁt of the excavation are mostly
decided by the rate of advance and undesired damage. Though faster advance at the mini-
mum cost remains a general objective of tunnel blasting, the priorities among the various
∗Contributed by Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Central Mining Research Institute, Regional Centre, Nagpur, India
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
152 Tunnelling in weak rocks
elementary tunnel blast results (such as the speciﬁc explosive consumption, the speciﬁc
drilling, the pull and the overbreak/underbreak) may vary from site to site depending on
the rock conditions. A trend has been set worldwide not to consider the blast results in iso-
lation but in totality with due consideration to the priorities. Decisions to modify the blast
pattern or tunnel conﬁguration may be undertaken with this view to optimize the blasting
practice.
Excavation of tunnels, except in geologically disturbed rock mass conditions, is pre-
ferred with full face blasting. It is common to excavate large tunnels of 80–90 m2 cross
section in sound rock masses by full face in a single round. However, tunnels larger than
50 m2 cross-sectional area driven through incompetent ground condition are generally
excavated in smaller parts and frequently applying the New Austrian Tunnelling Method
(NATM) and the Norwegian Tunnelling Method (NTM), as discussed in Chapters 9
and 10, respectively. Drilling jumbos are ﬁnding increasing application to replace conven-
tional jack hammer drilling, bringing the advantages of reduced drilling time and better
precision.
Introduction of electro-hydraulic jumbo drills with multiple booms, non-electric initi-
ation system, small diameter explosives for contour blasting and fracture control blasting
are some of the recent developments in tunnel blasting. Prediction and monitoring the
blast damage, application of computers in drilling, numerical modelling for advanced
blast design, use of rock engineering systems for optimization and scheduling of activities
have been the areas of intense research in today’s competitive and high-tech tunnelling
world. System approach is being applied nowadays in tunnel blasting to make it more
scientiﬁc, precise, safe and economic.
In tunnel blasting, explosives are required to perform in a difﬁcult condition, as single
free face (in the form of tunnel face) is available in contrast to bench blasting where
at least two free faces exist. Hence, more drilling and explosives are required per unit
volume of rock to be fragmented in the case of tunnel blasting. A second free face, called
“cut”, is created initially during the blasting process and the efﬁciency of tunnel blast
performance largely depends on the proper development of the cut. The factors inﬂuencing
the development of the cut and the overall blast results are dependent on a host of factors
involving rock mass type, blast pattern and the tunnel conﬁgurations. The results are often
found to be below par when a blast pattern is designed with scant regard to the rock mass
properties.
11.2 BLASTING MECHANICS
The tunnel blasting mechanics can be conceptualized in two stages. Initially, a few holes
called cut holes are blasted to develop a free face or void or cut along the tunnel axis.
This represents a solid blasting condition where no initial free face is available. Once
the cut is created, the remaining holes are blasted towards the cut. This stage of blasting
is similar to bench blasting but with larger conﬁnement. The results of tunnel blasting
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 153
depend primarily on the efﬁciency of the cut hole blasting. The ﬁrst charge ﬁred in
cut resembles crater blasting where there is only one free face in the vicinity of the
charge (Fourney, 1993). Livingston’s spherical charge crater theory (Livingston, 1956)
suggests that the blast induced fracturing is dominated by explosion gas pressure which is
supported by Liu and Katsabanis (1998). Since then, a series of crater blasting experiments
were conducted and different concepts have been reported. Duvall and Atchison (1957),
Wilson (1987) and others believe that the stress wave induced radial fracturing is the
dominating cause of blast fragmentation and gas pressure is responsible only for extension
of the fractures developed by the stress wave. Simha et al. (1987) and Hommert et al.
(1987) have similar views.
The natures of inﬂuence of the two pressures i.e., of stress and gas are different in the
jointedrockmasswherethestresswavesareusefulinfragmentationasthejointsrestrictthe
stress wave propagation. The gases, on the other hand, penetrate the joint planes and try to
separate the rock blocks. The fragments’ size and shape in jointed formations are domi-
nated by the gas pressure and the joint characteristics. Forsyth (1993) and Hagan (1995)
supported this concept. The experience in the footwall side blasting of Dongri Buzurg
manganese opencast mine of Manganese Ore India Ltd. supplements this view. A poor
fragmentation was observed due to open joints which resisted the propagation of stress
waves but favored wedging through the joints by gas pressure (Chakraborty et al., 1995b).
The roles of the stress wave and the gas pressures are no different in the second stage
of tunnel blasting. But with the availability of free face, the utilization of stress wave is
increased. The rock breakages by rupturing and by reﬂected tensile stress are more active
in the second stage because of cut formation in the ﬁrst stage.
11.3 BLAST HOLES NOMENCLATURE
The nomenclature of blast holes in different parts of a tunnel section are shown in Fig. 11.1
(Rustan, 1998).
The back holes and the side or rib holes will be referred as contour holes hereinafter.
All the holes except the contour holes are called as production holes.
The ﬁring sequence in tunnel blasting is based on the following principles:
(i) Progressive enlargement of free face and ﬁring of holes towards the maximum
free face.
(ii) Creation of free face towards the bottom of tunnel section so that the maximum
stoping can be done with favor of the gravity. However, the free face may be
positioned towards the middle or the top of the tunnel section to reduce the muck
tightness.
(iii) Maximum free face is made available before the contour holes are blasted so that
the minimum explosive quantity is required to break rock at the contour and the
blast-induced damage is restricted to a bare minimum.
154 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Tunnel face
Back hole
Stoping hole
Side or rib hole
Cut hole
Helper hole
Lifter
Relief hole
Fig. 11.1
Nomenclature of blast holes in different parts of a tunnel section (Rustan, 1998).
11.4 TYPES OF CUT
The cut can be created by blasting pairs of holes drilled at an angle to the tunnel axis.
These cuts are called inclined, convergent or angled cuts and hereinafter will be referred as
convergent cuts. Wedge cut or V-cut and fan cut are the most common of all the convergent
cuts. However, the problem with the convergent cuts is that the depth of cut is always
reduced because of angle and thus the pull is partially lost. Furthermore, the maximum
drilling depth in a convergent cut is dependent on the width of the opening. Hence, not
more than 50–60 percent of the tunnel width can be pulled with the convergent cut.
Sometimes, a cut is created by drilling a number of blast holes parallel to tunnel axis
around one or more empty holes, called relief holes. These holes generally vary from 56
to 100 mm in diameter. Such a cut, called a parallel hole cut, will be referred hereinafter
as a parallel cut. Burn cut, spiral cut and four-section parallel cut are the commonly used
parallel cuts. Hagan (1980) suggested that the relief hole depth should be 0.1–0.15 m
more than that of the blast holes. The void space provided by the relief holes should
be at least 15 percent of the cut volume to accommodate swelling due to fragmentation
(Hagan, 1980; Singh, 1995). The void requirement is less in hard, brittle and unfractured
formations and more in weak and ﬁssured ones. The formations having larger bulking
factor are subjected to more of parallel cut failures because of larger void area requirements
for the expulsion of the fragmented materials. The intial holes in the cut should be ﬁred on
separate delays of 100 ms or more for progressive relief of burden. The parallel cut rounds
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 155
are often accompanied by sympathetic detonation, dynamic pressure desensitization and
freezing. Further, the drilling accuracy plays a major role in the success of a parallel
cut blasting and its importance increases in deeper rounds. To counteract the drilling
error, the blast holes are generally overcharged. Templates or computer controlled jumbo
drilling are used to minimize the deviations. Langefors and Kihlstrom (1973) and Hoek
and Brown (1980) brought out various scopes and advantages with different types of
convergent and parallel cuts.
The void space provided by the relief holes in various rock types and the pull obtained
in some tunnels and drivages are listed in Table 11.1.
It is evident from Table 11.1 that larger void space is required if the formation has
greater RQD or P-wave velocity (Vp).
The main differences between the parallel and convergent cuts are:
(i) The cut depth is always lower in a convergent cut than in a parallel cut as the holes
are drilled at an angle in the convergent cut. Hence, a smaller pull is obtained with
a convergent cut.
(ii) The advance per round in a parallel cut is designed mainly on the basis of the relief
hole size, whereas, the same in a convergent cut is decided by the tunnel size.
(iii) Maintaining proper hole angle is more difﬁcult in a convergent cut.
(iv) The cut holes in a parallel cut need to be placed very close to each other. Hence,
there is a possibility of joining the holes at the bottom, if the deviation cannot be
controlled.
(v) Throw in a parallel cut blasting is directed towards the relief hole side. Hence,
the muck is thrown to a lesser distance. Moreover, the fragments collide due to the
movements in opposite directions and generate more ﬁnes.
Both the parallel cut and the wedge or the convergent cut were practised in coal
development galleries of Saoner mine, inclined drifts of Tandsi Coal Project and
developmental works in the host rock and ore body in Chikla Manganese mine, India
(Chakraborty, 2002). Conventionally, a decrease was observed in the speciﬁc charge and
the speciﬁc drilling while the cut was extended to the full face. It was interesting to note
Table 11.1 Voids provided in parallel cut blasting in different tunnels (Chakraborty, 2002).
S.
qc
Vp
Void by relief holes
Pull
No.
Formation
(MPa)
RQD
(m/s)
in percent of cut area
(%)
1
Coal
23
Closely
jointed, 10
(approx)
954
6–7
0.88
2
Rock 1
29.9
36
2800
8.7
0.75
3
Rock 2
18–46
40.75–91.4
2910–7690
10
0.75
156 Tunnelling in weak rocks
that in all the cases, the rate of reduction in both the speciﬁc charge and the speciﬁc
drilling with the parallel cuts were higher than those with the convergent cuts. Further, the
reduction trend lines for the parallel and the convergent cuts in each tunnel, intersected
when the tunnel area was nearly 25 m2. Subsequently, it was concluded that a parallel cut
should be economically viable when the tunnel area exceeds 25 m2 and a convergent cut
should be economical if the tunnel area was less than 25 m2.
11.5 TUNNEL BLAST PERFORMANCE
The tunnel blast performance is generally measured in terms of one or more than one of
the following blast parameters:
(i) Pull (face advance/depth of round), expressed in percent,
(ii) Speciﬁc charge (kg of explosive/m3 or tons of yield),
(iii) Speciﬁc drilling (m of drilling/m3 or tons of yield), or detonator or hole factor
(number of holes/m3 or tons of yield) and
(iv) Blast-induced rock mass damage and overbreak/underbreak.
The blast-induced damage is measured radially and is expressed in meter. The over-
break and the underbreak are often measured volumetrically in m3 of in situ rock mass.
These may be expressed in percent of the designed volume. However, in many projects,
the permissible limit of overbreak has been deﬁned in terms of width and height of tunnel.
The Swiss Society of Engineers and Architects deﬁnes the permissible overbreak limit as
0.07√A, where A is the tunnel area or 0.4 m whichever is less (Innaurato et al., 1998).
All the above mentioned blast performances jointly contribute to the safety, progress
rate and economy of the tunnelling operation.
11.6 PARAMETERS INFLUENCING TUNNEL BLAST RESULTS
The parameters inﬂuencing the tunnel blast results may be classiﬁed in three groups:
(i) Non-controllable – Rock mass properties,
(ii) Semi-controllable – (a) Tunnel geometry,
(b) Operating factors and
(iii) Controllable – Blast design parameters including the explosive properties.
11.6.1 Rock mass properties
The results of rock blasting are affected more by rock properties than by any other variables
(Hagan, 1995). As the mean spacing between the joints, ﬁssures or the cracks decreases,
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 157
the importance of rock material strength decreases while that of the rock mass strength
increases. The blasts are required to create many new cracks in a rock mass with widely
spaced joints. In a closely ﬁssured rock mass, on the other hand, generation of new cracks
is not needed and the fragmentation is achieved by the explosion gas pressure which opens
the joints to transform a large rock mass into several loose blocks. The tunnel blasting
efﬁciency is affected to a lesser degree by other rock mass properties like the internal
friction, grain size and porosity. Jorgenson and Chung (1987) and Singh (1991) opined
that the blast results are inﬂuenced directly by the overall rock mass strength. Chakraborty
et al. (1998b) suggested strength ratings (SR) based on the uniaxial compressive strength
(UCS) of rock to correlate the speciﬁc charge in a tunnel. Interestingly, it is experienced
that the inﬂuence of strength on the speciﬁc charge is comparatively lower at the higher
strength values.
Ibarra et al. (1996) observed in a tunnel that Barton’s rock mass quality (Q) and
speciﬁc charge in the contour holes have signiﬁcant effect on overbreak. Chakraborty
et al. (1996a) reported some typical observations in the tunnels of Koyna Hydroelectric
Project, Stage IV, Maharashtra, India, through Deccan trap formations consisting of com-
pact basalts, amygdolaidal basalts and volcanic breccias. Poor pull and small overbreak
were observed in volcanic breccia having low Q value, P-wave velocity and modulus of
elasticity. On the other hand, large overbreak on the sides due to vertical and sub-vertical
joints and satisfactory pull were reported in the compact basalts having comparatively
much higher Q value, P-wave velocity and modulus of elasticity. The fact is attributed to
the presence of well-deﬁned joints in compact basalts which is absent in volcanic breccia.
The effects of joint orientations on overbreak/underbreak and pull in heading and
benching operations during tunnel excavations are explained by Johansen (1998) in
Figs 11.2 to 11.6.
A) Heading
Fig. 11.2
Joints normal to tunnel direction favorable for good pull (Johansen, 1998).
158 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Fig. 11.3
Poor advance with joints striking parallel to tunnel advance direction (Johansen, 1998).
Fig. 11.4
Right side wall more prone to breakage due to obtuse angle between joints and tunnel
direction (Johansen, 1998).
B) Benching
The dip direction of the blasted strata on pull could be well experienced while blasting
in the development faces of Saoner coal mine where the pull was increased by 11 percent
in the rise galleries compared to that in the dip galleries (Chakraborty, 2002).
Longer rounds in tunnels can be pulled when the dominant joint sets are normal to
the tunnel axis as shown in Fig. 11.2. Whereas, better pull can be obtained in shaft
sinking if the discontinuities are parallel to the line joining the apex of the Vs in a V-cut,
Hagan (1984).
Chakraborty (2002) observed the following inﬂuences of joint directions on pull and
overbreak (Table 11.2).
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 159
Fig. 11.5
Bench blasting with joints dipping towards the free face (Johansen, 1998). Advantages:
Good forward movement of muck and reduced toe; Disadvantages: Large backbreak, poor contour
and slope control problems.
Fig. 11.6
Bench blasting with joints dipping away from the free face (Johansen, 1998). Advan-
tages: Small backbreak; Disadvantages: Restricted forward movement, tight muck pile and
increased toe.
Table 11.2 Inﬂuence of joint direction on overbreak (Chakraborty, 2002).
Joint orientation
Strike with respect to
Dip
tunnel axis
Face advance
Roof overbreak
Steep
Parallel
Very poor
Very small
Steep
Across
Very good
Very large
Gentle
Across
Fair
Large
Moderate
Across/oblique
Good
Small
160 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The gentle, moderate and steeply dipping joint planes signify the dip angles as 0–30◦,
30–60◦and 60–90◦, respectively. Similarly, strikes with respect to tunnel axis are men-
tioned as parallel, oblique and across to indicate that the joint strike intersection angle
with the tunnel axis as 0–30◦, 30–60◦and 60–90◦respectively.
If the geo-mechanical properties of the constituting formations of a tunnel are
quite different, the stress energy utilization and resulting fragmentation are adversely
affected. Chakraborty et al. (1996b) suggested an increase of speciﬁc charge by a
percent equal to ten times the number of contact surfaces of various constituting rock
formations.
11.6.2 Tunnel size
The speciﬁc charge and the speciﬁc drilling in tunnel blasting are inversely proportional
to the tunnel cross-sectional area (Figs 11.7 and 11.8). It is apparent from these ﬁgures
that the reduction rates of these blast results are intensely steep in small tunnels of cross-
sectional area up to 10 m2 and utterly mild in large tunnels exceeding 35 m2 size.
Based on speciﬁc charge and speciﬁc drilling performances, tunnels can be classiﬁed
into three categories in respect of their cross-sectional area as shown in Table 11.3.
As speciﬁc charge and speciﬁc drilling are less in large tunnels it may be more
advantageous to construct a large tunnel, in the absence of ground control problems,
instead of a number of small tunnels on blasting cost consideration.
1
2
3
d = 51mm
d = 38mm
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
Tunnel Area, m2
1 – Steeply reducing zone, 2 – Moderately reducing zone
and 3 – Mildly reducing zone
Specific Charge, kg/m3
Fig. 11.7
Speciﬁc charge vs. tunnel area (Olofsson, 1988) [d = blast hole diameter].
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 161
1
2
3
d = 38mm
d = 51mm
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
8
Tunnel Area, m2
Specific Drilling, m/m3
(1 – Steeply reducing zone, 2 – Moderately reducing zone
and 3 – Mildly reducing zone)
Fig. 11.8
Speciﬁc drilling vs. tunnel area (Olofsson, 1988) [d = blast hole diameter].
Table 11.3 Size-wise classiﬁcation of tunnels.
Predicted speciﬁc charge
S. No.
Tunnelarea(m2)
Type
and speciﬁc drilling
1
<15
Small
High
2
15–35
Medium
Moderate
3
>35
Large
Low
11.6.3 Tunnel depth
The rock masses at a great depth remain under high stress, which needs to be overcome
by increased blasting energy for satisfactory fragmentation. Calder and Bauer (1983) con-
sidered the in situ stress for design of blast hole spacing in pre-split blasting. Chakraborty
(2002) observed in Tandsi Project, India, that the blast performances did not show any
signiﬁcant variation with the increase in overburden up to a moderate height of 236 m.
11.6.4 Blast hole deviation
Blast hole deviation may occur due to poor collaring, improper alignment and wrong
trajectory direction. It plays a major role in deciding the tunnel blast results. Improved
drilling precision also provides better contour blasting performance. Langefors and
162 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Kihlstrom (1973) reported that the explosive efﬁciency in tunnel blasting might be reduced
by 50–75 percent on account of blast hole deviations leading to shorter pull.
Deviation is common in deep blast holes because of long drill rods, which are more
ﬂexible. Insuchcases, heavierdrillrodsaresuggested. Thefollowingparametersinﬂuence
the blast hole deviation:
(i) Drilling parameters
a) diameter, b) length and c) inclination
(ii) Drilling equipment
a) condition and type of drilling machine, b) condition
of drill string and couplings and c) type, condition
and shape of drill bit
(iii) Drill operation parameters
a) thrust and torque, b) rotary speed, c) rate of penetra-
tion and d) ﬂushing medium
(iv) Rock characteristic
a) structure and strength variation
(v) Operator’s skill
a) training, b) experience, c) skill and d) care
Deeper parallel cut holes in Saoner coal mine of Western Coalﬁelds Ltd., India, got
connected with the nearby relief holes because of deviations and therefore the pull could
not be improved more than 1.6 m. Heavier drill rods were used to solve the problem.
The need of numerically controlled jumbos, was strongly felt there. To maintain the same
pull in the link tunnel of Koyna Hydroelectric Project, Stage IV, the speciﬁc charge was
increased by 6 percent when the hole depth was increased from 3 to 4 m leading to greater
deviation.
Hole deviation is highly detrimental to the blast performances in small tunnels.
Chakraborty et al. (1998b) considered the deviation as a function of hole length for the
speciﬁc charge and the speciﬁc drilling predictions in small tunnels with both wedge and
parallel cuts.
11.7 MODELS FOR PREDICTION OF TUNNEL BLAST RESULTS
11.7.1 Speciﬁc charge
Pokrovsky (1980) suggested the following empirical relation to determine the speciﬁc
charge (q) in tunnels (equation (11.1)):
q = q1 · st · f · swr · def kg/m3
(11.1)
where
q1 = speciﬁc charge for breaking the rock against a free face in kg/m3,
= 1.5–1.2 if Protodyakonov Index is 20–15
= 1.2–1.0 if Protodyakonov Index is 15–10
= 1.0–0.8 if Protodyakonov Index is 10–8
= 0.8–0.6 if Protodyakonov Index is 8–4
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 163
= 0.6–0.2 if Protodyakonov Index is 4–2
= 0.15 if Protodyakonov Index is <2
st
= factor for structure and texture of rock,
= 2 for resilient, elastic and porous rock,
= 1.4 for dislocated and irregular rock and
= 1.3 for shale and bedding planes at normal to blast holes,
f
= rock conﬁnement
= 6.5 /√A,
(11.1a)
A
= area of tunnel (m2),
swr = relative weight strength of explosive (ANFO = 1) and
def = factor for diameter of explosive cartridge,
= 1.1 for 25 mm cartridge,
= 1.0 for 30 mm cartridge and
= 0.95 for 40 mm cartridge.
According to Langefors and Kihlstrom (1973), the speciﬁc charge (q) is related to the
cross-sectional area of the tunnel (A, m2) as given below:
q =
14
A

+ 0.8 kg/m3
(11.2)
The speciﬁc charge in the cut holes remain maximum and it can be upto 7 kg/m3 in
a parallel cut.
11.7.2 Rock mass damage
The aspects of blast-induced rock mass damage around a tunnel opening and its assessment
have been the subjects of in-depth research for quite a long time. The type of damage can
be grouped into three categories: (i) fabric damage due to fracturing, (ii) structural damage
exploiting discontinuities and shears and (iii) lithological damage causing parting between
two different rock units or lithological boundaries between similar rock types.
Engineers International Inc. modiﬁed basic RMR (MBR) considering blast-induced
damage adjustments, as shown in Table 11.4, were suggested for planning of caving mine
drift supports (Bieniawski, 1984). Chapter 4 in this book deﬁnes basic RMR.
Table 11.4 Blast damage adjustments in MBR (After Bieniawski, 1984).
Blast damage adjustment
Percent
Method of excavation
Damage level
factor
reduction
1. Machine boring
No damage
1.0
0
2. Controlled blasting
Slight
0.94–0.97
3–6
3. Good conventional blasting
Moderate
0.9–0.94
6–10
4. Poor conventional blasting
Severe damage
0.9–0.8
10–20
164 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Laubscher and Taylor (1976), on the basis of their experience in 50,000 m of mining
development, suggested following reductions in rock quality designation (RQD) and joint
condition rating due to blasting for use in RMR (Bieniawski, 1976) determination:
(i) Machine boring: No reduction
(ii) Smooth blasting: 3 percent
(iii) Good conventional blasting: 6 percent
(iv) Poor conventional blasting: 20 percent.
Various methods suggested and used globally for blast-induced rock mass damage
assessment are given by Scoble et al. (1996).
Ouchterlony et al. (1991) observed that the damage zone could be to the extent of
0.5 m with cautious tunnel blasting. McKenzie (1994) related the threshold peak particle
velocity, PPV, (vmax) for incipient fracture with uniaxial tensile strength (qt), Young’s
modulus and P-wave velocity (Vp, m/s) as shown below:
vmax = qt · Vp · 10−3
E
m/s
(11.3)
where
qt = uniaxial tensile strength, MPa,
Vp = P-wave velocity, m/s and
E = Young’s modulus, GPa.
Pusch and Stanfors (1992) and others observed that the minimum disturbance by
blasting is reported when the tunnel orientation was within 15◦with the strike of the
joint sets.
Yu and Vongpaisal (1996) concluded that the damage is a function of blast-induced
stress and rock mass resistance to damage. They proposed blast damage index (Dib),
as shown in equation (11.4), to estimate the type of damage due to blasting. It is the ratio
of the blast-induced stress to the resistance offered against damage.
Dib = Induced stress/damage resistance
= vR · ρr · Vp
ks · qtd
× 10−6
(11.4)
where
vR = vector sum of peak particle velocity, m/s,
ρr = rock mass density, kg/m3,
ks = site quality constant (maximum 1.0) obtained either from
(i) RMR with support adjustments, divided by 100 or
(ii) ground condition rating by sounding the ground with scaling bar with support
adjustments (Tables 11.5 and 11.6),
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 165
qtd = dynamic tensile strength of rock mass, MPa and
Vp = P-wave velocity, m/s.
Various blast damage indices suggested by them are given in Table 11.7.
Chakrabortyetal. (1998c)alsosuggestedhalfcastfactor(HCF)fordifferent Dib values
to facilitate damage estimation from the visible half drill hole marks on tunnel walls.
Table 11.5 Ground condition rating by sounding (Yu &
Vongpaisal, 1996).
Estimated by sounding
Ground condition
Rating
Sounds solid with scaling bar
Very good
0.9–1.0
Sounds solid after scaling
Good
0.7–0.9
Sounds drummy in places
Fair
0.5–0.7
Sounds drummy mostly
Poor
0.3–0.5
Loose rocks mostly
Very poor
0–0.3
Table 11.6 Rating adjustments on account of support (Yu &
Vongpaisal, 1996).
Adjustments
Type of support
(%)
Grouted cable bolting
4
Cable lacing, shotcreting, screening, grouted rebar
3
Bolting
2
Table 11.7 Blast damage index (Dib) and type of damage (Yu & Vongpaisal, 1996).
Dib
Type of damage
<0.125
No damage to underground excavations
Maximum allowable value for key permanent workings like crusher chambers, shafts,
permanent shops, ore bins, pump houses, etc.
0.5
Minor and discrete scabbing effects
Maximum tolerable value for intermediate term workings, e.g., main drifts, main
haulage ways, etc.
0.75
Moderate and discontinuous scabbing damage
Maximum tolerable value for temporary workings, e.g., cross-cuts, drill drifts, stope
access, etc.
1.0
Major and continuous scabbing failure, requiring intensiﬁed rehabilitation work
1.5
Severe damage to entire opening, causing rehabilitation work difﬁcult or impossible
2.0
Major caving, normally resulting in abandoned access
166 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The Dib was used to assess rock mass damage around horizontal tunnel no. I in Lake Tap
work of Koyna Hydroelectric Project, Stage IV, India, passing under water body.
11.7.3 Throw, muck proﬁle and fragmentation
The loading efﬁciency is largely dependent on the degree of fragmentation and the muck
proﬁle. Specially, a tight muck pile affects the loading efﬁciency quite adversely. Factors
like rock mass properties, charge parameters, initiation type and sequence along with
spacing to burden ratio are known to inﬂuence the muck proﬁle and fragmentation sub-
stantially. The control of geological factors, like pre-blast block size, on fragmentation has
been clearly recognized over the years. Pre- and post-blast block size analyses have been
used by many to assess the explosive energy utilization. Digital image analysis systems
are currently used for such a purpose. The swell of the muck pile is also a function of
fragmentation.
Throw in a tunnel blast largely depends on the speciﬁc charge, the blast hole directions,
the delay intervals, the placement of the cut holes and the type of initiation. Smaller
throw is reported with parallel cuts than with convergent cuts. Placement of the cut holes
at the lower part of the tunnel provides lesser throw but larger fragments. The reason is
that the gravitational force favors the burden movement in this case.
Short delay detonation produces a higher throw than long delay detonation. A shorter
delay does not provide sufﬁcient time for the burden to move and create space to
accommodate the fragments generated in the successive delays.
11.7.4 Holistic models
Chakraborty (2002) developed models for blast results predictions based on a holistic
approach. Different parameters inﬂuencing the blast results were subjected to multiple
linear regression analyses to select the following seven parameters dominating the blast
results.
(A) Rock mass parameters –
(i)
P-wave velocity (Vp, m/s),
(ii) Number of contact surfaces in multiple geological
conditions (n) and
(iii) RQD.
(B) Tunnel conﬁguration –
(i)
Area A (m2) and
parameters
(ii) Inclination with respect to vertical upward
direction (βi, expressed in radian “r”).
(C) Blast design parameters –
(i)
Cut hole angle with the face (Cα, expressed in
cotangent of the value) and
(ii) Coupling ratio between the blast hole and the
explosive cartridge (Rc).
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 167
An index to characterize the tunnel blasting environment, named tunnel blasting index
(TBI), was deﬁned by the above inﬂuencing parameters as follows:
TBI =
Rock mass factor (RF)
Tunnel conﬁguration factor (TF) × blast design factor (BF)
(11.5)
where
RF = Vp + n +
RQD
10

,
(11.5a)
TF = A −r, and
(11.5b)
BF = Cα + Rc
(11.5c)
The speciﬁc charge (q) and the speciﬁc drilling (bs) observed during ﬁeld investiga-
tions could be well related with TBI.
11.8 BLAST DESIGN
11.8.1 Depth of round
The depth of a round is an important parameter in tunnel blasting, as most of the excavation
engineers desire a higher tunnelling rate. There are two options for obtaining a high
drivage rate. The ﬁrst one is to go for a deeper round, which may invite more strata
control problems unless the ground is competent or smooth blasting practice is followed.
Much unproductive time can be saved in this option because the number of rounds is
reduced. The second option is based on pulling shorter rounds with smaller cycle time.
This becomes a useful option, particularly when the rock mass is weak. A better pull
efﬁciency is also expected in the second option. Therefore, it may be wise to generate a
database on case to case basis for a limited period to ﬁnally decide the optimum advance
per round. The advance per round in the weak rock mass is designed so that erection of
support in the freshly exposed zones can be completed within the bridge action period
(stand-up time), which is deﬁned by the time interval between the blast and the ﬁrst fall
of roof and is dependent on the rock type, span of the excavation, support system and
blasting quality (Fig. 4.1). However, the drilling resources is the dominating factor in
deciding the advance per round in most of the tunnels in India.
A rough guideline on the length of blast holes in the cut and easer holes of a convergent
cut is provided by Pokrovsky (1980),
for cut holes,
lc = 0.75 (A)0.5 m
(11.6)
for easer holes,
le = 0.5 (A)0.5 m
(11.7)
168 Tunnelling in weak rocks
where,
A = tunnel area, m2,
lc = length of cut hole, m and
le = length of easer hole, m.
According to Holmberg (1982), the depth of a round in a parallel cut depends on the
size of the relief hole (equation (11.8)) as given by the following relation:
Ad = 0.15 + 34.1 dr −39.1 d2
r m
(11.8)
where, Ad is the depth of round (m) and dr is the diameter (m) of the relief hole.
In case of more than one relief hole of similar size, the equivalent relief hole diameter
(dre, m) should be considered for estimating the round depth. It is obtained by multiplying
the relief hole diameter by √nr, where nr is the number of relief holes (Olofsson, 1988).
The depth of a round designed for drifts of various cross-sectional area in Germany
is presented by Ziegler (1985) in Fig. 11.9.
11.8.2 Holes per round
The number of holes per round is decided mainly by the tunnel size and hole diameter.
Ziegler (1985) reports that the number of holes per round in a drift reduces by 3 per-
cent with every 0.001 m increase in diameter of the explosive cartridge, and the hole
concentration is greater in small openings compared to large ones.
Based on US experience, Whittaker and Frith (1990) suggested the number of holes
for various tunnel sizes in weak and strong formations (Table 11.8).
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
10
20
30
40
Cross-sectional Area of Drift, m2
Depth of a Round, m
Fig. 11.9
Depth of a blast round vs. tunnel size in Germany (Ziegler, 1985).
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 169
Table 11.8 Number of holes per round (Whittaker & Frith, 1990).
Number of holes per round
Tunnel cross section (m2)
Weak
Strong
10
23–27
36–50
25
45–50
60–70
50
75–85
95–110
11.8.3 Explosives and accessories
It is a known fact that more the characteristic impedance, deﬁned as the product of density
and velocity of sound wave in any medium, of rock match with that of explosive, better is
the explosive energy utilization. Notwithstanding this guideline, the use of nitroglycerine
(NG) explosives is common in tunnels as these are very powerful and provide good
fragmentation in spite of the fact that large amount of noxious gas is generated from it
leading to long defuming time. Kate (1994) from his experience in the Konkan Railway
tunnels, reported that the defuming time with slurry explosive was only 25 percent with
NG 90 percent explosives. Presently, manufacturing of the NG explosives is discontinued
in India.
The development of ready-to-use pipe charges of various lengths has resulted in fast
charging of holes. Various unconventional charges have been explored which are nowa-
days available in global market for contour blasting. Lopez et al. (1995) and others
report that charges of 11, 17 and 22 mm diameter cartridges, called Gurit or Nabit,
are commonly used for this purpose. Sometimes, such low density cartridges are sur-
rounded by detonating cord to initiate ﬁring. Recently, high core load detonating cord
of 0.04–0.1 kg/m charge concentrations is available for contour blasting. As the total
charge is distributed in the detonating cord, the stress concentration is reduced to facil-
itate smoother contour. Ammonium nitrate fuel oil (ANFO) diluted by common salt
is also suggested as low energy explosives for this purpose. The polystyrene beads
with a density of 30 kg/m3 is also used to reduce the explosive density. A mixture of
ANFO and polystyrene beads, brings down the blast hole pressure by 1/12 times with
ANFO alone. The use of polystyrene beads is a common practice in Australia since
1975 (Wilson & Moxon, 1988). However, the use of ANFO is not quite common in
tunnelling due to defuming problems. Adhikari and Babu (1994) and others suggested
the use of bamboo spacers for longitudinal decoupling and distribution of explosive
cartridges.
Blasting technology has achieved a signiﬁcant development with the introduction of
non-electric detonators known as NONEL system which was innovated and developed
by Nitro Nobel (Olofsson, 1988). In order to meet the speciﬁc requirements of tunnel
blasting, Nonel GT/T developed by Nitro Nobel has a delay range of 25–6000 ms. Such
a vast range is not available with conventional detonating system.
170 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The velocity of detonation (VOD, m/s) of the explosives generally increases with
the increase in charge diameter. But no signiﬁcant increase in VOD was observed if the
diameter is more than 150, 125, 75 and 30 mm in case of ANFO, slurry, NG explosives
and cast booster, respectively. Many a time ANFO cartridges do not yield good results in
small diameter holes as the critical diameter of ANFO is 25 mm only.
Long storage has adverse effect on the VOD of explosives, which may be reduced
by about 20 and 30 percent for a storage time of 6 months and 12 months, respectively.
11.8.4 Charge per hole
The explosives consumption increases if the angle of breakage is small. The easer holes
in a parallel cut are blasted with small breakage angle against the free face created by
the cut. Langefors and Kihlstrom (1973) suggested the following relations to estimate
the linear charge concentration in a hole breaking towards a narrow opening or free face
(circular or rectangular) as shown in Fig. 11.10.
(a) Circular opening −qlco = 0.55(Dc −W/2)
(sin γa)3/2
kg/m
(11.9)
(b) Rectangular opening −qlro = 0.35(Dr)
(sin γa)3/2 kg/m
(11.10)
where
qlco = linear charge concentration in case of a circular opening, kg/m,
qlro = linear charge concentration in case of a rectangular opening, kg/m,
Dc = center to center distance of blast hole from circular opening, m,
Dr
= distance of blast holes from rectangular opening,
W
= width of the opening, m and
γa
= half of the aperture angle (◦) or angle of breakage.
Circular
Opening
Dc
W
Blast
Hole
γa
γa
Rectangular
Opening
Dr
W
Blast
Hole
(a)
(b)
Fig. 11.10
Plan view of blasting towards narrow opening (a) circular and (b) rectangular
(Langefors & Kihlstrom, 1973).
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 171
Holmberg (1982) provides a detailed design calculation of charge per hole with four-
section parallel cut.
The explosion pressure at the blast hole is directly proportional to the coupling ratio
raised to the power of 2.4 (Calder & Bauer, 1983). The fall in blast hole pressure due
to poor coupling is more with high explosives than with low explosives. The decoupling
may result in the channel effect preventing detonation of the charge column.
11.8.5 Burden
Burden is one of the most important parameters to be designed in tunnel blasting. As many
as 18 empirical models are compiled by Lopez et al. (1995). Majority of the models con-
sider the blast hole diameter, rock properties like density, compressive strength, seismic
velocity and explosive properties like density, velocity of detonation and detonation pres-
sure as the independent variables. Praillet (1980) considered separate constants for rope
shovel and dragline for burden estimation.
The burden for rock fracturing without displacement of muck is called as critical
burden. A burden of 0.4 to 0.9 times the critical burden gives the most satisfactory pull
(Rustan et al., 1985).
Rustan (1990) suggested that the practical burden in underground blasting (Bp, m)
is related to the blast hole diameter and the speciﬁc gravity of both the rock and the
explosive (equation (11.11)). The practical burden is deﬁned as the maximum burden
minus the greatest blast hole deviation caused by drilling.
Bp = K · d0.63 ·
γe
γr

, m
(11.11)
where
Bp = practical burden, m,
γe = speciﬁc gravity of explosive,
γr = speciﬁc gravity of rock,
d
= diameter of blast hole, m and
K = site constant.
Spacing to burden ratio (md) of holes at different parts of a tunnel face should be
different because the conﬁnement gets released gradually as the tunnel is enlarged from
the cut holes to the contour holes. The values of md for various types of holes in a tunnel
is provided in Table 11.9.
11.8.6 Type, delay and sequence of initiation
The delay time must allow the following events to reach completion or, at least, to be
well underway before initiation under subsequent delay.
172 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 11.9 Recommended spacing to burden
ratio (md) for different types of holes in a tunnel
(Holmberg, 1982).
Type of hole
md
Helping and stoping holes
1.25
Lifters
1
Contour holes
0.8
(i) Travel of the compressive waves through the burden to face and back to the
blast hole.
(ii) A subsequent readjustment of the initial stress ﬁeld due to the presence of
the primary radial cracks and the effect of the reﬂection of stress waves from
the free face.
(iii) Acceleration of the broken rock mass, by the action of the explosion gases, to a
high velocity to ensure the proper horizontal motion which controls the muck pile
proﬁle and the digging efﬁciency.
Fourney (1988) reports that the optimum delay time is much shorter for a layered
formation than for a massive formation and coarser fragments are obtained if delay time
is not optimum. Though the conventional concept is to go for indirect initiation in tunnel
for better fragmentation, but Ester (1998) noticed at Sopac tunnel of Croatia that direct
initiation produced more breakage than indirect initiation. The reason was attributed to
the fact that breakage started in the least strained part of the blast hole in case of direct
initiation leading to better energy utilization.
11.8.7 Contour blasting
Contour blasting in tunnelling is adopted to obtain a smooth tunnel proﬁle and minimize
damage to the surrounding rock mass. Despite a large amount of drilling required, it is
preferred over conventional blasting because of the following advantages:
(i) The shape of the opening is maintained with smooth proﬁle.
(ii) Stability of the opening and the stand-up time of the tunnel are improved.
(iii) Support requirement is reduced.
(iv) Overbreak is reduced to minimize unwanted excavations and ﬁlling to bring down
the cost and cycle time.
(v) Ventilation improves due to smooth proﬁle.
The performance of contour blasting is frequently measured in terms of “Half cast fac-
tor” (HCF) which is dominated by the design parameters of the contour holes, the joint
orientation and the explosive energy distribution.
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 173
Generally, two types of contour blasting are used in tunnelling, i) pre-splitting and ii)
smoothblasting. Whentwocloselyspacedchargedholesareﬁredsimultaneouslythestress
waves generated from the two holes collide at a plane in between the holes and create a
secondary tensile stress front perpendicular to the hole axis and facilitates extension of
radial cracks along the line joining the holes. The wedging action from the explosion gas
acts in favor of extending the crack along the same line. It is, therefore, essential to contain
the gas pressure till the cracks from both ends meet by adequate stemming. Further, the
delay timing of the adjacent holes need to be very accurate so that the stress waves should
collide at the mid-point and the arbitrariness of the breakage between the holes can be
reduced. Yamamoto et al. (1995) observed that the depth of damage and overbreak area
were reduced to 90 and 6 percent, respectively, with the use of electronic detonators, which
has high accuracy compared to those with long delay detonators. Ngoma et al. (1999)
reported that the electronic detonators provided 85 percent HCF compared to 34 percent
with conventional delay systems. Nevertheless, the success of contour blasting is strongly
dependent on its acceptance by the miners or tunnel engineers.
The contour blasting performance largely depends on the nature and the orientation
of joint planes. Gupta et al. (1988) found that the joint orientation adversely inﬂuences
the pre-splitting results to a maximum when these are at an angle of 1–30◦to the pre-
split axis.
It was observed in the machine hall of Srisailam Hydroproject in India that an arched
roof in such a strata having major horizontal joint set was converted to ﬂat roof due to roof
fall and overbreak (Chakraborty, 2002). Contour blasting for arched roof was not very
successful in such laminated rock masses.
In smooth blasting, the delay intervals between the contour holes and the nearest pro-
duction holes are kept high to facilitate complete movement of material in production
holes before the contour holes detonate so that the gas expansion in contour holes occurs
towards the opening. Sometimes, holes are drilled in between two charged blast holes
and are kept uncharged. These are called dummy holes (Fig. 11.11). The stress concen-
tration at the farthest and the nearest points of the dummy holes become high to initiate
cracks from the dummy holes extending towards the charged holes. The fracture is, thus,
controlled along the desired contour.
Dummy
Holes
Charged
Holes
Fig. 11.11
Smooth blasting pattern with dummy holes.
174 Tunnelling in weak rocks
In some cases, slashing or trimming techniques are used where the central core of
excavation area is removed ﬁrst to reduce the stress and then post-splitting is adopted to
remove the remaining rock mass along the desired contour. The technique is generally
referred to as “slashing” or “trimming” (Calder and Bauer (1983), Fig. 11.12).
Line drilling is adopted as an alternative technique where a number of uncharged
holes are drilled along the contour with a spacing of 2–4 times the hole diameter
(Du Pont, 1977). The distance of the row of empty holes from the ﬁnal row of charged
holes is kept as 0.5–0.75 times the normal burden. The empty holes are joined during the
main blasting round and a separation is created along the contour.
According to Holmberg and Persson (1978), the spacing of pre-split holes should
be 8–12 times the blast hole diameter. The following design parameters for contour hole
spacing, burden to spacing ratio of contour holes and linear charge concentration in smooth
blasting are suggested by Holmberg (1982):
Sdc = 16 × db m
(11.12)
mdc = 1.25
(11.13)
qlcc = 90 × (db)2 kg/m
(11.14)
where
Sdc = spacing of contour holes while drilling, m,
mdc = burden to spacing ratio of contour holes while drilling,
qlcc = linear charge concentration in the contour holes, kg/m and
db
= diameter of blast holes, m.
Desired Tunnel
Section to be
Excavated
Trimming Hole
Pilot Excavation
Fig. 11.12
Trimming after elimination of stress by making a pilot excavation (Calder &
Bauer, 1983).
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 175
Table 11.10 Recommended blast design for contour blasting (Olofsson, 1988).
Blast hole
Spacing of blast
Linear charge
Type of blasting
diameter (mm)
holes (m)
Burden (m)
concentration (kg/m)
Smooth blasting
25–32
0.25–0.35
0.3–0.5
0.11
25–48
0.5–0.7
0.7–0.9
0.23
51–64
0.8–0.9
1.0–1.2
0.42–0.45
Pre-splitting
38–44
0.3–0.45
–
0.12–0.37
Controlled blast design details recommended by Olofsson (1988) are presented in
Table 11.10.
Ibarra et al. (1996) reported that the rock mass quality Q has more signiﬁcant inﬂuence
on overbreak while the speciﬁc charge dominates the underbreak. They suggested that
the contour speciﬁc charge should be optimized considering the additional cost incurred
towards the overbreak and the underbreak. For example, the curve in Fig. 11.13 indicates
that the contour speciﬁc charge should be designed as 0.65–0.7 kg/m3 when the total cost
was the minimum.
Tracer blasting is used in Canadian underground mines to minimize the overbreak
in development headings and stopes (Singh & Lamond, 1996). This involves placing
a detonating cord along the blast hole wall before charging ANFO. The detonating
cord is used to initiate the primer placed at the hole bottom. Utilizing higher VOD
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
Underbreak
Cost
Total Cost
Support Cost
Overbreak Cost
Optimum
range of q
Contour Specific Charge (q), kg/m3
Cost, $/m
Fig. 11.13
Optimization of contour speciﬁc charge in terms of cost (Ibarra et al., 1996).
176 Tunnelling in weak rocks
of detonating cord, it is possible to obtain partial desensitization, deﬂagration and
decoupling which result in reduced explosive energy utilization controlling the blast
damage. McDonald and Ng (1994) report the use of ANFO-spoon technique for con-
tour blasting. The method works on the principle of air/ANFO dust explosion. Contour
blasting was tried with slotted cartridges (Wang & Wei, 1987) and notch drilling also
(Sperry et al., 1979; Fourney et al., 1984). In both the cases, a stress concentration is
created in the pre-determined points to ensure fracture along a desired direction. Wang
and Wei (1987) observed that the length and the width of a crack produced by a slot-
ted cartridge are related to the slot width. Sperry et al. (1979) observed that 6 mm deep
notch with 80◦notch angle provides good results with 44 mm drill hole size. The blast-
induced crack with such a notch extends to a length twenty times the diameter of the
drill hole.
The contour blasting in place of a conventional one was very useful at Tandsi project of
WCL. The number of holes including the dummy holes in a round was increased by more
than 71 percent when the spacing to burden ratio at the contour was reduced from 1.5–1.85,
as maintained in the conventional blasting, to 0.8 in the contour blasting. As a result, the
speciﬁc drilling increased by nearly 30 percent. In spite of increased drilling cost and
time, the excavation cost was reduced approximately by 22 percent and the tunnelling
rate was improved by more than 100 percent with contour blasting and shotcrete support.
Hence, the application of contour blasting appears to be highly beneﬁcial in reducing
the overall cost and time of tunnelling.
11.8.8 Computer-aided blast design
Some of the software developed for blast design and optimization are reported in
Table 11.11. Few blasting software on tunnel blasting are commercially available and
the details can be obtained through web search.
Table 11.11 Various routines for computer-aided tunnel blast design.
Name of software
Purpose
Reference
OPTES
Blast optimization in tunnels
Vierra (1984)
VOLADOR
Estimation of blast results, blast efﬁciency
and cost analyses in tunnels
Rusilo et al. (1994)
TUNNEL BLAST
Blast design in tunnels
Chakraborty et al. (1998a)
CAD
Optimum design of ring hole blasting
Myers et al. (1990)
FLAC and UDEC
Blasting effects on the near ﬁeld rock mass
Pusch et al. (1993)
ABAQUS V 5.4
Mechanics of crater blasting and the effects
of air-decking and decoupling
Liu and Katsabanis (1996)
ALEGRA
Air-decking blasting
Jensen and Preece (1999)
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 177
11.8.9 Optimum tunnel blast design
Optimum drilling and blasting, which is a basic need of a rock excavation work, is tradi-
tionally achieved when the excavation cost is maintained within a band closely extended
on either side of the minimum one. The blast design parameters are generally varied
to achieve better results and the modiﬁed set of design parameters is used till further
improvements are required. The objectives frequently change specially with the change
in rock mass conditions. Hence, the optimization becomes a dynamic process in rock
excavation.
Nielsen (1983), Gadberry (1984), Beattie (1982), Hagan and Gibson (1988), Hall
(1986) and Michaud and Blanchet (1996) have carried out extensive work on bench blast
optimization considering sub-systems utilization and fragmentation to arrive at optimum
blast design.
Optimization in underground excavations cannot be complied with fragmentation
assessment alone leaving other important parameters like ground stability, blast-induced
damage, support cost, hole deviation and ore dilution which may have greater impact on
productivity. Scoble et al. (1991) support this view.
REFERENCES
Adhikari, G. R. and Babu, A. R. (1994). Controlled blasting in tunnels - some issues. Journal of
Inst. of Engineers (I), 75, Nov., 56-59.
Beattie, S. K. (1982). Forward preparation in opencast coal mining - an analytical approach. Quarry
management and products. Reprinted in Minetech, Ranchi, 6, (1), 45-51.
Bieniwaski, Z. T. (1976). Rock mass classiﬁcation in rock engineering. Proc. Symposium on
Exploration for Rock Engineering, Johannesburg, 1, 76-106.
Bieniwaski, Z. T. (1984). Rock Mechanics Design in Mining and Tunnelling. Balkema A.A.
Rotterdam, 25-31 and 237-242.
Calder, P. N. and Bauer, A. (1983). Presplit blast design for open pit and underground mines.
5th International Cong. on Rock Mechanics, Melbourne, 2, E185-E190.
Chakraborty, A. K., Paithankar, A. G. and Jethwa, J. L. (1993). Computer aided blast design
for tunnels. 9th Annual Symposium on Explosives and Blasting Research, California,
USA, Org. by International Society of explosives Engineers, USA, Jan. 31–Feb. 4,
41-58.
Chakraborty, A.K., Murthy, V.M.S.R.andJethwa, J.L.(1996a). Blastingproblemsinunderground
construction through Deccan Trap formation: some experiences at Koyna Hydro-electric
Project, Stage IV. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology. Elsevier Science Ltd.,
Great Britain, 11(3), 311-324.
Chakraborty, A. K., Jethwa, J. L. and Dhar, B. B. (1996b). Predicting powder factor in mixed-face
condition: development of a correlation based on investigations in a tunnel through basaltic
ﬂows. Engineering Geology, Elsevier Science B.V., Netherlands, 47, 31-41.
178 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Chakraborty, A. K., Murthy, V. M.S. R., Jhanwar, J. C., Raina, A. K., Ramulu, M. and Jethwa J. L.
(1998a). Final report on development of rock mass classiﬁcation for computer aided tun-
nel blast design. Grant-in-Aid Project funded by Ministry of Water Resources, Govt. of
India, 136.
Chakraborty, A. K., Pal Roy, P., Jethwa, J. L. and Gupta, R. N. (1998b). Blast performance in small
tunnels - A critical evaluation in underground metal mines. Tunnelling and Underground
Space Technology. Elsevier Science Ltd., 13(3), 331-339.
Chakraborty, A. K., Raina, A. K., Ramulu, M., Jethwa, J. L. and Gupta, R. N. (1998c). Lake tap
at Koyna. World Tunnelling and Subsurface Excavation, The Min. Journal Ltd., London,
Nov., 456-460.
Chakraborty, A. K. (2002). Development of predictive models for optimum blast design in mine
roadways and tunnels under various rock mass conditions. PhD thesis, Indian School of
Mines, Dhanbad, India, 298.
Du Pont (1977). Blasters’ Handbook. E. I. du Pont de Nemours & CO. (Inc.), Wilmington,
Delaware, 526-541.
Duvall, W. I. and Atchison, T. C. (1957). Rock breakage by explosives. Explosives Reference
Database on CD-Rom, International Society of Explosives Engineers, USBM, R15356,
Ohio, USA, 1997.
Ester, Z. (1998). The role of position of initiation and stemming on breakage. General Proceed-
ings of Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research, Explosives Reference
Database on CD-Rom, International Society of Explosives Engineers, Ohio, USA, 1997.
Forsyth, W. W. (1993). A discussion of blast-induced overbreak around underground excavations.
Proc. 4th International Symposium on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, FRAGBLAST-4,
Vienna, Austria, Jul. 5–8, 161-166.
Fourney, W. L. (1988). Fragmentation studies with large ﬂaws. Rock Fracture Mechanics, Vol. II,
International Centre for Mechanical Sciences Courses and Lectures, Technical University
of Vienna, 341-352.
Fourney, W. L. (1993). Mechanism of rock fragmentation by blasting. Comprehensive Rock Engi-
neering – Principles, Practices & Projects, Ed: J. A. Hudson, Pergamon Press Ltd.,
UK, 4, 51.
Fourney, W. L., Barker, D. B. and Holloway, D. C. (1984). Fracture control blasting. General
Proceedings of Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research, Explosives
Reference Database on CD-Rom, International Society of Explosives Engineers, Ohio,
USA, 1997.
Gadberry, A. R. (1984). Poor breakage what does it really cost. International Journal of Explosives
Engg., Ohio, USA, Jan-Feb, 23-29.
Gupta, R. N., Singh, R. B., Adhikari, G. R. and Singh, B. (1988). Controlled blasting for under-
ground excavation. International Symposium on Underground Engineering, 14-17 Apr.,
New Delhi, India, 449-460.
Hagan, T. N. (1980). Understanding the burn Cut - A key to greater advance rates. Trans. Inst.
Mining and Metall., London, 89, A30-A36.
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 179
Hagan, T. N. (1984). Blast design considerations for underground mining and construction
operations. Proc. Design and performance of underground excavations, ISRM/BGS,
Cambridge, 255-262.
Hagan, T. N. (1995). The effect of rock properties on the design and results of tunnel blasts.
Journal of Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling Technology, 1(1), Mar., 25-39.
Hagan, T. N. and Gibson, I. M. (1988). Lower blast hole pressures: a means of reducing costs
when blasting rocks of low to moderate strength. International Journal of Mining and
Geological Engg., 6, 1-13.
Hall, S. J. (1986). Technology upgrades improve TOM Moura’s overburden blasting operations.
Proc. Symposium Large Open Pit Mining, Australia, Org. IMM, Oct., 113-115.
Holmberg, R. (1982). Charge Calculations for Tunnelling. Underground Mining Methods Hand-
book, Society of Mining Engineers, American Inst. of Mining, Metall. and Pet. Eng.,
New York, 1580-1589.
Holmberg, R. and Persson, P. A. (1978). The Swedish approach to contour blasting. Proc. of
Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research, Explosives Reference Database
on CD-ROM, International Society of Explosives Engineers, Ohio, USA, 1997.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavation in Rock. Inst. of Mining and Metall.,
London, 14-37 and 367-381.
Hommert, P. J., Kuszmaul, J. S. and Parrish, R. L. (1987). Computational and experimental studies
of the role of stemming in cratering. 2nd International Symposium on Rock Fragmentation
by Blasting, Keystone, Colorado, 23-27 Aug., 550-562.
Ibarra, J. A., Marez, N. H. and Franklin, J. A. (1996). Overbreak and underbreak in under-
ground openings Part 2: causes and implications. Journal of Geotechnical and Geological
Engineering, 14, Chapman and Hall, U.K., 325-340.
Innaurato, N., Mancini, R. and Cardu, M. (1998). On the inﬂuence of the rock mass quality on
the quality of the blasting work in tunnel driving. Tunnelling and Underground Space
Technology, Elsevier Science, Great Britain, 13(1), 81-89.
Jensen, R. P. and Preece, D. S. (1999). Modelling explosive/rock interaction during pre-splitting
using ALE computational method. Proc. 6th International Symposium for Rock Fragmen-
tation by Blasting. The South African Inst. of Mining and Metall., Johannesburg, 8-12, Aug.
199-202.
Johansen, J. (1998). Modern Trends in Tunnelling and Blast Design. IDL Industries Ltd.,
Hyderabad, India, 34-41.
Jorgenson, G. K. and Chung, S. H. (1987). Blast simulation surface and underground with
SABREX Model. CIM Bulletin, 80(904), Aug., 37-41.
Kate, S. R. (1994). New explosives for blasting in tunnels and construction activity. The Indian
Mining & Engineering Journal, Bhubaneswar, India, Special issue on Tunnelling – CMRS
Know-how, Jan., 64-67.
Langefors, U. and Kihlstrom, B. (1973). The Modern Technique of Rock Blasting. John Wiley &
Sons, 188-257, 299-301.
180 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Laubscher, D. H. and Taylor, H. W. (1976). The importance of geo-mechanics classiﬁcation
on jointed rock masses in mining operations. Proc. Symposium Exploration for Rock
Engineering, Johannesburg, 119-128.
Liu, L. and Katsabanis, P. D. (1996). Numerical modelling of the effects of air-decking/decoup-
ling in production and controlled blasting. Proc. 5th International Symposium on Rock
Fragmentation by Blasting, FRAGBLAST-5, Montreal, Quebec, 25-29 Aug., 319-330.
Liu, L. and Katsabanis, P. D. (1998). A numerical description of crater in rock blasting. CIM
Bulletin, Sept., 75-81.
Livingston, C. W. (1956). Fundamentals of rock failure. Quarterly of the Colorado School of Mines,
51(3), Jul.
Lopez, J. C., Lopez Jimeno, E., Carcedo, F. J. A. and De Ramiro, Y. V. (1995). Drilling and
Blasting of Rocks. Balkema A.A., Rotterdam, 200-204 and 259-260.
McDonald, K. and Ng, L. (1994). Perimeter blasting with ANFO-spoon technique. General
Proceedings of Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research, Explosives
Reference Database on CD-ROM, International Society of Explosives Engineers, Ohio,
USA, 1997.
McKenzie, C. J. (1994). Blasting for Engineers. Blastronics Pty. Ltd., Brisbane, Australia.
Michaud, P. R. and Blanchet, J. Y. (1996). Establishing quantitative relation between post
blast fragmentation and mine productivity: a case study. Proc. 5th Int. Symp. on Rock
fragmentation by Blasting, Montreal, Canada, 25-29 Aug., 389-396.
Myers, R. T., Lundquist, R. and Konya, C. J. (1990). Computer aided design of ring
blasts. General Proceedings of Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research,
Explosives Reference Database on CD-ROM, International Society of Explosives Engineers,
Ohio, USA, 1997.
Ngoma, J. C., Grobler, H. P. and Neetling, P. C. (1999). Smoothwall blasting at Finseh Diamond
Mine using Ez-TronicTM electronic detonator system. Proc. 6th International Sympo-
sium for Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, The South African Inst. of Mining and Metall.,
Johannesburg, 8-12 Aug., 327-332.
Nielsen, K. (1983). Optimisation of open pit bench blasting. Proc. 1st International Symposium
on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, Lulea, Sweden, 22-26 Aug., 653-654.
Olofsson, S., O. (1988). Applied Explosives Technology for Construction and Mining. Applex,
Arla, Sweden, 303.
Ouchterlony, F., Nyberg, Sjoberg, C. and Johansson, S-E. (1991). Damage Zone Assessment by
Vibration Measurements., Aspo hard rock laboratory, Progress Report, 3, 25-91.
Praillet, R., 1980. A new approach to blasting. (Lopez Jimeno, C., Lopez Jimeno, E., Carcedo,
F. J. A. and De Ramiro, Y. V. (1995). Drilling and Blasting of Rocks, Balkema A. A.,
Rotterdam, 204.
Pokrovsky, N. M. (1980). Driving Horizontal Workings and Tunnels. Mir Publishers, Moscow,
38-41.
Pusch, R. and Stanfors, R. (1992). The zone of disturbance around blasted tunnels at depth.
International Journal Rock Mech. Mining Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., 29(5), 447-456.
Blasting for tunnels and roadways 181
Pusch, R., Hokmark, H. and Borgesson, L. (1993). Characterisation of structure and stress state of
nearﬁeld rock with respect to the inﬂuence of blasting. Proc. 4th International Symposium
on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, FRAGBLAST-4, Vienna, Austria, 5-8 Jul., 175-181.
Rusilo, L. C., Sansone, E. C., Hennies, W. T. and Ayres Da Silva, L. A. (1994). Design and
optimization of tunneling blasting operations. Proc. 3rd International Symposium on Mine
Planning and Equipment Selection, Istanbul, Turkey, Oct.18-20, 651-655.
Rustan, P. A. (1990). Burden, spacing and borehole diameter at rock blasting. Proc. 3rd Inter-
national Symposium on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, Brisbane, 26-31 Aug., 303-309.
Rustan, A. (1998). Rock Blasting Terms and Symbols - A Dictionary of Symbols in Rock Blasting
and Related Areas Like Drilling,
Mining and Rock Mechanics.
(Editor-in-Chief)
Balkema A. A., Rotterdam, 193.
Rustan, P A., Naarttijarvi, T. and Ludvig, B. (1985). Controlled blasting in hard intense jointed
rock in tunnels. CIM Bulletin, Dec., 63-68.
Scoble, M., Lizotte, Y. and Paventi, M. (1996). Rock mass damage from blasting: characterization
and impact. Proc. of Fragblast-5 Workshop on Measurement of Blast Fragmentation,
Montreal, 23-24 Aug., 225-235.
Scoble, M. J., Lizotte, Y. C., Hendricks, C. and Mohanty, B. (1991). Fragmentation inter-
action with underground mining systems and productivity. Research Proceedings of
Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting Research, Explosives Reference Database
on CD-Rom, International Society of Explosives Engineers, Ohio, USA, 1997.
Simha, K. R. Y., Fourney, W. L. and Dick, R. D. (1987). An investigation of the usefulness
of stemming in crater blasting. 2nd International Symposium on Rock Fragmentation by
Blasting, Keystone, Colorado, 23-27 Aug., 591-599.
Singh, D. P. (1991). Effect of physico-mechanical properties of rocks on drilling and blasting
operations in underground drivage. Workshop on Tunnels, Mine Roadways and Caverns,
Ooty, Sept., IV-63-IV-68.
Singh, S. P. (1995). Mechanism of cut blasting. Trans. Inst. Mining and Metall., Section A, Mining
Industry, Sept-Dec., The Inst. of Mining and Metall., U.K., 104, A134-A138.
Singh, S. P. and Lamond, R. (1996). Application of tracer blasting during stoping operations.
5th International Symposium on Rock Fragmentation by Blasting, Montreal, Canada,
25-29 Sept., 425-436.
Sperry, P. E., Fourney, W. L., Thompson, D. E. and Mckown, A. E. (1979). Controlled blasting
experiments at Porter Square pilot tunnel. Proceeding on Rapid Excavation on Tunnelling
Conference, Atlanta, June 18-21, 1130-1157.
Wang, S. and Wei, Y. (1987). Fracture control in rock blasting. Proc. International Symposium
Mining Tech. and Science, China Coal Industry Publishing House, Trans Tech Publication,
610-616.
Whittaker, B. N. and Frith, R. C. (1990). Tunnelling Design, Stability and Construction. Inst. Mining
and Metall., London, 460.
Wilson, J. M. and Moxon, N. T. (1988). The development of low shock energy ammonium nitrate
based explosive. Workshop on Explosives in Mining, The Australian IMM, Melbourne,
Victoria, Nov., 27-31.
182 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Wilson, W. H. (1987). An experimental and theoretical analysis of stress wave and gas pressure
effects in bench blasting. PhD thesis, University of Maryland.
Yamamoto, M., Ichijo, T. and Tananka, Y. (1995). Smooth blasting with electronic delay
detonators. Research Proceedings of Annual Conference on Explosives and Blasting
Research, Explosives Reference Database on CD-Rom, International Society of Explosives
Engineers, Ohio, USA.
Yu, T. R. and Vongpaisal. S. (1996). New blast damage criteria for underground blasting.
CIM Bulletin, No. 998, 89, 139-145.
Ziegler, K. (1985). Blasting techniques in coal mines of the Republic of Germany. Proc. Interna-
tional Symposium on Mining Tech. & Sci., China Coal Industry Publishing House, Trans
Tech Publication, 594-599.
12
Rock bolting
“Listen to advice, but make your own decisions.”
From Chinese Fortune Cookie
12.1 GENERAL
Rock bolt as the term indicates is a rod or bar shaped bolt made up of steel, tube, etc.
and used to support the rock mass. With the developments in supporting technology, the
rock bolt supports have become very popular. Hence, one should plan an underground
engineering project with a rock bolt support. Starting from the ancient wooden or bamboo
bolts there are different types of rock bolts as discussed below.
12.2 TYPES OF ROCK BOLTS
There are basically two types of rock bolt (i) pre-tensioned point-anchored bolt and
(ii) untensioned full-column grouted bolt (Fig. 12.1). The evolution of rock bolting began
with (mechanically) point-anchored bolt. It consists of a steel bar with a mechanical
anchorage at the top and a bearing plate and a torque nut at its bottom end (Fig. 12.1a).
The bolt is pre-tensioned by tightening the nut with the help of a torque wrench. However
the pre-tension is lost gradually as (i) rock creeps and blast vibrations loosen the mechani-
cal anchorage particularly in weak rocks like shale and schist, etc., (ii) humidity or ground
water (with massive sulphides) corrodes the bolt, (iii) the rock is fractured at the end of
borehole due to stress concentration and (iv) bolt is broken in the highly tectonically active
(micro-folded) weak rocks. They are used as temporary support system.
Recently, full-column grouted bolts have been employed successfully in supporting
mine roof and tunnels where point (mechanically) anchored bolts had failed. The grouted
bolt is simply a steel bar grouted into a borehole throughout its length (Fig. 12.1b).
The grouted bolts are much stiffer than ungrouted bolts and so resist any tendency of
dislocation along the existing fractures in the rock masses. The propagation of a fracture
is arrested as a reinforced crack may not open up easily. Further, interlocking between
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
184 Tunnelling in weak rocks
rock blocks is retained. A broken rock bolt is still effective as two short bolts. Most of the
common bolts may be classiﬁed as illustrated in Fig. 12.2.
The various types of mechanical anchorages are shown in Fig. 12.3. Rock bolts (of
about 25 mm diameter) with slot and wedge anchorages are used extensively in hard
rocks. In this system, the anchorage is obtained by driving a bolt with a slot into the
wedge held against the end of the borehole (Fig. 12.3a). According to Lang (1961), the
bolt should be inserted by hammering with a pressure of 0.5–0.7 MPa, bolt insertion time
20 to 30 s, frequency of hammering 2000–3000 impacts per min. In this way, the slotted
Rock Fracturing 
During Pre-tensioning 
T
N
Loss of Pretension (T)
= Total Loss
Zone of Tensile 
Stresses
Rock Spalling
in Fragile Rock
Bolt Fracture
    Total Loss
Resin Absorbs
Blast Vibrations
Grout Enters into
Joints and Cements
them
a.  Point-Anchored Bolt
b.  Full-Column Grouted Bolt
Blast Vibrations and
Rock Creep Loosen
the Anchor
Bolthead Suffers
no Damage during
Blasting
Fig. 12.1
Comparison of point-anchored and grouted bolts.
Cable
Bolt
Resin
Fibreglass
Bolt
Resin
Bolt 
Perfo
Bolt
Untensioned
Cables
Resin
Bolt
Pre-tensioned
Swellex
Split
Set Tube
Full-Column Grouted Bolt
      or Anchor Bars
Friction Tube
Bolts
Grouted
Anchored
Sliding
Wedge
Slot
Wedge
Expansion
Shell
Point-Anchored Bolt
   (Pre-tensioned)
ROCK BOLTS
Point Anchored
Bolt (Grouted
by Cement)
Fig. 12.2
Types of bolts.
Rock bolting
185
15cm
7.5 cm
9cm
2.5 cm
13cm
5cm
15-20cm
25mm
32-35mm
25mm
7.5 cm
5cm
32mm
12.5-19 mm
2.5 cm
4.0 cm
41mm
a. Slot and wedge anchors
b. Expansion shell anchorage
19mm
19mm
41mm
Bearing Plate
(15cmx15cm)
Spherical
Washer (20°)
Greased
Machine Washer
Bewel Washer
as Required
Swivel Jointed
Plate (30°)
c. Expansion Shell Anchorage
d. Sliding Wedge
Anchorage
e. Various Types of
Bearing Plates
Fig. 12.3
Components of point-anchored bolts.
bolt may expand to a diameter 15 percent more than that of the borehole. If the rock is
too weak, the wedge may penetrate inside the rock at borehole end without causing the
expansion of slotted bolt. Thus anchorage capacity of the slot–wedge anchor may not
develop to the extent of tensile strength of the bolt-shank.
The expansion shell anchorage is more versatile than slot–wedge anchorage. It consists
of serrated split sleeves with a wedge cum nut screwed upon the threaded bolt (Fig. 12.3c).
When the torque nut at the bottom end (Fig. 12.1a) is tightened, the wedge forces the
sleeves to open against the wall of the hole. The expansion shell has two advantages over
186 Tunnelling in weak rocks
the slot–wedge (i) the length of the hole need not be precisely equal to that of the bolt and
(ii) the bolt can be used in soft rocks also. For example, anchorage capacity of expansion
shell for 19 mm bolt ranges from 3 to 10 tonnes for soft to medium shales. However
borehole diameter has to be slightly larger than that for slot and wedge type bolt of the
same diameter.
In practice, surface of the excavation is rarely ﬂat and perpendicular to the axis of
the bolt. As such steel bearing plates of size 10 × 10 cm or 15 × 15 cm are used to bridge
irregularities on the rock surface and provide ﬁrm bearing surface for the washer and the
nut (Fig. 12.3e).
As the bolt is tensioned, the rock asperities are crushed to provide the required bearing
area. With blasting vibrations, the crushed material tends to become loose, and at times
spalling of the rock above the plate occurs leaving the bolt to hang in the air. Thus the bolt
should be checked periodically and retightened. This is a rule which should be strictly
followed in the practice.
If rock bolts are desired to be a permanent system of support, all boltholes must be
grouted completely with cement grout (Fig. 12.4a) or resin. This is for preserving the pre-
tension and preventing corrosion of steel. (Steel ribs are also encased in concrete lining
for the same reasons.) For this purpose either an air tube or hollow bar of high strength
is used. While grouting a bolt, the rubber grout seal is used to center the bolt in the hole
and to seal the collar of the hole against grout leakage. Grout injection is stopped when
air has been displaced and the grout ﬂows out from the return tube (Fig. 12.4a). A site
engineer should check the ﬂowing out of return grout to ensure the full-column grouting
of rock bolts.
Resin
cartridges
25 mm
Rebar
19 mm dia
32 mm
38 mm
Split
perforated
tubes filled
with cement
mortor
Cement
Rebar
25mm dia
Anchorage
Cement
Grout
Air out
Grout in
a. Grouted Point-Anchored Bolt
b. Perfo Bolt
c. Resin Bolt
Fig. 12.4
Process of installation of grouted bolts.
Rock bolting
187
In situation where very long bolts are required such as in large underground chambers
(and high slopes), a steel cable may be substituted for steel bar.
The full-column grouted bolts without pre-tension are also quite effective in reinforc-
ing the rock masses as mentioned earlier. In civil engineering construction, “Perfobolts”
are used to provide a permanent system of support. It consists of a pair of semi-cylindrical
perforated metallic tubes which are ﬁlled with cement mortar and tied with wire and
inserted into the borehole. Then a steel bolt of a slightly smaller diameter is hammered
into the tube as shown in Fig.12.4b. The mortar extrudes evenly out of perforations and
ﬁlls the borehole. The modern trend is towards using resin grout because time of attaining
full strength of resin is just 5 min compared to 10 h for cement. The “resin bolts” are more
popular in mines and tunnels in Europe. First, resin cartridges (sausages) are inserted with
the bolt and pushed to the end of the borehole. The bolt is then rotated at 100–600 rpm
for about 10 s to break the cartridge and mix its contents, i.e., the polyester resin, catalyst
and hardener (Fig. 12.4c). The bearing plate and the nut are ﬁtted to suspend any loose
rock mass at the rock surface because the resin may not ooze right down to the bottom of
the borehole. It may be noted here that the grouted bolts are slightly costlier than point-
anchored bolt, as such they are used in highly unstable (or rock burst prone) grounds or
where a permanent system of support is required.
The fast rotating cartridge may dig up weak rock layers locally, preventing thorough
mixing of resin in long bolts. So, bolt length should be less than 5 m in poor rocks. It is
cautioned that the resin has limited shelf life in hot climates. Therefore, this must be
checked before its application.
Some other types of bolts, e.g., pins driven hydraulically into soft rocks (Harrell,
1971) and roof trusses developed by Birmingham Bolt Co. (Kmetz, 1970) and explosively
expanded rock bolts developed by U.S. Bureau of Mines are not commonly used.
Hoek and Brown (1980) have presented an excellent summary of new types of rock
bolts. Of special interest is split tube anchor which is popular in mines where temporary
stability is all that is needed. The bolt consists of 2–3 mm thick and 38 mm diameter split
tube with 13 mm gap (Fig. 12.5). It is forced into a 35 mm diameter drillhole. The spring
13 mm
38 mm
Fig. 12.5
Split set tube bolt.
188 Tunnelling in weak rocks
action of the tube causes the tube to jam inside the hole. The friction between drillhole and
tube is increased as bolt is rusted. Grouting of this type of bolt is not possible. Rusting of
split tube bolts occurs rapidly and therefore anchorage increases with time. It is difﬁcult
to install long split tube bolts.
Fig. 12.6 shows a collapsed tube called swellex bolt. It is inserted into the bore hole
and expanded by air and water pressure to the shape of bore hole. The friction between
tube bolt and rock reinforces the rock mass. It is ideally suited in supporting tunnels within
water-charged rock masses where grouting by cement or resin is not feasible. Corrosion
can be a long-term problem both in the split tube and swellex bolts.
12.3 SELECTION OF ROCK BOLTS
Following guidelines may prove useful in selection of bolts (Pender et al., 1963),
(i) Deformed bar shanks are now used for all bolts which are to be grouted with
cement or resin. They are installed along unsupported free length near the tunnel
face within the bridge action period of rock mass.
(ii) Plain shank bolts are used only for temporary full-column grouted bolts support or
where concrete lining is to be placed for permanent support. The modern practice is
Fig. 12.6
Swellex tube bolt (Hoek, 2004).
Rock bolting
189
to recommend thermo-mechanically treated (TMT) bolts as they are ductile having
strength of 415 MPa (against 250 MPa of mild steel).
(iii) Bolts of high tensile strength should be used with precaution. When it breaks, it
leaves a hole with high velocity. In squeezing ground or where rock bursts are
likely, mild steel bolts are preferred because it meets the requirement of large
plastic yielding. Special yieldable head type bolts may also be used in squeezing
conditions (Barla, 1995).
(iv) The cement grout should be designed properly for ﬂowability, slight expansion
on hardening and high shear strength. These properties are obtained with grouts
having water cement ratio between 0.38 and 0.44 to which commercial aluminum
powder has been mixed in amounts up to 0.005 percent by weight of cement.
Excessive aluminum powder may create weak, spongy and powdery grout. Other
expanding agents may also be used as per speciﬁcations of manufacturers.
Mandal (2002) has suggested rock bolt and shotcrete support systems for various
tunnelling ground conditions as given in Table 12.1.
Table 12.1 Suggested support for various rock conditions (Mandal, 2002).
Rock conditions
Suggested support type
Sound rock with smooth walls
created by good blasting. Low in
situ stresses.
No support or alternatively, where required for safety,
mesh held in place by grouted dowels or mechanically
anchored rock bolts, installed to prevent small pieces
from falling.
Sound rock with few intersecting
joints or bedding planes resulting
in loose wedges or blocks. Low in
situ stresses.
Scale well; install tensioned, mechanically anchored bolts
to tie blocks into surrounding rock, use straps across
bedding planes or joints to prevent openings. Such as in
shaft stations or crusher chambers, rock bolts should be
grouted with cement to prevent corrosion.
Sound rock, damaged by blasting,
with few intersecting weakness
planes forming blocks and
wedges. Low in situ stress
conditions.
Chain link or weld mesh, held by tensioned mechanically
anchored rock bolts, to prevent falls of loose rock.
Attention must be paid to scaling and to improving
blasting to reduce amount of loose rock.
Closely jointed blocky rock with
small blocks ravelling from
surface causing deterioration if
unsupported. Low stress
conditions.
Shotcrete layer, approximately 50 mm thick. Addition of
micro-silica and steel ﬁber reduces rebound and
increases strength of shotcrete in bending. Larger
wedges are bolted so that shotcrete is not overloaded.
Limit scaling to control ravelling. If shotcrete not
available, use chain link or weld mesh and pattern
reinforcement such as split sets or swellex.
Continued
190 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 12.1—Continued
Stress-induced failure in jointed
rock. First indications of
failure due to high stress are
seen in borehole walls and in
pillar corners.
Pattern support with grouted dowels. Split sets are suitable for
supporting small failures. Grouted tensioned or unten-
sioned cable can be used but mechanically anchored rock
bolts are less suitable for this application. Typical length of
reinforcement should be about half the span of openings
less than 6 m and between half and one-third for spans of 6
to 12 m spacing should be installed before signiﬁcant move-
ment occurs. Shotcrete can add signiﬁcant strength to rock
and should be used in long-term openings (drill-drive etc.)
Drawpoints developed in good
rock but subjected to high
stress and wear during blasting
and drawing of stopes.
Use grouted rebar for wear resistance and for support of
drawpoints brows. Install this reinforcement during
development of the trough drives and draw point, before
rock movement takes place as a result of drawing of stopes.
Do not use shotcrete or mesh in drawpoints. Place dowels
at close spacing in blocky rock.
Fractured rock around openings
in stressed rock with a
potential of rock bursts.
Pattern support required but in this case some ﬂexibility is
required to absorb shock from rock bursts. Split sets are
good since they will slip under shock loading but will still
retain some load and keep mesh in place. Grouted resin
bolts and Swellex will also slip under high load but some
face plates may fail. Mechanically anchored bolts are poor
in these conditions. Lacing between heads of reinforcement
helps to retain rock near surface under heavy rock bursting.
Very poor quality rock
associated with faults or shear
zones. Rock bolts or dowels
cannot be anchored in this
material.
Fiber-reinforced shotcrete can be used for permanent support
under low stress conditions or for temporary support to
allow steel sets to be placed. Note that shotcrete layer must
be drained to prevent build up of water pressure behind the
shotcrete. Steel sets are required for long-term support
where it is evident that stresses are high or that rock is
continuing to move. Capacity of steel sets estimated from
amount of loose rock to be supported. Min. 200 mm
backﬁlling is required to develop contact between steel sets
and rock surface.
12.4 INSTALLATION OF ROCK BOLTS
12.4.1 Scaling
One of the most frequent causes of accidents in underground excavations is indequate
scaling soon after blasting. Scaling work consists of removal of loose pieces of rock from
roof and walls before workmen move towards the face of excavation. It is generally done
Rock bolting
191
manually by using long steel bars. The sound of impact of a steel bar on the rock may
tell the foremen whether or not the rock is loose. The same is then removed. However,
there is poor visibility and walls are covered with dust and face is not easily accessible,
so manual scaling may not be very much effective.
12.4.2 Installation
The rock bolts must be installed as soon as possible after scaling and within bridge action
period. The delay in installation may not only jeopardize the safety of workmen due to
greater chances of rock fall but it also reduces the strength of the rock mass. The good
practice is:
(i) Install rock bolts concurrently with drilling of blast-holes in the (tunnel or mine)
face for the next round using common jumbo. The experience is that the bolts
even close to the face are seldom damaged after blasting, except that there is
loss of pre-tension. The grouting may then be done if required. The grout-
ing facilities (e.g., inlet and outlet tubes in Fig. 12.4a) should be provided at
the time of rock bolting so that pre-tension in the bolt is not released while
grouting.
(ii) The loosened rock particles in the roof should be pulled down rather than bolted.
Scaling reduces the need for spot bolting.
(iii) Thorough inspection of the rock mass (key blocks) should be done before bolting
to locate the weak zones that require special treatment or spot bolting.
12.4.3 Pre-tensioning
For efﬁcient use of the point-anchored bolts, the pre-tension (P) must be as high as the bolt
can take safely. To avoid overstressing of the bolt, adjustable automatic-cutoff (hydraulic
driven or impact) torque wrenches should be used to apply the desired torque (T) on the nut.
For purpose of checking the pre-tension, manually operated (lever type) torque wrenches
with dial may be used. Experiences show that the greased hard nut should be used above
the torque nut in order to increase the tension torque ratio (P/T) and to minimize the
scatter in this ratio (Osen & Parsons, 1966; Agapito, 1970). The typical tension–torque
relationship is given by
T = KPd
(12.1)
where d is nominal diameter of a bolt and K is a constant (∼= 0.20). Thus the bolt may
fail due to combined stresses of tension and torque. To increase torque limit, bolts of
high tensile steel are used for bolt diameter of 19 mm or less (in expansion shell). But in
soft rocks, mild steel bolts are strong enough. Very often in the ﬁeld, bolts of too large
diameter tend to be used for psychological reasons in the poor rocks, though they cannot
provide much anchorage capacity.
192 Tunnelling in weak rocks
There is no need of tensioning full-column grouted bolts in the weak zones (Tincelin,
1970), and in fact too high pre-tension might reduce the efﬁciency of bolts. However, a
resin bolt may be pre-tensioned by ﬁrst inserting cartridge of fast setting resin, followed
by cartridges of slow setting resin and thereafter rotating the bolt, and ﬁnally tightening
the torque nut as for the point-anchored bolt.
12.4.4 Wiremesh
If the clear spacing between bearing plates is too large compared to the fracture spacing,
rock blocks are likely to fall down leading to complete collapse of the bolted roof. The wire
mesh has proved more successful than initially thought of in preventing such spalling and
ravelling of highly fractured rock masses. However, the wire mesh should be stretched
tightly between rock bolts and held close to the rock surface. Further it also provides an
effective protection to the workmen against rock falls. Infact, even a ﬂimsy wire netting
serves the structural purpose.
Chain link mesh is used when spacing between bolts is considerable and mesh is
required to hold small pieces of rock which become detached from the roof due to the
poor work of scaling. This type of wire mesh consists of a woven fabric of wire such as
mesh for fencing around play grounds. It is ﬂexible. It is easy for shotcrete to penetrate
behind the chain link mesh. The contact between rock surface and mesh is a difﬁcult task in
practice. Since wire mesh is easily damaged by ﬂying pieces of rock from the nearby blast,
ithasbeensuggested(Hoek&Bray, 1980)thatthemeshshouldnotbeﬁxedrightuptoface.
Another type of wire mesh is weld mesh which is generally used for reinforcing
shotcrete. It consists of a square grid of steel wires, welded at junctions.
12.4.5 Rock bolt ties
In addition, continuous steel ties are also employed to support the unstable rock mass.
The ties may be of steel channel sections with properly spaced holes for the bolts.
12.5 PULL-OUT TESTS
Pull-out tests on certain percentage of bolts are necessary to (i) measure the residual pre-
tension in bolts after blasting, (ii) check their anchorage capacity and (iii) study creep
effect, etc.
Fig. 12.7a illustrates a typical pull-out test as suggested by Franklin and Woodﬁeld
(1971). The bolt is pulled out by a 100 ton spring-return hollow ram with low friction seals
for reproducible calibration. The ram is pressurized by a hand pump connected through
a high pressure ﬂexible hose. The pull is measured by a pressure gauge calibrated directly
in tons. The movement of the bolt-head which is the sum of anchor slip and deformations
in bolt can be monitored easily by a set of dial gauges. The bolt should be tested for a
movement to the extent of 5 to 8 cm in order to study the post-failure behavior.
Rock bolting
193
Spherical
Seat
Nut
Magnetic
Clamp
Nut
Measuring
Beam
Piston
Dial
Gauge
Base Plate
To Pump and
Pressure Gauge
Resin or
Mechanical Anchor
Ram
Fig. 12.7a
Rock bolt testing equipment (Franklin and Woodﬁeld, 1971).
To measure actual tension, an auxiliary shank may be coupled to the bolt-head. It
is pulled out by the ram which rests on an extra packer over a bearing plate to accom-
modate the coupling. The actual tension is that load at which torque nut just looses
contact with the bearing plate. The International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM)
has also suggested a method for pull-out test on rock anchors and bolts. Sometimes
the quality of grout is checked by overcoring a 15 cm diameter core containing the
rock bolt.
Typical test results are shown in Fig. 12.7b. It is seen that mechanical anchorages
may slip upto 50 mm before peak load in contrast to only 5 mm for resin bolts. In addition
resin bolts are found to give much better anchorage capacity.
The quality of bolts should also be checked in laboratory by testing ﬁve bolts per 1000
according to the suggested method of ISRM (1981) as follows:
(i) Tensile test on anchorage
(ii) Tensile test on nut and bearing plate
194 Tunnelling in weak rocks
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
0
1000
2000
3000
RESIN ANCHORS
Max. Bolt Strength
0
10
20
30
Short Tons Load
(a)
(b)
Bolt Extension, inch.
Bolt Extension, inch.
0
1000
2000
3000
Max. Bolt Strength
Yield Strength
Yield Strength
MECHANICAL  ANCHORS
0
10
20
30
Short Tons Load
Jack Pressure, psi
Jack Pressure, psi
Bolt De-
formation
Bolt De-
formation
Fig. 12.7b
Pull-out curves for granites (a) resin-anchored bolts, (b) mechanically anchored bolts.
(iii) Tensile test on the shank
(iv) Test for determining torque–tension ratio
Fairhurst and Singh (1974) conducted model tests on a bolted model of four layers
(simply supported at the ends) to compare the reinforcement action of full-column grouted
bolts and point-anchored bolts. Plexiglass beams and Masonite beams were used to repre-
sent brittle layers and ductile layers of rock masses. Both have practically same values of
modulus of elasticity and modulus of rupture. The generally low stiffness of mechanically
anchored bolt was modelled by interposing a spring between nut at the top end of each bolt
and pre-tensioning the spring to exert on average pressure of 0.07 MPa across the layer.
The grouted bolt consisted of 3 mm diameter steel rod in 5 mm hole ﬁlled with epoxy.
Fig. 12.8 compares the normalized force and deﬂection curves for various models. It is
seen that grouted bolts performed better than point-anchored bolt. This is also borne out
by the ﬁeld experience. Panek’s (1955a, b, 1961, 1962) suspicion on efﬁcacy of grouted
bolts is not based on reality.
It is interesting to note that a fracture occurred through the grouted bolt in the Plexiglas
beam presumably because of stress concentration around the bolthole. Consequently the
grouted bolts lowered the ultimate load carrying capacity of the brittle beam. On the other
hand the more ductile Masonite beam yielded around boltholes rather than fracturing as
in the case of Plexiglas beam. Tests on thick beams of Plexiglas however exhibited the
elasto-plastic shearing through bolt without any fracturing of the beam. A study of the
computer model of bolted layers was taken up (Singh et al., 1973) to verify the prediction.
Rock bolting
195
Grouted
Point  Anchored
0
1.0
1.5
Center  Deflection,  Inch.
0.0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.0
Center  Deflection, Inch.
2.0
0.5
Unbolted
Fracture
F
Fracture through
Bolt Hole
F
Point Anchored
Unbolted
Grouted
F = Normalized Force, [F = Fapplied/Fmax,  unbolted]
a. Masonite Beams
b. Plexiglas Beams
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Fig. 12.8
Load deﬂection results from model rock bolting tests (Fairhurst and Singh, 1974).
It was shown that the untensioned grouted bolt (at usual spacing) makes a rock beam
almost monolithic in behavior.
12.6 REINFORCEMENT OF JOINTED ROCK MASS AROUND OPENINGS
12.6.1 Reinforced beam
According to Lang (1961), axial pre-stress is developed due to Poisson’s effect of
normal stress on account of bolt’s pre-tension. This pre-stress can stabilize the rock beam
effectively as in the case of pre-stressed concrete beam.
196 Tunnelling in weak rocks
A two-dimensional photoelastic study showed that the pre-tension of bolts form a
zone of uniform compression between the ends of the bolts (Fig. 12.9). The only condition
is that the ratio between length (l) and spacing (s) of bolts is more than 2. At this ratio,
the zone is relatively narrow whereas for l/s equal to 3, it is approximately equal to two-
third of the bolt length (i.e., equal to l−s). The normal stress (σv) within the zone may
be estimated as ratio of pre-tension to the area per bolt. The horizontal stress (σh) equal
to koσv would be induced within this zone provided that the bolted beam is clamped
laterally.
(b)  l/s = 2.0
Tension
l
(a) l/s = 1.5
s
Zone of Uniform
Compression
Tension
(c)  l/S = 3.00
Fig. 12.9
Rock bolt – photoelastic stress pattern (Lang, 1961).
Rock bolting
197
The total horizontal force is the sum of axial pre-stress (Ph) and the thrust (T) due
to the arch action. Higher horizontal force means greater frictional resistance to sliding
of the beam downwards.
The photoelastic model further indicated that zones of tensile stresses develop between
bolts and so it may require an additional support in the form of wire-netting.
Large scale model tests to demonstrate the effectiveness of pre-tensioned bolts were
also performed by Lang (1966). Crushed rock material of 38 to 57 mm in size was ﬁlled
in a box of 1.2 m × 1.2 m × 1.2 m, compacted by vibration and then bolted with 58 cm
long bolts. The reinforced rock mass was loaded at the center. At a load of 7000 1b (point
D in Fig. 12.10), rock fragments started falling out leading to failure. The strength of
the beam was almost doubled when the experiment was repeated using 24 gauge chicken
wire net placed securely under the bolt-washers but not attached to the sides of the box.
Note that repeated loading caused plastic deformations but without failure. This is because
of some loss of pre-tension in bolts due to re-adjustment of rock fragments. Hence, the need
for retightening of the bolts after vibrations or repeated loading. It was also demonstrated
that only a very ﬂimsy support is needed to hold the loose material within the tension
zone between the bolt-washers.
If the clear spacing between the washer was less than 3 to 4 times the mean particle
size, wire mesh was not required to prevent the ravelling as mentioned above. If this
ratio was less than 7, the particles fell out between bolts but eventually a stable vault was
formed. If this ratio was greater than 7, a fall out (ravelling) continued leading to total
collapse. Similar conclusions have been made by Coates (1970) for block jointed models
of rock mass with different orientations of joint sets.
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
P
P 
δ
Bolting Pattern
Section of Box
11
7
9
8
5
6
4
3
1
2
D
A
10
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
S2
S1
W
l
Vertical Displacement - Center of Box ‘δ’ inch
Central Vertical Load (W)
Fig. 12.10
Behavior of crushed rock model (Lang, 1961) [Rock size range was 1-1/2’ to 2-1/4’;
The mean (m) was 1.875 inch (F = S2/m = 4.3)].
198 Tunnelling in weak rocks
An experiment may be conducted at home by ﬁlling a bucket with crushed rock which
is then bolted with single pre-tensioned bolt. The bucket is then turned upside down to
see whether rock mass has been stabilized.
12.6.2 Reinforced rock arch
It may be seen from Fig. 12.11 that radial bolting pattern creates a reinforced rock arch
over the tunnels. The thickness of an arch can be increased by employing supplementary
bolts of shorter length. The most common practice is (Lang, 1966; Barton et al., 1974)
(i) Rock bolts should be pre-tensioned to give required ultimate support capacity
(proof or pwall) which is equal to P/b·s where P = pre-tension, b = bolt spacing
20′
7 Bolts each 20′ long, spaced 6′x6′
11 Bolts each 8′ long, spaced  4′x4′
7 Bolts  each 16′ long, spaced 5-1/2′ x 5-1/2′
9  Bolts each 8′ long, spaced  4′x4′
20′
24′
24′
Fig. 12.11
Arch concept of rock reinforcement in circular and horse-shoe shaped tunnels
(Lang, 1961).
Rock bolting
199
along tunnel axis and s = bolt spacing perpendicular to the tunnel axis. The pre-
tensioned bolts are suitable for temporary support of openings in the hard rocks.
(ii) Grouted bolt anchors should be designed to provide ultimate support pressure
(proof or pwall) equal to P/bs where P is the tensile strength of bolts, provided
bolts are adequately grouted. The bolt length should be greater than 1/4 to 1/3 of
span of the tunnel.
(iii) The length of bolts (L in meters) should be calculated from the following simple
relationship given by Barton et al. (1974),
L = 2 + (0.15 B/ESR)
for
roof
(12.2)
= 2 + (0.15 H/ESR)
for
wall
(12.3)
where
B
= span or width of opening in meters,
H
= height of opening wall in meters and
ESR = excavated support ratio (Table 5.11).
(iv) The adequate length of grouted anchors be obtained similarly as follows,
L = 0.40 B/ESR
for
roof
(12.4)
= 0.35 H/ESR
for
wall
(12.5)
(v) When single (2–3 cm thick) or double (5 cm thick) layers of shotcrete are applied
usually in combination with systematic bolting, the function of shotcrete is to
prevent loosening, especially in the zone between bolts. The capacity of shotcrete
lining is, therefore, neglected. The application of shorcrete is essential to make
grouted bolt–anchor system as permanent support.
(vi) Clear spacing between bolts should not be more than three times the average
fracture spacing otherwise use wire mesh and guniting or shotcreting. Further
center to center spacing must be less than one-half of the bolt length.
(vii) Bolts are installed on a selected pattern except near weak zones that would require
special treatment. Spot bolting should be discouraged.
(viii) Bolts should be oriented to make an angle of 0 to φ to the normal on the critical
joint sets in order to develop maximum resistance along joints (Fig. 12.12).
(ix) Bolts must be installed as early as possible within “Bridge Action Period” and
close to the excavated face (Fig. 4.1).
However a tunnel is always unsupported in a certain length “t” between the last row
of bolting and the newly excavated face (blasted face). Suppose rock is pulled out to a
length of 3 m in each round of blasting, one may then assume the unsupported length (t)
to be about 4 m. According to Rabcewicz (1955), the zone of rock mass of thickness of
t/2 may be fractured and loosened due to blasting as shown in Fig. 12.13. Thus the bolt
200 Tunnelling in weak rocks
A. Horizontal joint system
B. Inclined joint system
C. Vertical joint system
Fig. 12.12
Roof bolting in strata having various dip angles.
Limit of
Loosening
Natural Arch Created
by Bolting
Y
Y
t/2
h
b
t/2
t
X
X
l
Limit of
Loosening
Gunite
Section Y-Y
Section X-X
Fig. 12.13
Diagrammatic sections demonstrating principles of roof bolting.
Rock bolting
201
length must be at least equal to the thickness of loosened zone (= t/2), so that the loose
zone may be suspended by competent rock mass.
Rock bolts/anchors should be designed to absorb high longitudinal strains in the cases
of weak rock masses. So the bolts of high tensile strength are failure in caverns and tunnels
in weak rocks under high tectonic stresses, as in Tala Hydroproject, Bhutan (Singh, 2003).
12.7 BOLTING PATTERN
It is generally agreed that pattern bolting should be preferred over spot bolting because
unknown conditions behind the surface of an excavation may be more critical than those
visible at the surface. In addition, pattern bolting is advantageous from construction point
of view also.
12.8 FLOOR BOLTING
Floor bolting is required to prevent ﬂoor of a tunnel from heaving in order to maintain the
track properly for efﬁcient haulage. Attempts to chop off squeezed rock mass are fruitless
and may damage the wall support. The experience is that reinforcement of rock mass in
the ﬂoor by rock bolts is very effective. However there is no standard practice. If swelling
soft shale is found in the ﬂoor of a deep tunnel opening heaving may be serious.
In squeezing ground, rock bolting is not enough. It is important to apply steel ﬁber
reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) layer by layer around the opening. It is necessary that invert
of shotcrete lining is also laid so that it may enable the shotcrete walls to take heavy wall
pressures. But one must understand the tunnelling hazards.
REFERENCES
Agapito, J. (1970). Development of a better rock-bolts assembly at White Pine. presented AIME
Annual Meetings Denver, Colorado, February 15-19, 1970. Preprint No. 70 - AM - 87.
Barla, G. (1995). Squeezing Rocks in Tunnels, ISRM News Journal, 2 (3 & 4), 44-49.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for design of
tunnel support, Rock Mechanics, 6, 189-236.
Coates, D. F. (1970). Rock Mechanics Principles, Mines Branch Department of Energy and
Resources, Canada, Mines Branch Monograph 874, Art 3.29, 7.15.
Fairhurst, C. and Singh, B. (1974). Roof bolting in horizontally laminated rock, Engineering and
Mining Journal, Feb. 80-90.
Franklin, J. A. and Woodﬁeld, P. F. (1971). Comparison of a polyester resin and a mechanical rock
bolt anchor. Inst. Min. Met. Trans, Sec. A Mining Industry, London, 80(776), 91-100.
202 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Harrell, M. V. (1971). Roof control with hydraulically driven pins. Mining Congress Journal, July
1971, 27-31.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Underground Excavations in Rock. The Institution of Min. Met.,
London Chap. 9.
Hoek, E. and Bray, J. W. (1981). Rock Slope Engineering. The Inst. Min. Met, 3rd edition, Chap. 7
and Appendix III.
Hoek, E. (2004). Downloaded from Internet.
ISRM (1981). Suggested methods for rock bolt testing. Rock Characterization Testing and
Monitoring, Ed: E.T. Brown, 163-168.
Kmetz, W. J. (1970). Roof trusses support problem strata. Coal Age, Jan. 1970, 64-68.
Lang, T. A. (1961). Theory and Practice of Rock Bolting. A.I.M.E., Trans., 220.
Lang, T. A. (1966). Theory and practice of rock reinforcement. 45th Annual Meetings Highway
Research Board, Washington D.C.
Mandal, K. S. (2002). Temporary support methods - an overview. Indian Rock Conference, ISRMTT,
New Delhi, India, 296-319.
Osen, L. and Parsons, E. W. (1966). Yield and Ultimate Strengths of Rock Bolts under Combined
Loading. U.S. Bureau of Mines, R.I. 6842.
Panek, L. A. (1955a). Principles of Reinforcing Bedded Roof with Bolts. U.S. Bureau of Mines,
R.I. 5156.
Panek, L. A. (1955b). Design of Bolting Systems to Reinforce Bedded Mine Roof. U.S. Bureau of
Mines, R.I. 5155.
Panek, L. A. (1961). The Combined Effect of Friction and Suspension in Bolting Bedded Mine roof.
U.S. Bureau of Mines, R.I. 6139.
Panek, L. A. (1962). The Effect of Suspension in bolted Bedded Mine Roof. U.S. Bureau of Mines,
R.I. 6138.
Pender, E. B., Hosking, A. D. and Mattner, R. H. (1963). Grouted Rock Bolts for Permanent
Support of Major Underground Works. Inst. of Engrs. Australia Journal, Sydney, 35,
(7-8), July-Aug-1963, 129-150.
Rabeewiez, L. V. (1955). Bolted support for tunnels. Mine and Quarry Engineering, Part I,
March 1955, 111-116, Part II, April 1955, 153-160.
Singh, B., Fairhurst, C. and Christiano, P. P. (1973). Computer simulation of laminated roof
reinforced with grouted bolts. I.G.S. Symp. Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling Problems,
Kurukshetra, 41-47.
Singh, R. B. (2003). Personal Communication with Bhawani Singh, IIT Roorkee, India.
Tincelin, E. (1970). Roof bolting recommendations, Publication of Parley of Cooperation and
Industrial Promotion for Exploration and Exploitation of Mineral Deposits and Mineral
Processing, Sydney, 26-27 May, 1970.
13
Tunnelling hazards
“The most incomprehensible fact about nature is that it is comprehensible.”
Albert Einstein
13.1 INTRODUCTION
The knowledge of potential tunnelling hazards plays an important role in the selection
of excavation method and designing a support system for underground openings. The
tunnelling media could be stable/competent (and or non-squeezing) or squeezing/failing
depending upon the in situ stress and the rock mass strength. A weak over-stressed rock
mass would experience squeezing ground condition (Dube & Singh, 1986), whereas a
hard and massive over-stressed rock mass may experience rock burst condition. On the
other hand, when the rock mass is not over-stressed, the ground condition is termed as
stable or competent (non-squeezing).
Tunnelling in the competent ground conditions can again face two situations – (i)
where no supports are required, i.e., a self-supporting condition and (ii) where supports
are required for stability; which is a non-squeezing condition. The squeezing ground
condition has been divided into four classes on the basis of tunnel closures by Hoek (2001)
as minor, severe, very severe and extreme squeezing ground conditions (Table 13.1).
The worldwide experience is that tunnelling through the squeezing ground condition
is a very slow and hazardous process because the rock mass around the opening loses its
inherent strength under the inﬂuence of in situ stresses. This may result in mobilization
of high support pressure and tunnel closures. Tunnelling under the non-squeezing ground
condition, on the other hand, is comparatively safe and easy because the inherent strength
of the rock mass is maintained. Therefore, the ﬁrst important step is to assess whether a
tunnel would experience a squeezing ground condition or a non-squeezing ground condi-
tion. This decision controls the selection of the realignment, excavation method and the
support system. For example, a large tunnel could possibly be excavated full face with
light supports under the non-squeezing ground condition. It may have to be excavated by
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
204 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 13.1 Classiﬁcation of ground conditions for tunnelling (Singh & Goel, 1999).
S.No.
Ground
condition
class
Sub-class
Rock behavior
1.
Competent self-
supporting
–
Massive rock mass requires no support
for tunnel stability
2.
Incompetent
non-
squeezing
–
Jointed rock mass requires supports for
tunnel stability. Tunnel walls are
stable and do not close
3.
Ravelling
–
Chunks or ﬂakes of rock mass begin to
drop out of the arch or walls after the
rock mass is excavated
4.
Squeezing
Minor squeezing
(ua/a = 1–2.5%)
Severe squeezing
(ua/a = 2.5–5%)
Very severe squeezing
(ua/a = 5–10%)
Extreme squeezing
(ua/a > 10%)
(Hoek, 2001)
Rock mass squeezes plastically into the
tunnel both from the roof and the
walls and the phenomenon is time
dependent; rate of squeezing depends
upon the degree of over-stress; may
occur at shallow depths in weak rock
masses like shales, clay, etc.; hard
rock masses under high cover may
experience slabbing/popping/rock
burst
5.
Swelling
–
Rock mass absorbs water, increases in
volume and expands slowly into the
tunnel (e.g., in montmorillonite clay)
6.
Running
–
Granular material becomes unstable
within steep shear zones
7.
Flowing/sudden
ﬂooding
–
A mixture of soil like material and
water ﬂows into the tunnel. The
material can ﬂow from invert as well
as from the face crown and wall and
can ﬂow for large distances
completely ﬁlling the tunnel and
burying machines in some cases. The
discharge may be 10–100 l/s which
can cause sudden ﬂood. A chimney
may be formed along thick shear
zones and weak zones.
8.
Rock burst
–
A violent failure in hard (brittle) and
massive rock masses of Class II*
type when subjected to high stress
Notations: ua = radial tunnel closure; a = tunnel radius; ua/a = normalized tunnel closure in percentage; * UCS
test on Class II type rock shows reversal of strain after peak failure.
Tunnelling hazards
205
heading and benching method with a ﬂexible support system under the squeezing ground
condition.
Non-squeezing ground conditions are common in most of the projects. The squeezing
conditions are common in the Lower Himalaya in India, Alps and other young moun-
tains of the world where the rock masses are weak, highly jointed, faulted, folded and
tectonically disturbed and the overburden is high.
13.2 THE TUNNELLING HAZARDS
Various tunnelling conditions encountered during tunnelling have been summarized in
Table 13.1. Table 13.2 suggests the method of excavation, the type of supports and
precautions for various ground conditions. Table 13.3 summarizes different conditions
for tunnel collapse caused by geological unforeseen conditions, inadequacy of design
models or support systems (Vlasov et al., 2001).
Commission on Squeezing Rocks in Tunnels of International Society for Rock
Mechanics (ISRM) has published Deﬁnitions of Squeezing as reproduced here
(Barla, 1995).
“Squeezing of rock is the time dependent large deformation, which occurs around a
tunnel and other underground openings, and is essentially associated with creep caused
by (stress) exceeding shear strength (limiting shear stress). Deformation may terminate
during construction or continue over a long time period.”
This deﬁnition is complemented by the following additional statements:
• Squeezing can occur in both rock and soil as long as the particular combination
of induced stresses and material properties pushes some zones around the tunnel
beyond the limiting shear stress at which creep starts.
• The magnitude of the tunnel convergence associated with squeezing, the rate of
deformation and the extent of the yielding zone around the tunnel depend on the
geological conditions, the in situ stresses relative to rock mass strength, the ground
water ﬂow and pore pressure and the rock mass properties.
• Squeezing of rock masses can occur as squeezing of intact rock, as squeezing of
inﬁlled rock discontinuities and/or along bedding and foliation surfaces, joints and
faults.
• Squeezing is synonymous of over-stressing and does not comprise deformations
caused by loosening as might occur at the roof or at the walls of tunnels in jointed
rock masses. Rock bursting phenomena do not belong to squeezing.
• Time-dependent displacements around tunnels of similar magnitudes as in squeezing
ground conditions, may also occur in rocks susceptible to swelling. While swelling
always implies volume increase due to penetration of the air and moisture into the
rock, squeezing does not, except for rocks exhibit a dilatant behavior. However,
it is recognized that in some cases squeezing may be associated with swelling.
Table 13.2 Method of excavation, type of supports and precautions to be adopted for different ground conditions.
S.No
Ground
conditions
Excavation method
Type of support
Precautions
1.
Self-supporting/
competent
TBM or full face drill
and controlled blast.
No support or spot bolting with a thin layer of
shotcrete to prevent widening of joints.
Look out for localized wedge/shear zone.
Past experience discourages use of TBM
if geological conditions change
frequently.
2.
Non-squeezing/
incompetent
Full face drill and
controlled blast
by boomers.
Flexible support; shotcrete and
pre-tensioned-rock-bolt supports of required
capacity. Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS)
may or may not be required.
First layer of shotcrete should be applied
after some delay but within the stand-up
time to release the strain energy of rock
mass.
3.
Ravelling
Heading and bench;
drill and blast
manually.
Steel support with struts/pre-tensioned rock bolts
with steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS).
Expect heavy loads including side pressure.
4.
Minor
squeezing
Heading and bench;
drill and blast.
Full column grouted rock anchors and SFRS. Floor
to be shotcreted to complete a support ring.
Install support after each blast; circular
shape is ideal; side pressure is expected;
do not have a long heading which delays
completion of support ring.
5.
Severe
squeezing
Heading and bench;
drill and blast.
Flexible support; full column grouted highly ductile
rock anchors and SFRS. Floor bolting to avoid
ﬂoor heaving & to develop a reinforced rock
frame. In case of steel ribs, these should be
installed and embedded in shotcrete to withstand
high support pressure.
Install support after each blast; increase the
tunnel diameter to absorb desirable
closure; circular shape is ideal; side
pressure is expected; instrumentation is
essential.
6.
Very severe
squeezing
and extreme
squeezing
Heading and bench in
small tunnels and
multiple drift
method in large
tunnels; use
forepoling if
stand-up time is low.
Very ﬂexible support; full-column grouted highly
ductile rock anchors and thick SFRS; yielding
steel ribs with struts when shotcrete fails
repeatedly; steel ribs may be used to supplement
shotcrete to withstand high support pressure; close
ring by erecting invert support; encase steel ribs in
shotcrete, ﬂoor bolting to avoid ﬂoor heaving;
sometimes steel ribs with loose backﬁll are also
used to release the strain energy in a controlled
manner (tunnel closure more than 4 percent shall
not be permitted).
Increase the tunnel diameter to absorb
desirable closure; provide invert support
as early as possible to mobilize full
support capacity; long-term
instrumentation is essential; circular
shape is ideal.
7.
Swelling
Full face or heading
and bench; drill and
blast.
Full-column grouted rock anchors with SFRS shall
be used all-round the tunnel; increase 30 percent
thickness of shotcrete due to weak bond of the
shotcrete with rock mass; erect invert strut. The
ﬁrst layer of shotcrete is sprayed immediately to
prevent ingress of moisture into rock mass.
Increase the tunnel diameter to absorb the
expected closure; prevent exposure of
swelling minerals to moisture, monitor
tunnel closure.
8.
Running and
ﬂowing
Multiple drift with
forepoles; grouting
of the ground is
essential; shield
tunnelling may be
used in soil
conditions.
Full column grouted rock anchors and SFRS;
concrete lining up to face, steel liner in exceptional
cases with shield tunnelling. Use probe hole to
discharge ground water. Face should also be
grouted, bolted and shotcreted.
Progress is very slow. Trained crew should
be deployed. In case of sudden ﬂooding,
the tunnel is realigned by-passing the
same. Monitor rate of ﬂow of seepage.
9.
Rock burst
Full face drill and blast
Fiber reinforced shotcrete with full column resin
anchors immediately after excavation.
Micro-seismic monitoring is essential.
Table 13.3 Quality aspects related to tunnel collapses (Vlasov et al., 2001).
S.No.
Type
Phenomenon
Cause
Remedial measures
1.
Ground
collapse
Ground collapse
near the portal
During the excavation of the
upper half section of the portal
the tunnel collapsed and the
surrounding ground slid to the
river side.
Ground collapse was caused by
the increase of pore water
pressure due to rain for ﬁve
consecutive days.
• Installation of anchors to
prevent landslides
• Construction of
counter-weight embankment
which can also prevent
landslide.
• Installation of pipe roofs to
strengthen the loosened
crown.
2.
Landslide near the
portal
Cracks appeared in the ground
surface during the excavation
of the side drifts of the portal,
and the slope near the portal
gradually collapsed.
Excavation of the toe of the slope
composed of strata disturbed
the stability of soil, and
excavation of the side drifts
loosened the natural ground,
which led to landslide.
• Caisson type pile foundations
were constructed to prevent
unsymmetrical ground
pressure.
• Vertical reinforcement bars
were driven into the ground
to increase its strength.
3.
Collapse of the
crown of cutting
face.
10 to 30 m3 of soil collapsed
and supports settled during
excavation of the upper half
section.
The ground loosened and
collapsed due to the presence
of heavily jointed fractured
rock mass at the crown of the
cutting face, and the vibration
caused by the blasting for the
lower half section (hard rock).
• Roof bolts were driven into
the ground in order to
stabilize the tunnel crown.
• In order to strengthen the
ground near the portal and
talus, chemical injection and
installation of vertical
reinforcement bars were
conducted.
4.
Collapse of fault
fracture zone
After completion of blasting and
mucking, ﬂaking of sprayed
concrete occurred behind the
cutting face, following which,
40 to 50 m3 of soil collapsed
along a 7 m section from the
cutting face. Later it extended
to 13 m from the cutting face
and the volume of collapsed
soil reached 900 m3.
The fault fracture zone above the
collapsed cutting face
loosened due to blasting, and
excessive concentrated loads
were imposed on supports,
causing the shear failure and
collapse of the sprayed
concrete.
• Reinforcement of supports
behind the collapsed location
(additional sprayed concrete,
additional rock bolts).
• Addition of the number of
measurement section.
• Hardening of the collapsed
muck by chemical injection.
• Air milk injection into the
voids above the collapsed
portions.
• Use of supports with a higher
strength.
5.
Distortion of
supports
Distortion of
tunnel
supports
During excavation by the full
face tunnelling method, steel
supports considerably settled
and foot protection concrete
cracked.
Bearing capacity of the ground
at the bottom of supports
decreased due to prolonged
immersion by ground water.
• Permanent foot protection
concrete was placed in order
to decrease the concentrated
load.
• An invert with drainage was
placed.
6.
Distortion of
lining
concrete due
to unsymmet-
rical ground
pressure.
During the excavation of the
upper half section, horizontal
cracks ranging in width from
0.1 to 0.4 mm appeared in the
arch portion of the mountain
side concrete lining, while
subsidence reached the ground
surface on the valley side.
Landslide was caused due to the
steep topography with
asymmetric pressure and the
ground with lower strength,
leading to the oblique load on
the lining concrete.
• Earth anchors were driven into
the mountain side ground to
withstand the oblique load.
• Ground around the tunnel was
strengthened by chemical
injection. Subsidence location
was ﬁlled.
Continued
Table 13.3—Continued
S.No.
Type
Phenomenon
Cause
Remedial measures
7.
Distortion of tunnel
supports due to
swelling pressure
Hexagonal cracks appeared in
the sprayed concrete and
the bearing plates for rock
bolts were distorted due to
the sudden inward
movement of the side walls
of the tunnel.
Large swelling pressure was
generated by swelling clay
minerals in mudstone.
• Sprayed concrete and face
support bolts on the cutting
face were provided to
prevent weathering.
• A temporary invert was
placed in the upper half
section by spraying
concrete.
8.
Heaving of a tunnel
in service
Heaving occurred in the
pavement surface six
months after the
commencement of service,
causing cracks and faulting
in the pavement. Heaving
reached as large as 25 cm.
A fault fracture zone containing
swelling clay minerals, which
was subjected to hydrothermal
alteration, existed in the
distorted section. Plastic
ground pressure caused by this
fracture zone concentrated on
the base course of the weak
tunnel section without invert
• In order to restrict the
plastic ground pressure,
rock bolts and sprayed
concrete were applied to
the soft sandy soil beneath
the base course.
• Reinforced invert concrete
was placed.
9.
Adverse effects
on the
surrounding
environment
Adverse effects of
vibration due to
blasting on the
adjacent existing
tunnel.
During the construction of a new
tunnel, which runs parallel to
the side wall of the existing
portal, cracks appeared in the
lining (made of bricks) of the
existing tunnel.
The voids behind the existing
tunnel loosened and the lining
was distorted due to the
vibration of the blasting for
construction of the new tunnel.
• Steel supports and
temporary concrete lining
were provided to protect
the existing tunnel.
• Backﬁll grouting was
carried out.
• Excavation was carried out
by the non-blasting rock
breaking method and the
limit for chemical agent
was set to mitigate the
vibration.
10.
Ground settlement
due to the
excavation for
dual-tunnel
directly beneath
residential area.
Considerable distortion of
supports occurred in the
embankment section.
Although additional bolts
were driven into ground and
additional sprayed concrete
was provided, ground surface
settlement exceeded 100 mm.
Since the soil characteristics in
the embankment section were
worse than expected, the
ground settlement was
considerably increased by the
construction of tunnels
following the dual-tunnel.
• Pipe roofs were driven
from inside the tunnel to
reduce ground surface
settlement.
Summary table of different conditions for tunnel collapses, caused by geological unforeseen conditions, inadequacy of design models or support systems.
212 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 13.4 Comparison between squeezing and swelling phenomena (Jethwa & Dhar, 1996).
Parameter
Squeezing
Swelling
1. Cause
Small volumetric expansion of
weak and soft ground upon
stress-induced shear failure
Compaction zone can form within
broken zone
Volumetric expansion due to ingress
of moisture in ground containing
highly swelling minerals
2. Closure
• Rate of closure
(i) Very high initial rate, several
centimeters per day for the ﬁrst
1–2 weeks of excavation
(i) High initial rate for ﬁrst 1–2
weeks till moisture penetrates
deep into the ground
(ii) Reduces with time
(ii) Decreases with time as
moisture penetrates into the
ground deeplywith difﬁculty
• Period
(iii) May continue for years in
exceptional case
(iii) May continue for years if the
moist ground is scooped out to
expose fresh ground
3. Extent
The affected zone can be several
tunnel diameters thick
The affected zone is several meters
thick. Post-construction saturation
may increase swelling zone
signiﬁcantly
• Squeezing is closely related to the excavation, support techniques and sequence
adopted in tunnelling. If the support installation is delayed, the rock mass moves
into the tunnel and a stress re-distribution takes place around it. Conversely, if the
rock deformations are constrained, squeezing will lead to long-term load build-up
of rock support.
A comparison between squeezing and swelling phenomena by Jethwa (1981) and
Jethwa and Dhar (1996) is given in Table 13.4. Various approaches for estimating the
ground conditions for tunnelling on the basis of Q and modiﬁed Q, i.e., rock mass number
N are discussed in book by Singh and Goel (1999).
13.3 EMPIRICAL APPROACH FOR PREDICTING
DEGREE OF SQUEEZING
Fig. 13.1 shows zones of tunnelling hazards depending upon the values of HB0.1 and N
(rock mass quality Q with SRF = 1). Here H is the overburden in meters, B is the width
of the tunnel or cavern in meters and N is rock mass number (Chapter 6). It should
Tunnelling hazards
213
Severe Squeezing
Severe Squeezing
Minor Squeezing
Minor Squeezing
10
100
1000
10000
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Very Severe Squeezing
Mild Rock Burst
Jr/Ja > 0.5
Self-
Supporting
Non-Squeezing
Severe Squeezing
Minor Squeezing
Rock Mass Number (N)
H.B0.1
Fig. 13.1
Plot between rock mass number N and HB0.1 for predicting ground conditions
(Goel, 1994).
be noted that B should be more than the size of self-supporting tunnels (Singh and
Goel, 1999).
For a squeezing ground condition
H >> (275 N 0.33) · B−0.1meters
Jr
Ja
≤1
2
(13.1)
For a non-squeezing ground condition
H << (275 N 0.33) · B−0.1meters
(13.2)
13.4 SUDDEN FLOODING OF TUNNELS
The inclined beds of impervious rocks (shale, phyllite, schist, etc.) and pervious rocks
(crushed quartzites, sandstone, limestone, fault, etc.) may be found along a tunnel
214 Tunnelling in weak rocks
alignment. The heavy rains/snow charge the beds of pervious rocks with water like an
acquifer. While tunnelling through the impervious bed into a pervious bed, seepage water
may gush out suddenly. Authors have studied four similar case histories of Chhibro –
Khodri, Maneri Bhali, BSL and Dulhasti hydroelectric projects in Himalaya. Experience
is that sudden ﬂood accompanied by huge out-wash of sand and boulders may occur ahead
of tunnel face where several shear zones exist. This ﬂooding problem becomes dangerous
where the pervious rock mass is squeezing ground also due to the excessive overburden.
The machines and tunnel boring machines are buried partly.
The seepage should be monitored near the portal regularly. The discharge of water
should be plotted along chainage of the face of tunnel. If the peak discharge is found
to increase with tunnelling, it is very likely that sudden ﬂooding of the tunnel may take
place on further tunnelling. It is suggested that the international experts be consulted for
tackling such situations.
13.5 CHIMNEY FORMATION
There may be local thick shear zones dipping towards a tunnel face. The soil/gouge
may fall down rapidly, unless it is supported carefully and immediately. Thus, a high
cavity/chimney may be formed along the thick shear zone. The chimney may be very high
in water-charged rock mass. This cavity should be back-ﬁlled by lean concrete completely.
13.6 ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS DUE TO TOXIC OR EXPLOSIVE
GASES AND GEOTHERMAL GRADIENT
There are serious environmental hazards due to toxic or explosive gases while tunnelling in
the argillaceous rocks. Sometimes methane gas is emitted by blasted shales. Improper ven-
tilation also increases concentration of toxic gases like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen sulﬁde and sulfur dioxide. Additional ventilation capacity is required. In case
of methane gas emission, permissible electrical equipment may be used. Attention should
be given to the physical properties of the gases, as some gases tend to collect either in high
or low pockets in a tunnel complex. Table 13.5 summarizes the properties of above men-
tioned gases found in tunnels (Mathews, 1982). Monitoring of gases and oxygen should
be carried out near the face of a tunnel specially where blast fumes and gas emissions are
maximum. Oxygen must be maintained at a level of 20 percent or greater. Dust inside
the tunnel should also be controlled for reducing health hazards. Therefore, wet drilling
method is recommended for both blastholes and boltholes.
As rock engineers are going deeper and deeper, workers face a high temperature.
The temperature may increase at a rate of about 30◦C per km. This is in addition to
the average ground temperature which is equal to the average temperature in the whole
year. The temperature inside a 1400 m deep NJPC tunnel in Himalaya, India, was
Table 13.5 Properties of various gases which may be present in tunnel (Mathews, 1982).
Gas
Density
Color
Odor
Source
Physiological effect on workmen
Oxygen (O2)
1.11
None
None
Air is normally
20.93% O2
At least 20% is required to sustain normal health. Workmen
become dizzy if concentration drops to 15%. Some workmen
may die at 12.5%; most will faint at a concentration of 9%;
and death will occur at 6% or less.
Nitrogen
(N2)
0.97
Yellow
None
Air is normally
78.10% N2
Nitrogen has no ill effect on persons except to dilute air and
decrease O2%.
Carbon
dioxide
(CO2)
1.50
None
None
Air is normally 0.03%
CO2. CO2 is produced
by decaying timber and
ﬁres, and is present in
diesel exhaust.
CO2 acts as a respiratory stimulant and may increase effects of
other harmful contaminants. At 5% CO2, breathing is
laborious. A concentration of 10% can be endured for only a
few minutes.
Carbon
monoxide
(CO)
0.97
None
None
Present in diesel exhaust
and blast fumes.
CO is absorbed into the blood rather than O2. In time, very
small concentrations will produce symptoms of poisoning.
A concentration slightly greater than 0.01% will cause a
headache or possibly nausea. A concentration of 0.2% is
fatal.
Methane
(CH4)
0.55
None
None
Present in certain rock
formations containing
carbonaceous materials.
Has no ill effect on persons except to dilute air and decrease
O2%. It is dangerous because of its explosive properties.
Methane is explosive in the concentration range of 5.5 to
14.8%, being most explosive at a concentration of 9.5%.
Continued
Table 13.5—Continued
Gas
Density
Color
Odor
Source
Physiological effect on workmen
Hydrogen
sulﬁde
(H2S)
1.19
None
Rotten
eggs
Present in certain rock
formations and
sometimes in blast
fumes.
Extremely poisonous – 0.06% will cause serious problems in a
few minutes.
Sulfur
dioxide
(SO2)
2.26
None
Burning
sulfur
Present in diesel exhaust
and blast fumes.
Strongly irritating to mucous membranes at low
concentrations. Can be kept below objectionable levels by
limiting fuel sulfur content to 0.5 percent.
Oxides of
nitrogen
Approx.
1.5
Yellow-
brown
Stings
nose
Present in diesel exhaust
and blast fumes.
NO2 is most toxic. All oxides of nitrogen cause severe
irritation of the respiratory tract at high concentrations.
Acute effects may be followed by death in a few days to
several weeks owing to permanent lung damage.
Tunnelling hazards
217
as high as 45◦C or more. The efﬁciency of workers in such a high temperature was
reduced drastically. They worked for two or three hours only after taking bath frequently
with ice-ﬁlled water. If possible, cool fresh air should be used for ventilation to maintain
a working temperature of around 30◦C at the tunnel face.
13.7 INTERACTION BETWEEN ROCK PARAMETERS
The real world response of rock masses is often highly coupled or interacting. There is
a non-linear complex relationship between mechanical properties and rock parameters,
especially in weak argillaceous rock masses. Hudson (1992) has shown schematically
such complex interaction for tunnelling (Fig. 13.2). He identiﬁed the following 12 rock
parameters affecting the tunnelling conditions.
1.
Excavation dimensions
Excavation size and geometry
2.
Rock support
Rock bolts, concrete liner, etc.
3.
Depth of excavations
Deep or shallow
4.
Excavation methods
Tunnel boring machines, blasting
5.
Rock mass quality
Poor, fair, good
6.
Discontinuity geometry
Sets, orientations, distributions, etc.
7.
Rock mass structure
Intact rock and discontinuities
8.
In situ rock stress
Principal stress magnitudes and directions
9.
Intact rock quality
Hard rocks or soft rocks
10.
Rock behavior
Responses of rocks to engineering activities
11.
Discontinuity aperture
Wide or narrow
12.
Hydraulic conditions
Permeabilities, water tables, etc.
Hudson (1992) has made system’s approach very simple, interesting and based on
actual experiences and judgments of tunnelling experts. His approach makes decision
making very easy in planning of geotechnical investigations for tunnelling projects.
Figs 13.2a–d are self-explanatory. For example (7,1) means effect of 7th parameter (rock
mass structure) on the ﬁrst parameter (excavation dimensions). Since the problem is cou-
pled, coordinate (1,7) means effect or excavation dimensions on the rock mass structure,
e.g., opening or discontinuities and development of new fractures.
13.8 CONCLUDING REMARKS
Rock has EGO (extraordinary geological occurrence) problem. Enormous time and money
is lost due to unforeseen tunnelling hazards particularly in Himalaya and such other young
mountain chains in the world. It is generally said that if a shear zone or a weak zone is
not seen within 200 meters in lower Himalaya, it means that it has been missed. Thus,
geological uncertainties may be managed by adopting a strategy of tunnel construction
218 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Excavation
Dimensions
Excavation Size
&
Geometry
Rock
Support
Rockbolts
Concrete Liner,
etc.
Depth of
Excavations
Deep
or
Shallow
Dimension limited
by support require-
ments in soft rock
Caverns size may be
limited by depth
d
e
e
p
e
r
Larger caverns may be
difficult in less
competent near surface
rocks
Caverns at depth
need more
support
The stronger the rock
support is, the deeper
the cavern
can be
located
Tunnel boring machine
suitable for caverns with
regular shapes
A pre-cast concrete liner
may not be suitable for
caverns created by
blasting 
Squeezing ground at
depth will influence
excavation method TBM
can become
stuck
Creation of caverns
causes near field rock
mass quality to deteri-
orate
Good rock support
system maintains or
improve rock mass
quality
Caverns at depth have
less influence on rock
mass quality
Larger caverns induce
larger new disconti-
nuities
Appropriate rock
support prevents
discontinuities
from propagation
Caverns at depth may
induce less disconti-
nuities movement
τ
δ
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
2,6
1,1
1,2
1,3
1,4
1,5
1,6
3,1
3,2
3,3
3,4
3,5
3,6
Larger cavern need
more support
Excavations
Methods
Tunnel Boring
Machines
Blasting, etc.
Rock Mass
Quality
Poor, Fair,
Good, etc.
Discontinuity
Geometry
No. of sets,
Orientations,
Distributions, etc.
Very large caverns may
be created by blasting
Large
Large
Cavern
Good rock
Caverns size may be
limited by major
discontinuities
Caverns excavated by
mechanical means
generally need less
support
Caverns in good quality
rock mass need less or
no rock
support
Caverns in highly
fractured rock masses
need more
support
Tunnel boring
machines
suitable for
caverns at
shallower depths can
become stuck
Caverns in good quality
rock masses can be
located at greater depth
Caverns in
highly
fractured
rock masses
may not be possible
at depth
Caverns in hard high
quality rock masses may
have to be created by
blasting
Caverns in highly
fractured rock masses
likely to be suitable for
using TBM
Tunnel boring machine
has less disturbance on
rock mass quality
Blast
TBM
Poor quality rock mass
may contain many sets
of discontinuities
Blasting induces new
discontinuities
Less discontinuities
induced in good quality
rock mass
4,1
4,2
4,3
4,4
4,5
4,6
5,1
5,2
5,3
5,4
5,5
5,6
6,1
6,2
6,3
6,4
6,5
6,6
Larger caverns may
be created in better
quality rock masses
Fig. 13.2a Interaction of rock parameters in the underground excavations (Hudson, 1991).
Tunnelling hazards
219
Rock Mass
Structure
Intact Rock
and
Discontinuities
Higher hydrostatic
in situ stress generally 
stabilizes
rock
mass
structure
The stronger the intact
rock is, the stabler the
rock mass structure
tends
to be
A highly variable in situ
stress field exists in a
fractured rock mass 
In Situ
Stress
Magnitude
and
Directions
Intact Rock
Quality
Hard Rocks
or
Soft Rocks
A stronger rock can
sustain a higher in situ
stress
High E
High stress
σ
σ
Some weak rock strata
can be damaged,
others
not
Weak
Strong
Weak
Strength of intact rock
increases with minimum
principal
In situ
stress
σ1
σ3
Caverns created in a
fractured rock mass
may induce larger
displace-
ments
In situ stress affects the
stability of
caverns
σH
σH
σV
σV
Caverns created in rock
masses with hard intact
rocks induce less
displacement
Larger discontinuity
apertures may exist in
highly fractured rock
masses
Hydrostatic in situ
stress tends to close
discontinuities
Discontinuities in hard
intact rocks tend to be
narrow and clean
High fractured rock
masses generally have
high permeability
Stress field alters
permeabilities of rock
masses
Hard intact rock has
lower permeability
Water
Low
K
Water
7,7
7,8
7,9
7,10
7,11
7,12
8,7
8,8
8,9
8,10
8,11
8,12
9,7
9,8
9,9
9,10
9,11
9,12
Large deformation alters
rock mass structure
The large the joint
aperture, the less
stable the rock mass is
Bad weather may
cause rock mass
structure
to be
unstable 
Rock Behaviour
Responses of
Rock to
Engineering,
Activities
Discontinuity
Aperture
Wide
or
Narrow
Hydraulic
Condition
Permeabilities,
Water Tables,
etc.
Stress concentration
decreases with
displacements
τ
στ
In situ stress normal to
discontinuities with
large apertures will be
low
Effective stress
reduced by increasing
pore pressure
σ
τ
στ
t
Rock strength decreases
with creep deformation
Intact rocks close to
discontinuities with large
apertures may be weak
Strong
Weak
στ
w
Rock strength
decreases
with
water
content 
Large displacements
may occur along large
discontinuities
Water causes some
rocks to swell,
accelerating
displace-
ments
Larger displacement
may increase joint
aperture
Higher pore pressure
increases discontinuity
aperture
Rock mass deformation
alters its hydraulic
conditions
Cubic law
b
L
12 ν
∆H
gb3
Q =
∆H
10,7
10,8
10,9
10,10
10,11
10,12
11,7
11,8
11,9
11,10
11,11
11,12
12,7
12,8
12,9
12,10
12,11
12,12
Fig. 13.2b Interaction of rock parameters in the underground excavations (Hudson, 1991).
220 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Larger caverns can
destabilise rock mass
structure 
Appropriate rock
support stabilises rock
mass structure 
The deeper the cavern
is, the more stable the
rock mass structure is
likely to be 
Greater stress
concentration exists
around cavern corners
Large
stress
Stiffer rock support in-
creases support pressure
δ
P1 
σ2
d
d
k
In situ stress varies with
depth
Intact rock properties
are scale dependent
size
Strength
A shotcrete layer
prevents intact rock from
weathering 
Shotcrete 
Deeper caverns are
likely to have
stronger
surrounding
rocks 
Cavern displacement is
proportional to cavern
radius 
a
Uτ
a
P 
δ
Displacement are
restricted by stiffer rock
support 
Stiff
Soft
Creation of caverns at
great depth can induce
rock - bursts 
Creation of large caverns
can increase the aperture
of proximate joints 
Rockbolts inhibit joints
from further opening 
At depth creation of
caverns can have large
effect on near field
opening
of joints  
σ
δ
Blasting increases the
near field permeability
larger cavern,
larger zone 
Concrete grouting
reduces near field rock
mass permeability 
Rock mass
permeabilities may
decrease with depth 
1,7
1,8
1,9
1,10
1,11
1,12 
2,7
2,8
2,9
2,10
2,11
2,12
3,7
3,8
3,9
3,10
3,11
3,12
Damage caused by
blasting and stress
concerntrations
The poorer the rock
mass quality is, the
more fractured the rock
mass may become 
Discontinuities dictate
rock mass structure 
Near field stress
distributions altered 
Harder rocks more likely
to have higher  
σ1  -  σ3
σ1
σ2
σ3
Discontinuities control
magnitudes & direction
of in situ stress field 
Rock quality in the near
field deteriorates with
creation of caverns 
Strength of intact rock is
generally low in poorer
quality rock
masses 
Intact rock quality
deteriorates with
increase in new
discontinuities 
Excavations created by
TBM suffer less damage,
hence inducing less
deformation 
Caverns in good quality
rock masses induce less
deformation
Key blocks move along
discontinuities
TBM has less effect on
the apertures of joints in
near field
Discontinuities in good
quality rock masses may
have smaller apertures 
The more sets, the more
variability in joint
aperture 
Blasting increases near
field permeabilities 
Good quality rock
masses are generally
less
permeable
The more sets of
discontinuities, the more
permeable the rock
masses
may be 
4,7
4,8
4,9
4,10
4,11
4,12 
5,7
5,8
5,9
5,10
5,11
5,12 
6,7
6,8
6,9
6,10  
6,11
6,12  
Fig. 13.2c Interaction of rock parameters in the underground excavations (Hudson, 1991).
Tunnelling hazards
221
Cavern shape may
be restricted by rock
mass structure
7,1
Ideal cavern shape is
controlled by insitu stress
8,1
Geometry and size of
large caverns may be
restricted by major
inhomogeneity
soft rocks
9,1
Caverns created in hard
intact rocks may need
little or no support
9,2
Cavern in highly stressed
rock mass need more
support
8,2
Cavern in highly fractured
rock mass need more
support
7,2
It may be
impossible to
construct
caverns at
depth in highly fractured
rock masses
7,3
Depth of
caverns is limited due to
higher insitu stresses at
depth
8,3
Caverns excavated in
hard intact rock can be
located at great depth
High z
High z
9,3
Excavation rate reduced
in rock masses with hard
intact rock
X
X
ER
9,4
Rockburst in highly
stressed rock masses
affects excavation
method
8,4
Specific excavation
methods are suitable for
specific rock mass types
7,4
E
Rock masses with a
competent rock mass
structure have good
quality
RMR
7,5
Higher stress causes
Higher stress causes
rock mass to fracture
rock mass to fracture
and 
and its quality to
its quality to
deteriorate
deteriorate
Higher stress causes
rock mass to fracture
and its quality to
deteriorate
8,5
Good quality rock
Good quality rock
masses consist of good
masses consist of good
quality intact rocks: high
quality intact rocks: high
modulus-high
modulus-high
strength
strength
9,5
More fractures induced
in weak rocks than in
hard rocks
9,6
8,6
σ3
σ3
Stresses cause rock
fracturing normal to
minimum principal stress
direction
Weak strata are more
affected by creation of
caverns, altering the
joint
geometry
7,6
σ1
σ3
Final cavern size may be
smaller than excavated
due to rock deformation
10,1
Cavern size may be
limited by joints with
large
aper-
ture
11,1
Cavern size may be
limited in highly perme-
able rock
masses
12,1
The higher the water
pressure is, the stronger
the rock support usually
needed
12,2
Special rock support may
be needed for proximate
joints with
large
aperture
11,2
The larger the rock
deformation is, the more
flexible the support may
need to be
10,2
Cavern
depth is
limited in
soft
rock formation due to
large deformations
10,3
Cavern depth may be
limited by joints with
large aperture
11,3
Cavern depth may be
Cavern depth may be
limited in highly
limited in highly
permeable
permeable
rock
rock
masses
masses
Cavern depth may be
limited in highly
permeable
rock
masses
12,3
Blasting may not be
suitable under some
special hydraulic
conditions
12,4
Large joint apertures
less affected by TBMs
11,4
TBM may become stuck
in soft rock masses due
large displacements
10,4
Rock mass quality may
be reduced in vicinity of
caverns
because
of
damage
10,5
The wider the joint
aperture, the poorer the
rock mass
quality
11,5
Rock mass quality is
reduced as a result of
weathering
12,5
12,6
Water flow may silt up
discontinuities, altering
their effective distributions
Larger apertures allow
maximum water pressure
and can
create new
fractures
11,6
10,6
Rock deformation
Rock deformation
induces new
induces new
discontinuities
discontinuities
ε
σ
Good quality rock
masses consist of good
quality intact rocks: high
modulus-high
strength
Rock deformation
induces new
discontinuities
High z
Water 
Water 
Water 
Fig. 13.2d Interaction of rock parameters in the underground excavations (Hudson, 1991).
222 Tunnelling in weak rocks
which can cope up with most of the tunnelling conditions. A hazard foreseen is hazard
controlled. Therefore, it is desirable to use safe and effective tunnelling methodology,
based on detailed explorations before and during the tunnel construction. Of course the
modern trend of insuring the tunnelling machine and the losses due to delays because
of unexpected geological and geohydrological conditions takes care of the contractors’
interests.
REFERENCES
Barla, G. (1995). Squeezing rocks in tunnels. ISRM News Journal, 2(3) and (4), 44-49.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Dube, A. K. and Singh, B. (1986). Study of squeezing pressure phenomenon in a tunnel – Part I
and II. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 1(1), 35-39 (Part I) and 41-48
(Part II), USA.
Goel, R. K. (1994). Correlations for predicting support pressures and closures in tunnels.
PhD thesis, Nagpur University, Nagpur, India, 308.
Hoek, E. (2001). Big tunnels in hard rock. The 36th Karl Terzaghi Lecture, J. of Geotechnical and
Geo-environmental Engineering, ASCE, 127(9), 726-740.
Hudson, J. A. (1991). Atlas of rock engineering mechanism: Underground excavations. Techni-
cal Note, International Journal of Rock Mechanics, Mining Sciences and Geomechanics
Abstracts, 28(6), 523-526.
Hudson, J. A. (1992). Rock Engineering Systems – Theory and Practice. Ellis Horwood,
England, 185.
ISRM - Referred the Deﬁnitions of Squeezing received from ISRM.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressures in tunnels through squeezing ground in lower
Himalayas. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India, 272.
Jethwa, J. L. and Dhar, B. B. (1996). Tunnelling under squeezing ground condition. Proc. Recent
Advances in Tunnelling Technology, New Delhi, 209-214.
Mathews, A. A. (1982). Material handling and construction plant, Chapter 13. Tunnel Engineering
Handbook. Ed: J. O. Bickel, T. R. Kuesel and E. H. King, Chapman and Hall Inc., New York
and CBS Publishers, New Delhi, Second Edition, 544.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (1999). Rock Mass Classiﬁcation – A Practical Approach in Civil
Engineering. Chapter 7. Elsevier Science Ltd., The Netherlands, 267.
Vlasov, S. N., Makovski, L. V. and Merkin, V. E. (2001). Accidents in transportation and subway
Tunnels. Elex KM., Moscow [in Oggeri, Claudio Q. and Ova, G. (2004). ITA/AITES
Accredited Material on Quality in Tunnelling, ITA-AITES Working Group 16, Final Report,
Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 19, 239-272.
14
Tunnel instrumentation
“If you do not do the thing you fear, the fear controls your life.”
Brian Tracy
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Improvements in design methods stem from the knowledge of behavior of the designed
structures. Abnormal conditions indicate that the factor of safety has fallen to one. In early
daysoftunnelengineering, failureswereapowerfulmotivationfordevelopmentsindesign
techniques. In the past, there was a little emphasis on instrumentation although ad hoc
observations were sometimes made if failure appeared imminent. The recent projects have
created many problems, e.g., rock bursts, support failures due to intense support pressures
generated by squeezing and swelling rocks, water inrush, gas explosion, etc. The con-
struction engineers are facing these problems while constructing tunnels. For example,
steel supports have failed in many cases. As such ﬁeld instrumentation for support and
lining design is gaining popularity among both designers and construction engineers with
a little hesitation due to initial hindrance to construction progress. Of course, eventually
the construction engineers did realize the net saving in the time of completion of tunnel
owing to reduction in the number of tunnelling hazards and cost overruns.
14.2 BASIC CONSIDERATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR
THE DESIGN OF AN OPENING IN ROCK
Design of an underground structure in rock or evaluation of stability and safety of an
existing structure calls for determination of (i) the deformation and/or stresses in the
structure resulting from external loads applied to the structure; (ii) the physical properties
of the rock in the vicinity of the opening; (iii) the ability of the structure to withstand the
applied stresses or deformations; (iv) the geometry of the opening and (v) the regional
geology and its inﬂuence on the stress and displacement distribution in the vicinity of the
opening. Suitable analytical methods, model studies and/or numerical procedures, such
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
224 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Required Data
1.  In situ stress field
2.  Physical properties of
     rock mass
3.  Criteria of failure
4.  Geometry of opening
5.  Geological structure
Simulation
1.  Theoretical
2.  Numerical
3.  Model
Design
      Field
Measurement
Fig. 14.1
Basic requirements for design of a structure in rock.
as the ﬁnite element or distinct element method must be used to incorporate this data
into the initial stage of design. However, the initial design should be frequently evaluated
by conducting full scale ﬁeld tests and then by correlating the ﬁeld data with predicted
results. Repeated feedback of ﬁeld data into the input data of the design helps in the
development of the reliable design techniques. Thus design modiﬁcations can be effected
if the results of instrumentation and experience warrant. Principles of this procedure are
illustrated in Fig.14.1.
14.3 DATA REQUIREMENT
The data obtained from instrumentation work may be used for, (a) selection of economical
support during construction period and (b) determination of basic tunnel lining design-
criteria, such as in pressure tunnels.
Following information is required while dealing with tunnel supports in an effective
manner:
(i) Are the tunnel supports strong enough for the purpose for which they were
installed?
(ii) How the rock mass around the tunnel is behaving? Where does the rock load
come from? Is the support pressure due to loosening of rock or squeezing of rock
under overburden pressure or due to swelling?
The answers to these questions can come only through instrumentation, observation
and geological data. Thus, zones of high support pressure may be delineated and the
pressures are actually measured so that stronger lining is installed but without being
overconservative and taking risk to life and structure. On the basis of measured loads,
it may be possible to use lighter lining compared to that predicted from the design cal-
culations. The actual distribution of load on the lining can also be ascertained – a factor
that no theory looks into. For example, in a zone of high support pressure, there may be
signiﬁcant variation in the distribution of support pressure and stronger lining need to be
designed for higher bending moments (if its bonding with rock mass is not good).
Another major problem faced by a designer is what direction of rock load is considered
in designing a support system. Is it absolutely essential to place invert (or bottom strut)
Tunnel instrumentation 225
along with roof support so that mucking roof operation is least disturbed? The answer is
afﬁrmative if measurements on rock load indicate high horizontal support pressure.
In the last but not of the least importance, we must know the radius of failed rock
(called cofﬁn cover or the broken zone) in the cases of squeezing rock masses. Table 14.1
summarizes typical applications of various instruments.
Table 14.1 Typical applications for various measuring instruments.
Measurement
Instrument
Typical applications
Surface settlement
Single point borehole
extensometer
Multi-point borehole
extensometer
Vertical pipe or tube
settlement gauge
Forewarning of surface settlement.
Verifying adequacy of tail void ﬁlling.
Monitoring basal stability of open cut
excavations in clay.
Subsurface
horizontal
movement
Inclinometer
Borehole extensometer
Forewarning of surface settlement or
tunnel instability by monitoring
ground movement towards
excavation or heading.
Verifying adequacy of rock bolting and
other support.
Diameter or width
change
Tape extensometer
Monitoring changing width of open cut
as indication of stability.
Monitoring lining distortion.
Tilt
Tilt meter
Monitoring tilting of buildings
Load or stress in
structural support
Load cell
Strain gauge
Verifying adequacy of structural
support (rock bolts, ribs, liner plates,
precast concrete liners, cross-lot
bracing, tie-backs).
Determining factor of safety on
shoving stresses in soft ground shield
tunnelling.
Increasing knowledge of support
behavior as input to improved design
procedures.
Groundwater level
Observation well
Monitoring draw down of groundwater
table due to tunnelling or shaft.
Pore water pressure
Piezometer
Forewarning of distress to buildings
due to movement of soil or water
towards soft ground tunnel or shaft.
Vibration
Engineering
seismograph
Verifying that ground and building
vibrations due to blasting do not
exceed an acceptable limit.
226 Tunnelling in weak rocks
14.4 INSTRUMENTATION FOR TUNNELLING
Instrumentation for determination of various parameters which are helpful in evaluating
a suitable tunnel support system is dealt below.
14.4.1 Tunnel instrumentation: why?
Tunnel instrumentation can help in the following ways.
• Verifying design of support system
• Advancing the state-of-the-art
• Providing adequacy of new construction techniques
• Controlling quality of construction
• Reducing construction cost and extra payment
• Diagnosing the cause of a problem
• Improving construction safety by providing warning system
• Documenting as-built conditions
• Providing legal protection
• Enhancing public relations, bonding team spirit between engineers, geologists and
contractors.
14.5 STRESS FIELD
Knowledge of stress ﬁeld existing in a particular region prior to tunnelling is essential.
Measurement of in situ stresses have shown that in many cases measured stresses are
anomalous, in the sense that the horizontal stresses cannot be attributed to gravity load,
even when allowances are made for variations in surface level. This anomaly is believed
to be a result of tectonic stresses which are caused by movements and strains in the earth
“plate” or the “continent” of the region under consideration. For example, the Indian sub-
continent is drifting 25◦N towards China. As such horizontal stresses in Himalayas may
be high.
Generally, tectonic stresses also affect both the vertical and horizontal components
of stress vector and the principal direction of stresses will be in some direction other
than the horizontal or vertical. Field measurements of the in situ stress ﬁeld indi-
cate that, in general the stress ﬁelds are triaxial or polyaxial, that is, there are two or
more unequal principal stresses and these are not oriented in the vertical and horizontal
directions.
The determination of both the magnitude and direction of the in situ stress ﬁeld plays
a key role in the design of an underground structure.
Tunnel instrumentation 227
14.5.1 Virgin and induced stresses
Stress distribution in rock mass prior to excavation is known as virgin or primitive stress
and the stress distribution resulting from an excavation is known as induced stress. Various
methods and principles for determining virgin and induced stresses are given in Table 14.2.
14.5.2 Stress measurement in the interior of rock mass
Among the various methods that can be used to measure stresses in rock mass, the most
widely used is the one described here. The instrument used is a three component borehole
deformation gauge developed by U.S. Bureau of Mines (Merrill, 1967).
The gauges contact the wall of a borehole at six points through movable pistons
provided at diametrically opposite ends. With the deformation of borehole due to over-
coring, the pistons actuate three pairs of beryllium–copper cantilevers. Four strain gauges
mounted on opposite cantilevers are connected to form a single four arm bridge. The
bending strain produced in the cantilevers is measured by the resistance strain gauges and
is read on a resistance strain gauge indicator. The bending of cantilevers and hence the
change in resistance is pre-calibrated with the movement of the pistons. The magnitude
of the stress relief measurement is simply the difference between the indicator reading
before overcoring and the indicator reading after overcoring, provided that the overcoring
bit has penetrated sufﬁciently past the gauge.
After in situ stress relief measurements have been obtained, the borehole deformation
gauge is used in conjunction with a biaxial pressure cell to determine the elastic modulus
of the rock material (Er). The stresses in the plane normal to the borehole can then be
calculated using the following equations:
P + Q =
Er
3d(1 −ν2)(U1 + U2 + U3)
(14.1)
P −Q =
ν2·Er
6d·(1 −ν2)

(U1 −U2)2 + (U2 −U3)2 + (U1 −U3)2
(14.2)
tan 2θ =
ν3 	
U2 −U3
2U1 −U2 −U3
(14.3)
Where U1, U2 and U3 are the three borehole deformation measurements, Er and ν are
elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio respectively of the rock material, d is diameter of
pilot borehole and P and Q are the maximum and minimum principal stresses in the plane
normal to the borehole. The angle θ is the angle from the deformation U1 to the maximum
stress P. These equations are for relatively isotropic rock material. If this is not the case,
another system of equations must be used.
After borehole deformation measurements have been made in three non-parallel holes,
all components of the three-dimensional stress ﬁeld may be calculated in any coordinate
system.
Table 14.2 Methods of measuring virgin stresses.
Nature of Measuring
Measuring
stress
method
principle
Instrument
Site of utilization
Virgin
Stress
Electrical
1. Glued strain gauges
End of borehole
relieving
resistance
2. As above
Wall of borehole
3. As above
At surface
4. Borehole gauge
Along borehole
5. Diametral deformation
As above
gauge
6. Strain gauge tensor
As above
7. Rigid brass plug
As above
8. Rigid inclusion gauge
As above
Stress
Induction
L.V.D.T.
Along borehole
compensating
magnetism
Borehole deformation
As above
gauge
Photo-
Drill-hole pre-stressmeter
As above
elasticity
Acoustic
Borehole deformation
As above
gauge
Mechanical
Movable strain meter
At surface
Biaxial
Biaxial compensating
Along borehole
pressure
gauge
Uniaxial
1. Flat jack grouted
At surface
pressure
2. Flat jack ungrouted
At surface
Hydraulic Hydraulic
fracturing
Equipment for grouting
pressure but only water
is used to create fracture
along borehole
The only method for
directly measuring
virgin stress at great
depths along a
borehole
Others
Propogation
velocity of
vibration
Along borehole and at
surface
Radioactive
Along borehole
Induced
Stress
Electrical
Stress meter
Between rock and strut
measurement
resistance
Uniaxial
Pressure cell
Between rock and strut
pressure
Strain
Electrical
Strain meter – 2 m long
Along borehole
measurement
resistance
Multiple position
Along borehole
borehole extensometer
Mechanical
Invar wires multi-point
Along borehole
extensometers
Along borehole
Extensometers
Along borehole
(rod and wire)
Tunnel instrumentation 229
In situ stresses are generally measured in solid blocks of rock material surrounded by
sometimesfracturedrockmass. Assuchblockisoverstressedthanentirerockmasslocally.
So measured in situ stresses are more than overall in situ stresses at such situations. Further
in situ horizontal stresses are more in hard rocks than in soft rock areas. The tectonic stress
is found as,
Tectonic stress = Measured horizontal stress −gravitational horizontal stress
Microcracking along drill holes may give wrong picture of in situ stresses as found
from borehole deformation gauge. The hydrofracturing test is gaining popularity for in
situ stress measurement, as it is simple and cost-effective. However Cornet’s method
of hydrofracturing along joints is better than hydrofracturing of solid blocks for reasons
mentioned above (Fairhurst, 1994).
14.5.3 Stresses at the rock face
Measurement of stresses at the rock face relates to stress conditions prevailing there and
should not be mistaken for the natural stress condition existing in the interior of the rock
mass prior to excavation, i.e., virgin stresses. In other words, measurements at rock face
of an excavation gives induced stresses. These are useful in order to check if the induced
stresses have attained or going to attain ultimate uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of
the surrounding rock indicating its possibility of failure.
Strain gauges or extensometers are arranged in a delta conﬁguration (Fig. 14.2).
A stress relieving borehole is then drilled at the center. The hole should be gradually
Extensometer
Stress
relieving
borehole
Strain
gauges
200mm
Fig. 14.2
Stress measurement at rock face by extensometers or strain gauges.
230 Tunnelling in weak rocks
deepened and the resulting deformations should be continuously observed. Deformations
are thus plotted against depth to ﬁnd out local irregularities or disturbances. For a side
length of 200 mm satisfactory results have been obtained with 56 mm diameter hole drilled
with very ﬁne diamond tipped bits.
14.6 SUPPORT PRESSURE IN TUNNELS
The term “support pressure” has been deﬁned by Kastner (1962) as, referring to all effects
of the induced state of stress which occur in the rock mass surrounding an unsupported
excavation or which are in interaction with a support and which load the support system.
Thus, support pressure relates to phenomenon caused by engineering activities but does
not apply to virgin stresses.
14.6.1 Measurement by load cells and pressure cells
Manyloadcellsareavailablebasedonvariousprinciples. Muchworkontheirdevelopment
has been done. These are in use in mines and tunnels of civil engineering projects for a
considerable length of time. In the initial stages, the hydraulic load cells used in mines
were adopted with some success in tunnels too. These had the disadvantages of low
capacity, suitability for a smaller period only and were affected by eccentric loading,
shearing action, etc. Another high capacity mechanical load cell developed for tunnels
used to get damaged by blasting at face and hence could not be used at face. Now better
versions of the load cells are available, which are vibrating wire type electrical load cells.
The load cells are, in general, cylindrical shape device made up of steel having the height
and width ratio less than one. The load measuring system is ﬁtted inside the cylinder.
The load applied on the two circular faces of cylinder is read by the readout. The load
cells are installed at joints of supports and measures the hoop load on steel rib supports.
Various typical installation arrangements in practice are shown in Fig. 14.3. Vertical and
horizontal components of support pressure set up in Fig. 14.3b and 14.3c can be given as:
pv = P1 + P3
Srib · D
(14.4)
ph = 2P2
S · D
(14.5)
where
pv and ph
= vertical and horizontal components of support pressure, respec-
tively exerted on the support;
P1, P2 and P3 = loads recorded by load cells at positions 1, 2 and 3, respectively;
Srib
= spacing of supports and
D
= diameter of excavation.
Tunnel instrumentation 231
P2
P2
P1
P3
2
1
3
P3
P1
P2
P2
P3
P3
P1
P1
Load cell
2
1
3
P2
P2
P4
P3
P3
P1
P1
Load cell
2
P4
1
3
4
a. Circular support in 3 pieces, joints
at 120deg., load cells at 1, 2 & 3
b. Arch shaped support with vertical
legs, semi-circular arch and invert;
load cells at 1, 2 & 3
c. Circular support in 4 pieces joints
at 90 deg., load cells at 1, 2, 3 & 4
Fig. 14.3
Typical installation arrangements of load cells.
It is experienced that the observations are affected by break line, backﬁll material
and its compactness, time interval between installation of load cells and excavation at a
particular place and the face advance.
It is obvious that load cells thus used give average pressures in vertical and horizontal
directions. The chances of survival of load cells may be as low as 40 percent due to blasting
vibrations and failure of ribs. Hence, the need for installing statistically signiﬁcant number
of load cells.
A more detailed picture of radial loading of a support may be obtained by installing
pressure cells at various positions (Fig. 14.4) between support and the rock. The pressure
cells are pre-calibrated for changing loads in a universal testing machine.
Radial support pressure can be given by,
pr = P
A
(14.6)
232 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Pressure cells
A. Pressure cells at 90 degree
B. Pressure cells at 45 degree
TUNNEL
TUNNEL
Fig. 14.4
Typical installation arrangements of pressure cells.
where
pr = radial support pressure,
P = load indicated by a pressure cell,
(obtained from its calibration curve) and
A = area of the pressure cell.
These are also inﬂuenced by the same factors as indicated earlier in case of load cells.
Pressure cells may also be used to determine radial support pressure on lining by installing
them between rock and the lining.
The rock bolt load cells are also being used to monitor the pressure on (or the tension
in) the rock bolt. The capacity of these rock bolt load cells depends upon the capacity
of the rock bolt, but certainly quite less than the capacity of load cells installed in the
steel ribs.
14.6.2 Measurement by extensometers
Extensometers can be used to calculate support pressure acting on a tunnel lining by
measuring its diametric deformations. These may be arranged radially or in a star-shaped
conﬁguration. Support pressure in this case is given by,
pr =
 Ed
1 + ν + 2h · El
D

· δ
D
(14.7)
where
pr = radial rock pressure,
Ed = modulus of deformation of rock mass,
δ
= deformation,
Tunnel instrumentation 233
El = modulus of elasticity of lining,
D = diameter of lining and
h = lining thickness.
These observations are important from the point of view of stabilization of a tunnel in
squeezing and swelling rocks.
Similarly, tape extensometers may be used to determine modulus of deformation
approximatelybymeasuringdiametricdeformationofanunlinedtunnelsoonafterblasting
a tunnel face.
Ed = P · D(1 + ν)
δ
(14.8)
where
P = overburden pressure,
Ed = deformation of rock mass,
δ
= closure between walls,
D = diameter of the tunnel and
ν
= Poisson’s ratio of the rock.
The equations described here are based on elastic theory for isotropic and elastic
materials (see equation (AI.5) and Fig. AI.1).
14.6.3 Measurement by strain gauges
Various electrical and mechanical strain gauges may be used to measure strain on steel
supports or tunnel lining and support pressures can be computed therefrom. Serious dif-
ﬁculties are encountered in their use, because of the elapse of time. The development of
pressures is affected seriously by the proper and ﬁrm installation of gauges by all changes
produced in the surroundings and by a variety of other factors, the identiﬁcation and
separation of which is practically impossible.
14.7 MEASUREMENT OF ROCK MASS BEHAVIOR AROUND AN
UNDERGROUND OPENING BY BOREHOLE EXTENSOMETER
The rock surrounding the excavation of a tunnel may fail and produce a loose and fractured
rock mass when the induced stresses exceed the uniaxial compressive strength of the
surrounding rock. Thus, it is apparent that support pressure depends to a considerable
degree on the depth of this zone of loose and fractured rock mass. In case of loosening
type of rock, the support pressure depends on the depth of the zone of loosened rock.
The utility of the depth of loosened rock mass is, therefore, obvious. A set of single
point borehole extensometers or a set of multi-point borehole extensometers (Fig. 14.5)
are used to determine the depth of a loosened rock mass and the extent of loosening
234 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Vertical section of tunnel showing a typical
installation arrangement for 3 point borehole
extensometer
Side
Side
Single point
extensometer
Anchor
Plan of tunnel showing 3 single point
extensometers installed at different depths
in different holes at one location
TUNNEL
Fig. 14.5
Typical installation arrangements of multi-point (3 points shown) and single point
borehole extensometers.
at different depths. The borehole extensometers can be of wire or rod type. Relative
movements are transferred from one measuring point (ﬁxed point of rock or wire) to
another measuring point (sensing head) by means of a tensioned wire or rod. Movements
thus transferred are indicated mechanically in the sensing head or converted into electrical
output, which may then be transferred for remote instrument reading, if required. A
recording unit and an alarm may also be introduced if needed.
14.8 CASE HISTORIES
Some examples explaining how instrumentation helps in engineering decisions are
given here.
14.8.1 Observations by load cells
In a particular section of a 3.0 m diameter tunnel at Yamuna Hydroelectric Project, in
brecciated, crushed and sheared shales supported by 150 × 150 mm, H.H. Section R.S.
joints spaced at 0.5 m; three load cells were installed at joints (Fig. 14.3a). Loading of
the support as a function of time is shown in Fig. 20.10f. Support pressures of 2.7 kg/cm2
(0.27 MPa) and 1.5 kg/cm2 (0.15 MPa) were recorded in a period of 115 days in vertical
and horizontal directions, respectively. Upon extrapolation the respective values were
worked out to be about 0.5 and 0.3 MPa in about 3 years. Chapter 20 gives the detailed
case history.
Based on these observations steel supports for 9.0 m diameter excavation were
designed for 6.0 kg/cm2 (0.6 MPa) of support pressure and have proved to be adequate.
Earlier, weaker supports had failed in this zone.
The backﬁll material employed here was precast concrete blocks ﬁlled thoroughly
between rock and the supports soon after excavation.
Tunnel instrumentation 235
14.8.2 Observations by pressure cells
Radial support pressure was measured by installing pressure cells between steel sup-
port and the rock in yet another zone of the rock mentioned above. The supports were
300 × 140 mm R.S. Joists of 9.0 m diameter spaced at 350 mm center to center. Precast
concrete blocks were used as backﬁll material. Method of excavation was heading and
benching. The pressure cells were installed on a support in heading as shown in Fig. 20.12,
which gives support pressure as a function of time both before and after excavation of the
bench. First fall in support pressure values observed about 125 days after installation is
attributed to removal of rock reaction due to excavation of bench at this place during this
period. The support experienced a sharp rise in its rate of loading soon after completion
of full ring. They were designed for 0.9 MPa support pressure. This value was exceeded
upon when the pressure cells indicated pressures of about 1.2 MPa. This resulted in the
deformation (buckling) of the supports which could be seen by naked eye and the pressure
values decreased due to the buckling. Since then the supports had deformed very badly in
this reach.
14.8.3 Observation of tunnel closure
Diametric deformations of a 3.0 m diameter tunnel were measured with a simple steel
tape by installing closure pins at 45◦intervals around the excavation. Tunnel closure as
a function of time is shown in Fig. 14.6. An unexpected rise in the rate of tunnel closure
can be seen. Upon studying the possible causes, it was found that about 60 cm deep water
remained stagnant in this part of the tunnel for about two months resulting in the increased
moisture content of the surrounding rock. It can be noted that the area had not stabilized
although the excavation was over two years old, the rate of tunnel closures being about
2 and 1 mm per month in horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. This indicated
that either the concrete lining should wait for the stabilization of the zone or it should be
designed taking into consideration the time-dependent support pressures.
0
200
400
600
800
Time, days
0
50
100
150
Tunnel Closure, mm
5
1
7
3
3 - 7
1 - 5
Increase rate of closure
due to increased moisture
content
Fig. 14.6
Tunnel closure as a function of time.
236 Tunnelling in weak rocks
14.8.4 Tunnel closure and load on supports
A very interesting feature of instrumentation in a 3.0 m diameter tunnel was relationship of
tunnel closure and support pressure (Fig. 14.7). Support pressure was measured by insert-
ing load cells at support joints and closure was measured with the help of an ordinary steel
tape to an accuracy of ±1 mm. It can be seen that for both vertical and horizontal directions
these have a direct straight line relationship. Its slope deﬁnes the support stiffness.
14.8.5 Observations by borehole extensometers
Non-squeezing ground condition
Single point rod type extensometers were installed at sides and crown of a 3.0 m diameter
tunnel upto a depth of 3.0 m. Time and borehole extension relations (Fig. 14.8) indicated
that upto this depth of 3.0 m the loosening of rock in the vertical and horizontal directions
were 65 and 84 percent, respectively. In other words 65 and 84 percent of loosening was
absorbed by rock mass lying at a depth greater than the diameter of excavation. In simple
terms this meant that the thickness of loosened rock mass around the excavation was very
high. It is obvious that multi-point borehole extensometers installed at greater depth could
have given the total thickness of the zone of loose rock mass as a result of tunnelling.
Squeezing ground condition
In squeezing ground condition, displacements are very large and must be measured. Sin-
gle point rod type borehole extensometers were installed on the sides of a 4.2 m diameter
Tunnel Closure, mm
Support Pressure, kg/cm2
0
0.8
1.6
2.4
3.2
0
25
50
75
100
125
Along vertical axis
Along horizontal axis
Fig. 14.7
Support pressure as a function of tunnel closure (observed by installing load cells in a
support).
Tunnel instrumentation 237
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
0
10
20
30
3m dia. Tunnel
2
3
1
3m
1
2
3
Time, Days
Borehole Extension, mm
Fig. 14.8
Variation of borehole extension with time.
Giri Hydeltunnel through crushed phyllites which squeezed due to high cover pressure
of about 300 m. Two extensometers of 5 and 2.5 m depths were installed on the left wall
and three extensometers of 7.5, 5.0 and 2.5 m depths were installed on the right wall.
No extensometer could be installed on the roof. Tunnel closures were also measured.
The data were analyzed and radial displacements ur were plotted against radial distance
r for various time intervals as shown in Fig.14.9. The convergence of ur−log r plots at
point indicates stabilization of the broken zone between 200 to 300 days after excavation.
The broken zone radius (b) at this period was found to be 20.7 and 20.3 m on the left and
right wall, respectively. (It can be noted that the radial displacements vs. time curves tend
to converge at some radial distance which is believed to be the interface between broken
zone and elastic zone within a squeezing ground condition.) The steel ribs buckled after
300 days. This produced a spurt in radial displacements and the broken zone started widen-
ing again as indicated by the divergence of ur−log r plots in Fig.14.9. The example clearly
shows the usefulness of multi-point borehole extensometers to monitor the development
of broken zone around a tunnel under squeezing ground conditions.
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
0
2
3
5
10
20
b = 20.7
800
400
300
200
100
50
20
Days
(a) Left wall
Radial Distance, m
Radial Displacement, cm
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
0
2
3
5
10
20
b = 20.3
800
400
300
200
100
50
Days
(b) Right wall
Radial Distance, m
Radial Displacement, cm
20
Fig. 14.9
Variation of radial displacement with radial distance within phyllites in Giri Hydeltunnel
(a = 2.12 m and b = radius of broken zone in squeezing ground).
238 Tunnelling in weak rocks
0
400
800
1200
1600
2000
2400
Time, days
−0.50
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
Relative displacement between anchors, mm
0.73mm
0.024mm/month
0.00mm/month
Anchors 1 and 2
Anchors 2 and 3
Installation of
longer rock bolts
7.8.84
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
25.2.91
23m
57m
EL(-)12m
EL 45m
1
2
3
Agglomerate
Band
EL 48.5m
47m
EL 93m
Fig. 14.10
Monitoring agglomerate band behavior with the multi-point borehole extensometer in
the roof of a large underground cavity, India (Goel, 2001).
14.8.6 Observation by borehole extensometer in large underground cavity
In one of the large underground opening projects, for example, it has been possible to
monitor the roof displacement of 0.024 mm/month (Fig. 14.10). The deformation remains
continued for almost 30 months. At this point of time, additional supports of longer rock
boltswereinstalledandsubsequentlyitwasobservedthattheroofmovement/displacement
had stopped.
14.9 LAYOUT OF A TYPICAL TEST SECTION
Layout of an extensively instrumented zone is shown in Fig.14.11. Measurements taken
consist of following robust and valuable instruments.
(i) Radial support pressure by pressure cells
(ii) Load on support by load cells
(iii) Depth of loosened rock mass by multi-point borehole extensometers and
(iv) Rock closure and support deformation by tape extensometer.
Tunnel instrumentation 239
Pressure Cells
Load Cells
Pin for Support Deformation
0.33m
4-Point B.H.
Extensometer
3.0m dia.
Fig. 14.11
Layout plan of a typical instrumentation zone.
Strain in support can be measured by strain gauges.
Instrumentation in the lined and concreted zone should consist of the following:
(i) Stress meters
Embedded in concrete
(ii) Strain meters
Besides the above mentioned instrumentation, following data should also be
collected:
A. Geology – mapping, fracture spacing and orientation, width of fracture zone,
alteration and groundwater
B. Rock mass quality (Q), rock mass rating (RMR) and geological strength index
(GSI)
C. Geophysical observations – seismic activity, in situ stresses and their orientation,
micro-seismic activity inside opening.
Signiﬁcant researches have been done on the basis of ﬁeld data from the instrumented
tunnels in past. One is missing great opportunity by avoiding the tunnel instrumentation
and not collecting new ﬁeld data, specially in complex geological conditions.
REFERENCES
Fairhurst, C. (1994). Lecture. Civil Engineering Department, I.I.T., Roorkee
Goel, R. K. (2001). Status of tunnelling and underground construction activities and technologies
in India. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 16, 63-75.
Kastner, H. (1962). Statik does Tunnel - and Stollen Baues. Springer Verlag, Berlin/Gottingen/
Heidelberg.
Merrill, R. H. (1967). Three component borehole deformation gauge for determining the stress in
rock. Bu. Mines Rep. of Inv., 7015, 38.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
15
Tunnelling machines
“Any manager of a project must understand that his success depends on the success of
the contractor. The contractors have to be made to succeed. They may have many
problems. We cannot always talk within the rigid boundaries of a contract document. No,
without hesitation. I go beyond the contract agreement document.”
E. Sreedharan, Managing Director, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
15.1 GENERAL
The age-old drill and blast technique is still being used in poor countries due to choice
for labor-friendly policies. The time has come for change. We should prepare ourself men-
tally for change and for a fast rate of progress also. The applications of modern techniques
like NATM and NTM involving automated excavation methods are the need of time.
Fig. 15.1 depicts a variety of methods of excavation as a function of strength of rock
material (Jethwa, 2001). Table15.1 shows comparative study of the available techniques
for tunnelling vis-à-vis some of the important parameters like cost, advance rate of tun-
nelling, utilization of money and geometric requirements of a tunnel. A judicious selection
of tunnelling technology may be made with the help of Table 15.1 depending upon the
culture of a nation. Some nations in Asia prefer to evolve slowly for sustainable growth
for a very long time.
15.2 SYSTEM’S MIS-MATCH
An effort to increase the rate of tunnelling requires a system’s approach. The system
in totality should be improved, specially the weakest link which is the installation of
support system in weak rock masses. For example, excavation by a road header will
be meaningless if steel-arch supports are not replaced by SFRS (steel ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete) support for weak rock masses. A tunnel boring machine is stuck in a thick fault
or shear zone in a complex unknown geological condition, burying the machine. Excessive
failure of tunnel face causes jamming of excavating head. So the choice of selection of
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
242 Tunnelling in weak rocks
0
7
70
140
275
Soft ground
techniques
Road header
Tunnel boring machine
Drill and blast
UCS, MPa
Fig. 15.1
Tunnel excavation methods as a function of rock strength (Jethwa, 2001).
tunnelling machine depends upon the complexity of geological conditions, poverty of a
nationandmanagementconditions. ItiswisertoinsureTBMalways. Unfortunately, active
participation of a rock engineer is conspicuously absent from planning to commissioning
of the tunnelling projects in many nations. This results in geological surprises which have
to be paid for in terms of both time and cost over-runs.
There is a great fallacy that automated tunnelling is costlier. It is not true. With advent
of modern tunnelling machines, though the initial investment is high, the recurring cost
is relatively low in long tunnels (>2 km), except in soft ground tunnelling (Table 15.1).
Further, the tunnelling project is completed in shorter time and starts giving economic
return much earlier which helps in reducing the cost of interest on the capital investment.
It is painful to know that construction of hydroelectric projects is delayed greatly due to
the delay in completion of very long and complex tunnel network. Hence, the justiﬁcation
for adopting tunnelling machines but judiciously.
15.3 TUNNEL JUMBO
The tunnel jumbo usually consist of light rock drill of high performance which are mounted
on a mechanical arms. These arms are moved by hydraulic jacks. The wheeled jumbo is
mobile and fast. Initial cost is only a small portion of the overall cost of tunnelling. All
booms can be used to drill upwards, downwards, besides horizontally. The number of
booms can go up to seven (which was used in Daniel Johnson dam in Canada). The rate
of tunnelling goes up with more number of booms and the cost of jumbo also goes up.
The main advantages of modern jumbos are:
• Faster rate of penetration of drills
• Quick realignment of booms (arms)
• Versatility of boom movements
• Maneuverability of carrier
• Low power consumption
Tunnelling machines
243
Table 15.1 Comparative study of different techniques for tunnelling projects (Jethwa, 2001).
Parameters
Conventional
drill and blast
Automated drill and
blast in conjunction
with NATM/NTM
Roadheaders
Soft rock TBMs
Hard rock
TBMs
Cost
Initial
•
• • •
• • ••
• • • • •
• • • • •
Running
• • • • •
••
••
• • • • •
••
Rate of advance Favorable ground
50–60 m/month
200–700 m/month
350–800 m/month
150–300 m/month
500–1500 m/month
Unfavorable ground
7–10 m/month
50–60 m/month
75–150 m/month
25–50 m/month
100–200 m/month
Utilization
of money
Overall
Very inefﬁcient
Good
Best
Best
Best
Space at face
Least
Moderate
Moderate
• • • • •
• • • • •
Geometric
requirements
Shape of tunnel
Any
Any
Horse-shoe
Circular
Circular, horse-shoe,
rectangular
Cross section of tunnel Any
Any
2.5–10 m
1–10 m
2–13 m
Maximum gradient
Any
Upto 30 degree
15 degree
<10 degree
<10 degree
Applicability
Geology
Universally
applicable
Universally applicable Sensitive to change Very sensitive to
change
Very sensitive to
change
Rock strength
All strength
All strength
Medium hard to
hard
Soft and clayey
Hard to very hard
Operational
parameters
Ground disturbance
and overbreak
• • • • ••
Moderate with good
controlled blasting
measures
Least
Moderate to least
Least
Operator’s skill
•
Moderate
• • • • •
• • • • ••
• • • • •
Support requirement
• • • • ••
Very high to high
••
High to low
••
Speed of work
•
Good to very good
• • • • ••
Fair
Extremely good
Public safety
•
••
• • • • •
Moderate
• • • • •
Quality of work
•
Poor to good
• • • • ••
• • • • •
• • • • ••
Hard Rocks – Automated D&B with NATM/NTM; Soft Rocks Roadheaders with NATM/NTM.
• – Very Low, •• – Low, • • • – Low to medium, • • •• – Medium to high, • • • • • – High, • • • • •• – Very high.
244 Tunnelling in weak rocks
• Longer bit and steel life
• Considerably less noise
• Improvement in environmental conditions
The vertical drilling mechanism is used for drilling boltholes and horizontal booms
are used for drilling blast holes.
15.4 MUCK HAULING EQUIPMENT
Efﬁcient removal of excavated rock blocks (muck) is an important operation. Use of
belt conveyers is very economical and efﬁcient. Belt conveyers load into the muck cars
hauled by diesel, electricity or battery. As the area available is limited in a tunnel driving
the mucking equipment should occupy minimum working space. Rail track should be
well laid on rock mass and should be maintained well for efﬁcient operation. The rail
lines move upwards in squeezing rock conditions or swelling rocks. In former case, rock
anchors should be installed in the ﬂoor and shotcreted using SFRS. In the latter case,
swelling of rocks should be prevented by spraying shotcrete immediately all round the
tunnel including the ﬂoor to prevent ingress of moisture inside the rock mass. However,
the inverts delay mucking.
Fig. 15.2 shows Haggloader 10 HR which is mounted on a rubber tired chassis. It is
more mobile than other Haggloaders. It uses digging and gathering arms in the front of
the machine. The muck is brought into the transport equipment by a conveyer (shown by
inclined line). This model is highly efﬁcient and safe for the operator.
The classic books of Singh (1993) and Bickel and Kuesel (1982) describe various
other machines used for tunnelling operations.
Fig. 15.2
Haggloader 10 HR, principal data.
Tunnelling machines
245
15.5 TUNNEL BORING MACHINE (TBM)
After nearly 150 years of development, the TBM has been perfected to excavate in fair to
hard rock masses. The TBM has the following technical advantages.
• Reduction in overbreaks
• Minimum surface and ground disturbance
• Reduced ground vibrations cause no damage to nearby structures, an important
consideration for construction of underground metro
• The rate of tunnelling is several times of that of drill and blast method
• Better environmental conditions – low noise, low gas emissions, etc.
• Better safety of workers
Engineers should not use TBM where engineering geological investigations have not
been done in detail and the rock mass conditions are very heterogeneous. Contractors can
designTBMaccordingtothegivenrockmassconditionswhicharenormallyhomogeneous
non-squeezing ground conditions. TBM is unsuitable for the squeezing or ﬂowing grounds
(Bhasin, 2004).
The principle of TBM is to push cutters against the tunnel face and then rotate the
cutters for breaking the rocks in chips (Fig. 15.3).
The performance of a TBM depends upon its capacity to create largest size of chips
of rocks with least thrust. Thus, rock chipping causes high rate of tunnelling rather than
grinding (Kaiser & McCreath, 1994). The rate of boring through hard weathered rock
mass is found to be below expectation (see Chapter 16).
Disc cutters are used for tunnelling through soft and medium hard rocks. Roller cutters
are used in hard rocks, although their cost is high. A typical TBM is shown in Fig. 15.4
together with the ancillary equipment. The machine is gripped in place by legs with pads
on rocks. The excavation is performed by a cutting head of welded steel and convex shape,
with cutters arranged on it optimally. The long body of TBM contains the four hydraulic
P
Fig. 15.3
Mechanism of failure of rock by cutter (Bickel & Kuesel, 1982).
246 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Cutters
Cutting head
bearing
Drive motor
Gripper pads
Conveyor
Cutting head
Sprocket wheel meshes with
ring gear on cutting head
Thrust jacks Support leg
Transformers
Fig. 15.4
Tunnel boring machine and ancillary equipment (Bickel & Kuesel, 1982).
Main legs
Hydraulic thrust
cylinders
Cutting head
Rear
support
legs Step 1: Start of boring cycle. Machine
clamped, rear support legs retracted
Step 2: Start of boring cycle. Machine clamped,
head extended, rear support legs retracted
Step 3: Start of boring cycle. Machine
unclamped, rear support legs extended
Step 4: End of reset cycle. Machine unclamped,
head retracted. Machine now ready for
clamping and beginning boring cycle
Fig. 15.5
Method of advance of a rock tunnelling machine (Bickel & Kuesel, 1982).
jacks to push forward the cutting head and also drive motors which rotate the cutting head
for chipping rocks. Fig. 15.5 shows schematically a method of advance of the cutter head.
This ﬁgure shows how TBM is steered and pushed ahead in self-explaining four steps.
Typically even when a TBM operates well, only 30 to 50 percent of the operating time is
spent on boring.
Tunnelling machines
247
Fig. 15.4 also shows the removal system for muck (rock chips). The excavated material
is collected and scooped upwards by buckets around the cutter head. These buckets then
drop the rock pieces on a conveyer belt and transported it to the back end of the TBM.
There, it is loaded into a train of mucking cars.
Precautions:
The following precautions should be taken:
(i) There should be adequate store-keeping of spare parts for all the tunnelling
machines at the project site. Arrangement should be made to procure machine
parts on a quick emergency basis by air cargo to reduce break down periods.
Funds should be available for the same.
(ii) Maintenance of machines is a weakness in culture of many Asian countries, as there
is no glory in the job of maintenance. Hence, maximum efforts for maintenance
are needed at the project site.
(iii) Extra machines even TBM should be purchased as standby tunnelling machines.
Thus standby machines can be used when there is a major breakdown of machines;
as the completion of a tunnel before target date is important to start earning proﬁt
from the completed project. The completion of a project is normally delayed
signiﬁcantly due to the difﬁculties in long tunnelling.
(iv) There is high cost over-run and time over-run in long deep tunnels (>500 m). Best
management conditions help.
(v) There should be good workshop of adequate capacity for repairs of machines.
(vi) There should be a preventive maintenance program, as it is of vital importance to
the successful and continuous operations of all machines.
(vii) Modern ﬂeet of tunnelling machines are more sophisticated, more versatile, more
powerful and very fast, and therefore safety of workers in limited space of unsafe
tunnels should be the top priority.
15.6 SAFETY DURING TUNNELLING
Safety saves. It is well-known proverb. Managing safety saves money. One dollar invest-
ment in safety recovers ten dollars of loss. Safety goes together with quality of the
construction and project target. Achievement in safety creates a good public image. One
may learn from the case histories. The rate of accidents should be recorded and acci-
dent reporting is very important. The risk is too high in tunnelling through water-charged
rocks, wide shear zones, collapse of shallow covers in transportation tunnels and under
sea tunnelling. Many times there are no contingency plans and emergency plan. There is
no coordination between the design and construction engineers. There should be quick
feedback of actual construction problems to the designers and managers. The real and vis-
ible commitment or involvement of senior managers is extremely important in the safety
management, quality control and completion of the project in time.
248 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Habit of safety is a way of life. Safety consciousness should be created among workers
by frequent training programs at the site. There should also be interaction between all
the concerned i.e., executives, planners, managers, designers, geologists, engineers and
contractors, etc. Efforts should be made to reduce communication gap among them with
the help of simple artistic presentation. There should be mutual respect for each other
rather than distrust. There should be culture of friendship in spite of tensions and passions,
as in Japan and many other nations. There are unforeseen geo-environmental conditions
particularly in the long deep tunnels. So there should be contingency clause in the contract
document, to be always prepared to tunnel manually through piping or ﬂowing grounds,
weak rock masses and the water-charged rock masses. Contractors should employ healthy,
highly experienced and skilled workers in a tunnel. Quotations (safety saves, safety ﬁrst,
etc.) should be written on the boards in local languages at proper places (at inlets, etc.).
The accidents involved in tunnelling and underground construction are mainly during
drilling, handling explosives and blasting, mucking and supporting the weak rock masses.
The congested working space, wet and slippery ﬂoor, inadequate lighting and ventilation
increase the chances of accident. Working through access shaft is an additional cause for
accidents. The persons working in the tunnels should be provided with helmets and gum-
boots for safety. The workers would be withdrawn from the tunnel, in case of prolonged
ventilation failure or a heavy rush of ground water. Good housekeeping (maintenance) is
essential for safe and successful operations of tunnelling. Proper and adequate drainage
inside the tunnel leads to safe working conditions. Sump pumps, switches, crossings of
rail tracks, transformers and equipment should be well lighted locally.
In the race of speedy construction, the future machines should be safe, simple, versatile
and economical, sophisticated and fast and powerful (Singh, 1993). The safety of the
people shall be the highest law, according to Cicero.
REFERENCES
Bhasin, R. (2004). Personal communications at IIT, Roorkee. India.
Bickel, J. O. and Kuesel, T. R. (1982). Tunnel Engineering Hand Book. Van Nostrand Reinhold
Company, New York, 670.
Jethwa, J. L. (2001). National Tunnelling Policy. National Workshop on Application of Rock
Engineering in Nation’s Development (In honour of Prof. Bhawani Singh), IIT Roorkee,
India, 63-81.
Kaiser, P. K. and McCreath, D. R. (1994). Rock mechanics considerations for drilled or bored
excavations in hard rock. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 9(4), 425-437.
Singh, J. (1993). Heavy Construction Planning, Equipment and Methods. Oxford and IBH
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1084.
16
Rock mass quality for tunnel boring
machines (QTBM)
“The Mother Nature is Motherly!”
Vedas, Gita and Durgasaptashati
16.1 INTRODUCTION
Tunnel boring machine (TBM) may give extreme rates of tunnelling of 15 km/year and
15 m/year, sometimes even less. The expectation of fast tunnelling places great responsi-
bility on those evaluating geology and hydrogeology along a planned tunnel route. When
the rock conditions are reasonably good, a TBM may be two to four times faster than
drill and blast method. The problem lies in the extremes of rock mass quality, which
can be both too bad and too good (no joints), where alternatives to TBM may be faster
(Barton, 1999).
There have been continuous efforts to develop a relation between the rock mass char-
acterization and essential machine characteristics such as cutter load and cutter wear,
so that surprising rates of advance become the expected rates. Even from a 1967 TBM
tunnel, Robbins (1982) has reported 7.5 km of advance in shale during four months. Earlier
in the same project, 270 m of unexpected glacial debris had taken nearly seven months.
An advance rate (AR) of 2.5 m/h has declined to 0.05 m/h in the same project. It needs to
be explained by a quantitative rock mass classiﬁcation.
Barton (2000) has incorporated a few parameters in Q-system which inﬂuence the
performance of a TBM to obtain QTBM, i.e., rock mass quality for tunnel boring machine.
Using QTBM, Barton (2000) opines, the performance of TBM in a particular type of rock
mass may be estimated. His approach, in brief, has been presented in this chapter.
16.2 Q AND QTBM
The Q-system was developed by Barton et al. in 1974 from the drill and blast tunnel
case records and now totals 1250 cases (Grimstad & Barton, 1993). The Q-values stretch
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
250 Tunnelling in weak rocks
over six orders of magnitude of rock mass quality. Continuous zones of squeezing rock
and clay may have Q = 0.001, while virtually unjointed hard massive rock may have
Q = 1000. Both conditions are usually extremely unfavorable for TBM advance, one
stoppingthemachineforextendedperiodsandrequiringheavypre-treatmentandsupports;
the other perhaps slowing average progress to 0.2 m/h over many months due to multiple
daily cutter shifts (Barton, 1999).
The general trends for a penetration rate (PR) with uninterrupted boring and the actual
advance rate (AR) measured over longer periods is shown in Fig. 16.1. It is highlighted
here that the penetration rate of a TBM may be high, but the real advance rate depends
on the tunnel support needs and on conveyor capacity. The Q-value goes a long way to
explain the different magnitudes of PR and AR but it is not sufﬁcient without modiﬁcation
and the addition of some machine–rock interaction parameters.
A new method has been developed by Barton (1999) for estimating both PR and
AR using both Q-value and a new term QTBM. This is strongly based on the familiar
Q parameters but has additional rock-machine–rock-mass interaction parameters.
Together, these give a potential 12 orders of magnitude range of QTBM. The real value
depends on the cutter force.
Experience suggests that there are four basic classes of rock tunnelling conditions that
need to be described in some quantitative way:
(i) Jointed, porous rock, easy to bore, frequent support;
(ii) Hard, massive rock, tough to bore, frequent cutter change, no support;
(iii) Overstressed rock, squeezing, stuck machine, needs over-boring, heavy support
and
(iv) Faulted rock, overbreak, erosion of ﬁnes, long delays for drainage, grouting,
temporary steel support and back-ﬁlling.
The conventional Q-value, together with the cutter life index (Johannessen &
Askilsrud, 1993) and quartz content help to explain some of the delays involved.
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
1000
Delays due to support
no support area
AR
PR
Lack of joints
Gripper
Exc. Poor
Ext. Poor
Very Poor
Poor & Fair
Good &
Very Good
Ext. & Exc.
Good
Penetration Rate (PR)
Advance Rate (AR)
Q = (RQD/Jn).(Jr/Ja).(Jw/SRF)
Fig. 16.1
A conceptual relation between Q, PR and AR.
Rock mass quality for tunnel boring machines (QTBM) 251
The Q-value can also be used to select support once the differences between drill and blast
and TBM logging are correctly quantiﬁed in the central threshold area of the Q-diagram
(Fig. 10.2).
In relation to the line separating supported and unsupported excavations in the
Q-system support chart, a TBM tunnel will give an apparent (and partially real) increase in
the Q-value of about 2 to 5 times in this region. This is where the TBM tunnel supports are
reduced. When the Q-value is lower (shaded area in Fig. 10.2) than in the central thresh-
old area, the TBM tunnel will show similar levels of overbreak or instability as the drill
and blast tunnel, and ﬁnal support derived from Q-system can apply. However, they may
be preceded by (non-reinforcing temporary) steel sets and lagging (and void formation).
Each of which require due consideration while designing a support.
TheQTBM isdeﬁnedinFig. 16.2, andsomeadjectivesatthetopoftheﬁguresuggestthe
ease or difﬁculty of boring. (Note the difference to the Q-value adjectives used in Fig. 16.1,
which describe the rock mass stability and need of tunnel support.) The components of
QTBM are as follows:
QTBM = RQD0
Jn
× Jr
Ja
× Jw
SRF × σcm or σtm
F10
209 × 20
CLI × q
20 × σθ
5
(16.1)
where
RQD0 = RQD (%) interpreted in the tunnelling direction. RQD0 is also used when
evaluating the Q-value for rock mass strength estimation,
PR
AR
RELATIVE DIFFICULTY OF GROUND FOR TBM USE
Very
Problematic
May be
Problematic
Fair
Good
Very Good
Good
Fair
Tough
Theoretical
only
av.
av.
UNSTABLE:
Collapse, severe
overbreak, gripper-
problems, cutter head
seizure, squeeze,
flooding, etc.
(hrs)
24
168
720
Operator usually
reduces thrust
0.001 0.003
0.01
0.03
0.1
0.3
1
3
10
30
100
300
1000
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
Advance Rate (AR), m/hr
Penetration Rate (PR), m/hr
5
20
20
209
σθ
σcm or σtm
×
q
×
CLI
×
F10
×
SRF
Jw
×
Ja
Jr
×
Jn
RQD0
QTBM =
Fig. 16.2
Suggested relation between PR, AR and QTBM.
252 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Jn, Jr, Ja, Jw and SRF = ratings of Barton et al. (1974) and are unchanged,
F = average cutter load (tnf) through the same zone, normalized by
20 tnf (the reason for the high power terms will be seen later),
σcm or σtm = compressive and tensile rock mass strength estimates (MPa) in
the same zone,
CLI = cutter life index (e.g., 4 for quartzite, 90 for limestone),
q = quartz content in percentage terms and
σθ = Induced biaxial stress on tunnel face (approx MPa) in the same
zone, normalized to an approximate depth of 100 m (= 5 MPa).
The best estimates of each parameter should be assembled on a geological/structural
longitudinal section of the planned (or progressing) tunnel.
The rock mass strength estimate incorporates the Q-value (but with oriented RQD0),
together with the rock density (from an approach by Singh (1993)). The Q-value is nor-
malized by uniaxial strength (qc) different from 100 MPa (typical hard rock) as deﬁned
in equation (16.3a) and is normalized by point load strength (I50) different from 4 MPa.
A simpliﬁed (qc/I50) conversion of 25 is assumed. Relevant I50 anisotropy in relation to
the direction of tunnelling should be quantiﬁed by point load tests in the case of strongly
foliated or schistose rocks. The choice between σcm and σtm will depend on the angle
between tunnel axis and the major discontinuities or foliations of the rock mass to be
bored (Barton, 2000). It has been suggested to use σcm when the angle is more than
45 degree and σtm in case the angle is less than 45 degrees. It may be noted here that
penetration rate is more in case the angle is zero degree.
σcm = 5 · γ Q1/3
c
(16.2)
σtm = 5 · γ Q1/3
t
(16.3)
where
Qc = Q · qc/100,
(16.3a)
Qc = Q · qt/100,
(16.3b)
= Q · (I50/4) and
γ = Density in gm/cm3.
Equations (16.2) and (16.3) for the estimation of σcm and σtm are proposed only
for QTBM where it is useful as a relative measure for comparing with the cutter force
(Barton, 2005).
Example
Slate Q ≈2 (poor stability); qc ≈50 MPa; I50 ≈0.5 MPa; γ = 2.8 gm/cm3; Qc = 1; and
Qt = 0.25. Therefore, σcm ≈14 MPa and σtm ≈8.8 MPa.
Rock mass quality for tunnel boring machines (QTBM) 253
The slate is bored in a favorable direction, hence consider σtm and RQD0 = 15
(i.e., <RQD). Assume that average cutter force = 15 tnf; CLI = 20; q = 20%; and
σθ = 15 MPa (approx 200 m depth). The cleavage joints have Jr/Ja = 1/1 (smooth, planar,
unaltered). The estimate of QTBM is as follows:
QTBM = 15
6 × 1
1 × 0.66
1
×
8.8
1510
209 × 20
20 × 20
20 × 15
5 = 39
According to Fig. 16.2, QTBM ≈39 should give fair penetration rates (about 2.4 m/h).
If average cutter force were doubled to 30 tnf, QTBM would reduce to a much more
favorable value of 0.04 and the PR would increase (by a factor 22 = 4) to a potential
9.6 m/h. However, the real advance rate would depend on the tunnel support needs and
on conveyor capacity (Barton, 1999).
16.3 PENETRATION AND ADVANCE RATES
The ratio between the advance rate (AR) and penetration rate (PR) is the utilization
factor U,
AR = PR · U
(16.4)
The decelerating trend of all the data may be expressed in an alternative format:
AR = PR · T m
(16.5)
where T is time in h and the negative gradient (m) values are cited in Table 16.1.
The values of m given in Table 16.1 may be reﬁned in the future as more and more
cases of TBM tunnels would be available (Barton, 2000).
16.4 CUTTER WEAR
The ﬁnal gradient (−)m may be modiﬁed by the abrasiveness of the rock, which is based on
a normalized value of CLI, the cutter life index. Values less than 20 give rapidly reducing
Table 16.1 Deceleration gradient (−) m1 and its approximate relation to Q-value.
Q
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
m1
−0.9
−0.7
−0.5
−0.22
−0.17
−0.19
−0.21
Unexpected events or expected bad ground.
Many stability and support-related delays and
gripper problems. Operator reduces PR. This
increases QTBM
Most variation of (−)m may be due to rock
abrasiveness, i.e., cutter life index CLI,
quartz content and porosity are important.
PR depends on QTBM
Note: The subscript (1) is added to m for evaluation by equation (16.6).
254 Tunnelling in weak rocks
cutter life, and values over 20 tend to give longer life. A typical value of CLI for quartzite
might be four and for shale 80. Due to the additional inﬂuence of quartz content (q%)
and porosity (n%), both of which may accentuate cutter wear, these are also included in
equation (16.6) to give “ﬁne tuning” to the gradient.
It has also been felt necessary to consider the tunnel size and support needs. Although
large tunnels can be driven almost as fast (or even faster) as small tunnels in similar
good rock conditions (Dalton, 1993), more support-related delays occur if the rock is
consistently poor in the larger tunnel. Therefore, a normalized tunnel diameter (D) of 5 m
is used to slightly modify the gradient (m). (QTBM is already adjusted for tunnel size by
the use of average rated cutter force.)
The ﬁne tuned gradient (−)m is estimated as follows:
m ≈m1
D
5
0.20  20
CLI
0.15  q
20
0.10 n
2
0.05
(16.6)
Sometimes, PR becomes too fast due to the logistics and muck handling. There may
be a local increase in gradient from 1h to 1 day as a more rapid fall occurs in AR.
16.5 PENETRATION AND ADVANCE RATE VS QTBM
Development of a workable relationship between PR and QTBMwas based on a process of
trial and error using case records (Barton, 2000). Striving for a simple relationship, and
rounding decimal places, the following correlation was obtained:
PR ≈5 (QTBM)−0.2
(16.7)
From equation (16.5), one can therefore also estimate the AR as follows:
AR ≈5 (QTBM)−0.2 · T m
(16.8)
One can also check the operative QTBM value by back-calculation from penetra-
tion rate:
QTBM ≈
 5
PR
5
(16.9)
16.6 ESTIMATING TIME FOR COMPLETION
The time (T ) taken to penetrate a length of tunnel (L) with an average advance rate of AR
is obviously L/AR. From equation (16.5), one can therefore derive the following:
T =
 L
PR
1/(1 + m)
(16.10)
Rock mass quality for tunnel boring machines (QTBM) 255
Equation (16.10) also demonstrates instability in fault zones, until (−)m is reduced by
pre- or post-treatment.
Example
Slate QTBM ≈39 (from previous calculations with 15 tnf cutter force). From equa-
tion (16.7),
PR ≈2.4 m/h.
Since Q = 2,
m1 = −0.21 from Table 16.1. If the
TBM diameter is 8 m and if CLI = 45, q = 5% and n = 1%, then m ≈−0.21 × 1.1 ×
0.89 × 0.87 × 0.97 = −0.17 from equation (16.6). If 1 km of slate with similar orientation
and rock quality is encountered, it will take the following time to bore it, according to
equation (16.10):
T =
1000
2.4
(1/0.83)
= 1433 h ≈2 months
i.e., AR ≈0.7 m/h, as also found by using equation (16.8) and T = 1433 h.
A working model for estimating the TBM penetration rates and advance rates for dif-
ferent rock conditions, lengths of tunnel and time of boring has been presented. It may
be used for prediction and back-analysis. Since the model is new, Barton (2000) empha-
sizes that improvements and corrections may be possible as future case records are
available. Shielded TBM is very useful in metro tunnels.
REFERENCES
Barton, N. (1999). TBM performance estimation in rock using QTBM. Tunnels & Tunnelling
International, 31(9), 30-34.
Barton, N. (2000). TBM Tunnelling in Jointed and Faulted Rock. A. A. Balkema, 173.
Barton, N. (2005). Personal Communication with Dr. R. K. Goel.
Dalton, F. E., DeVita, L. R. and Macaitis, W. A. (1993). TARP tunnel boring machine performance.
Chicago. Proc. RETC Conf. Boston, Eds: Bowerman and Monsees, US, SME, 445-451.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating the Q-system for NMT. Proc. Int. Symp. On Sprayed
Concrete, Fagernes, Norway, Eds: Kompen, Opsahl and Berg, Norwegian Concrete
Association, Oslo, 46-66.
Johannessen, S. and Askilsrud, O. G. (1993). Meraaker hydro tunnelling the ‘Norwegian Way’.
Proc. RETC Conf. Boston, US, SME, Eds: Bowerman and Monsees, 415-427.
Robbins, R. J. (1982). The application of tunnel boring machines to bad rock conditions.
Proc. ISRM Symp. Aachen, Ed: Wittke, A. A. Balkema, 2, 827-836.
Singh, Bhawani (1993). Norwegian Method of Tunnelling Workshop, Lecture at CSMRS.
New Delhi, India.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
17
Metro tunnels
“It is cheaper to do things right the ﬁrst time.”
Phil Crosby
17.1 INTRODUCTION
A new era of underground space technology has begun with extensive networks of under-
ground metro systems all over the world, due to the grace of God. No mega city may
function efﬁciently without a mass transit system of high performance. They offer to
everyone fast, safe, comfortable and cheap access to the different areas of a city. The
under-city tunnels are also being excavated for a direct by-pass trafﬁc as in Australia.
Following are the advantages of underground metros in the mega cities (Sharma,
1998):
(i) Crossing of hills, rivers and a part of oceans (straits).
(ii) Increase in market value of adjacent land and saving in man-hours.
(iii) They also favor a more aesthetic integration into a city without blocking view of
beautiful buildings, bridges, monuments and religious functions.
(iv) Very high capacity in peak hours in any direction. It forms a part of integrated
total city transportation system for convenience of people.
(v) It protects the residents completely from severe round-the-clock noise pollution
from surface trafﬁc.
(vi) Efﬁcient, safe, more reliable, faster, comfortable and environmentally sustain-
able and technically feasible in developing nations also. It requires just 20 percent
of energy that is consumed by road trafﬁc. It reduces road accidents and pollution
due to the decrease in vehicular trafﬁc.
With more and more use of underground transit systems, it is necessary to prepare the
contingency plans accordingly to take care of emergency situation. A good example of this
is of black out in USA and Canada on August 14, 2003. More than thousand persons were
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
258 Tunnelling in weak rocks
stranded in subways, but the police have been trained to evacuate people from subways
and skyscrapers without increase in panic.
The opinion polls carried out in the USA, Japan and 14 European countries show
clearly the public moral support for environmental protection, even at the expense of
reducing the economic growth.
The metro rail system uses ballastless track without joints which makes it almost free
of maintenance. Signals are in the driver’s cabin only and the software controls automatic
driving of the engine, so the train stops exactly at the same position within ±10 cm on
the dot, hence, disabled persons can enter the coaches comfortably. The driver only
opens and closes the door. Underground stations (with cross passage below tracks) are
air-conditioned, and there are parks above underground stations. Performance is the best
publicity. The life of the metro is about 100 years. The underground stations should meet
the ﬁre safety and evacuation norms (Heijboer et al., 2004).
Tunnels are ventilated properly; one fan pumps air and the other acts as an exhaust to
take out smoke, in case coaches catch ﬁre. These fans are switched on by station masters.
The train will move to pumping fan side so that passengers do not die of smoke. All
coaches are connected with see-through end for further escape.
Unfortunately construction costs for underground systems are a major deterrent when
city ofﬁcials consider the option of underground metro. Table 17.1 compares relative
costs of the various types of infrastructures on the basis of a study conducted by French
Tunnelling Association.
It is the experience of road users that open cut method of construction leads to a
lot of inconvenience to the society and disruption of the environment, which must be
compensated ﬁnancially if any justiﬁable comparison between cut and cover method of
construction and tunnel boring is to be made.
The photograph of a rail metro tunnel is shown in Fig. 17.1, which shows the pre-
fabricated lining which is suitable for various soil, boulder and rock conditions except
squeezing grounds (due to the high overburden pressure) and ﬂowing grounds within
water-charged–wide-shear zones (due to seepage erosion or piping failure). These may
not occur in shallow tunnels.
Table 17.1 Relative costs of interstations structures.
Infrastructure
Equipment
Total
Ratio
Location
(a)
(b)
(a)/(b)
At grade (surface)
25
30
55
0.45
Elevated (super structure)
100
30
130
0.75
Long span bridge
250
30
280
0.90
Cut and cover
100 to 200
40
140 to 240
0.70 to 0.80
Tunnelled
150 to 500
50
200 to 550
0.75 to 0.90
Metro tunnels
259
Fig. 17.1
Precast lining in a metro tunnel (Ref: http://www.railwayage.com/sept01/
washmetro.html).
The work culture of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation is that there is no clerk with very
few peons, which is the key to success. There is no witch-hunting for a wrong decision. The
decisionswerenotdelayed. Wrongdecisionswereautomaticallynoticedandgetcorrected.
Punctuality of staff plays an important role. NATM was adopted. Ten trees were planted
for every cut tree. All underground stations are built by cut and cover method. The entire
site was closed by walls on all sides. Exhaustive instrumentation is done to learn lessons
for construction of future metros. The rehabilitation of structures (damaged by subsidence
along tunnels) is the responsibility of all contractors to save excessive time which is lost
in litigation by management (see http://www.delhimetrorail.com).
17.1.1 Findings of international tunnelling association
The International Tunnelling Association (ITA, 2004) has presented the following
observations after analysis of data from 30 cities in 19 countries.
(i) The typical cost for surface : elevated and : underground metro systems were
found to be approximately as 1 : 2 : 4.5.
(ii) It is generally accepted that underground systems are more expensive to operate
than elevated or surface system.
(iii) Due to the requirement of large investment (capital and recurring costs) and the
signiﬁcant urban and environmental impacts, the choice is nearly always resolved
politically. The government has to subsidize the cost to reduce the cost of ticket.
The metro is not commercially viable.
(iv) The over-whelming choice (of 78 percent alignment) for urban metro systems is
underground with very little at grade (surface) alignment. They are typically
260 Tunnelling in weak rocks
designed to be of high speed and capacity (20,000 passengers per hour per
direction) serving the city center.
(v) In many cases – for example in the center areas of older cities (with 2–7% area
of streets only) – for functional, social, historic, environmental and economic
reasons; there is no alternative to the choice of an underground alignment for
new transit systems.
(vi) Noiseless technology may be used in the tunnelling.
17.2 SHIELDED TUNNEL BORING MACHINES
Tunnel boring machines (TBMs) with features-purpose-built to the speciﬁc ground condi-
tions are now the preferred mode for bored tunnelling in mega cities. The high capital cost
is justiﬁed by the length of tunnel more than 2 km [Pearse, 1997 cited by Sharma (1998)].
These TBMs offer the following advantages over the drilling and blasting method in the
metro tunnels.
• Explosives are not used. Hence the operations in densely built-up areas produce
much lower vibrations.
• Little or no overbreak.
• Excavation is fast. Time is money.
• Lower initial support capacity saves cost.
• Less labor cost.
• Reduces surface settlement to very low levels resulting in assured safety to the
existing super structures.
• Reduces risk to life of workers by (i) rock falls at face or behind the TBM,
(ii) explosives, (iii) hit by vehicles and (iv) electrocution.
In case of massive rock masses, open face tunnel boring machine is used as discussed
in Chapter 15. Recently, dual mode shield TBMs are developed to bore through in all
soil, boulders and weak rocks (in non-squeezing ground) under high ground water table.
During tunnelling, the ground water table is lowered to the bottom of the tunnel by drilling
drainage holes to keep ground dry. It works on the principle of shield TBM on which
both scrapper picks as well as disc cutters are mounted on the cutter head. Table 17.2
summarizes the salient features of dual mode TBM and earth pressure balance machine
(EPBM). During initial excavation at New Delhi underground metro, it was found that
a large number of scrappers and buckets are getting detached from the cutter head. This
was probably because of the presence of too many boulders in the soil strata. As a result,
the bigger boulders were entangled in the large space between the arms and thereby
knocking off the scrapper and buckets. Then protective plates and deﬂector strips were
added around the buckets to avoid direct impact of boulders on the buckets, in addition to
Metro tunnels
261
Table 17.2 Salient features of tunnel boring machines (Singh, 2003).
EPBM – earth pressure
Dual mode TBM shielded
S.No. Item
balance machine
tunnel boring machine
1.
Manufacturers
Herrenknecht of
Germany
Herrenknecht of Germany
2.
Diameter
6.490 m
6.490 m
3.
Length of shield
3.8 m (7 m including tail
skin)
3.9 m (6.9 m including tail
skin)
4.
Weight of shield
252 MT
325 MT
5.
Length of complete system
57 m
70 m
6.
Cutter head rotation
1 to 7 rpm
1 to 6 rpm
7.
Torque
4000 kNm
4377 kNm
8.
Tunnel lining
Precast segmental RCC
Precast segmental RCC
9.
Finished diameter
5.7 m
5.7 m
10.
No. of segments per ring
6 (5+1 key)
6 (5+1 key)
11.
Thickness of lining
280 mm
280 mm
12.
Length of ring
1.2 m
1.2 m
13.
Grade of concrete
M-45
M-45
14.
Weight of each ring
16 tons
16 tons
15.
Joint sealing
EPBM gasket and
hydrophilic seal
EPBM gasket and
hydrophilic seal
16.
Power required
3 MW for each machine
3 MW for each machine
17.
Planned progress
10 m per day
6 m per day
18.
Maximum progress achieved
so far
28.8 m per day
7.2 m per day
other modiﬁcations. Thereafter dual TBM has succeeded (Singh, 2003). The advantage
of fully shielded TBM with segment erector is that there is no unsupported ground behind
the shield. That is why TBMs have failed in poor grounds yet dual TBM has succeeded
(Broomﬁeld & Denman, 2003) in soils, boulders and weak rock mass in non-squeezing
ground condition (H < 350 Q1/3 m).
It is necessary to inject the foam along with water at the cutter head which has the
following advantages:
• Reduced permeability and enhanced sealing at the tunnel face.
• Suppresses dust in rock tunnelling.
• Excavation of wet soil or weathered rock is easier.
• Soil does not stick to the cutters.
262 Tunnelling in weak rocks
There is no experience of success in TBM tunnelling through squeezing grounds any
where in the world. It is understood that TBM may stuck in the highly squeezing ground
or ﬂowing ground. Therefore, both TBM and shielded TBM are not recommended in the
squeezing ground and ﬂowing conditions.
Obviously water lines, sewer lines, etc. have to be protected during tunnelling at
shallow depth below congested mega cities. Some times a sewer line is ruptured during
tunnelling. Enormous stinking sewerage is spread on the roads. It is difﬁcult to repair sewer
lines quickly. In soil area the ground water table (GWT) is lowered below the tunnel base
before tunnelling is done in relatively dry soil. The subsidence proﬁle due to lowering of
GWT is, however, wider compared to that due to tunnelling. Careful underpinning of the
foundations or columns of the old cracked building is done to adjust to the subsidence
increasing with time, such as at Delhi.
There is a tendency very often to term the “geological surprises” as the cause to justify
time and cost over-runs in completion of tunnelling projects. This could be true in some
cases, yet managers should be cautious.
17.3 PRECAST LINING
In some projects, ﬁber reinforced–precast-concrete linings have been adopted. Precast-
concrete–segmental lining is now used both in soil, boulders and weak rock masses.
TBM is capable of placing them in position all round the circular tunnel with the help
of segment erector. Segment bolts are then tightened by impact wrenches twice. The
curved alignment is achieved with the help of tapering of the lining rings. All the rings
are tapered and curvature is obtained by suitably adjusting the orientation of rings. Before
taking inside the tunnel, the segments are checked on ground for any cracks/damage. As
water tightness is extremely important for the durability of the tunnel lining, a double
gasket system comprising a durable-elastomeric gasket and a water sealing made from the
hydrophobic material is used. These gaskets are located in grooves cast into the edges of
the precast concrete segments. Together with the high precision casting of the segments
achieved by precision steel molds, gaskets will ensure the durable and water tight tunnels.
Hydrophobic seals expands upto 250 percent, once it comes into contact with water.
Thought should be given to ﬁre-resistant design of concrete lining, as ﬁres in trains
are common these days. Extra thickness of concrete covers (∼=75 mm) should be provided
over the steel reinforcement. Under-reinforced concrete segments may be used to ensure
the failure in ductile phase, if it occurs.
Grouting is carried out simultaneously with the tunnelling. There are inbuilt ports
in the tail skin of TBM. These are used in primary grouting of annulus (void between
excavation proﬁle and outer face of the precast ring). Grouting is continued upto 3 bars
(0.3 MPa) pressure. Excavation is not commenced until the previous lining is completed.
Secondary grouting is also done within 14 days of ring erection. Every third ring is grouted
Metro tunnels
263
to pressure of 3 bars (0.3 MPa). Secondary grouting will ﬁll up any void left during
primary grout due to its shrinkage.
17.4 BUILDING CONDITION SURVEY AND VIBRATION LIMIT
Open trenches and shafts are excavated by drilling and blasting method for connection
to the underground metro system. The controlled bench blasting method is used in open
excavation, under busy and congested roads which are ﬂanked by old or heavy buildings
and monuments. Before designing the controlled blasting, the entire rock mass is explored
thoroughly (Chapter 11, see article on smooth blasting). The trial blasts are detonated to
determine the safe-scaled-distance (= R/W1/2, where W is the weight of charge per delay
of detonators and R is the distance from the blasting pattern), according to the nature of
structures.
The next step is to assess the condition of buildings standing near the blast site to
determine how much vibration can be sustained by these structures, specially old buildings
and ancient monuments if any. Table 17.3 speciﬁes permitted peak particle velocities
(PPV) as per German standard. It may be reminded that ISRM has recommended almost
twice PPV values.
Archaeologists suggest that no surface metro station should be built within protected
100 m periphery of a protected (heritage) monument. In such cases, an underground metro
station may be a better choice.
17.5 IMPACT ON THE STRUCTURES
The blasting works may affect the surrounding structures slightly in spite of the controlled
blasting. In worst case, small cracks may develop in RCC and masonry. The air over-
pressure may also create cracks in glass works of doors and windows in nearby areas.
Table 17.4 summarizes the various types of damages to structures. A huge compensation
Table 17.3 Permitted peak particle velocities (PPV) on structures.
S.No.
Condition of structure
Max. PPV (mm/s)
1.
Most structures in “good condition”
25
2.
Most structures in “fair condition”
12
3.
Most structures in “poor condition”
5
4.
Water supply structures
5
5.
Heritage structures/bridge structures
5
264 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 17.4 Building damage classiﬁcation (Burland et al., 1977; Boscardin & Cording, 1989 cited
by Agarwal & Gupta, 2002).
Risk
category
Description
of degree of
damage
Description of typical damage and
likely form of repair for typical
masonry buildings
Approx. crack
width (mm)
Max tensile
strain (%)
due to
subsidence
0
Negligible
Hairline cracks
–
Less than
0.05
1
Very slight
Fine cracks easily treated during normal
redecorations. Perhaps isolated slight
fracture in building. Cracks in
exterior brickwork visible upon close
inspection.
0.1 to 1
0.05 to
0.075
2
Slight
Cracks easily ﬁlled. Redecoration
probably required. Several slight
fractures inside building. Exterior
cracks visible, some repointing may
be required for weather tightness.
Doors and windows may stick
slightly.
1 to 5
0.075 to
0.15
3
Moderate
Cracks may require cutting out and
patching. Recurrent cracks can be
masked by suitable linings.
Tack-pointing and possibly
replacement of a small amount of
exterior brickwork may be required.
Doors and windows sticking. Utility
services may be interrupted. Water
tightness often impaired.
5 to 15 or a
number of
cracks greater
than three
0.15 to 0.3
4
Severe
Extensive repair involving removal and
replacement of sections of walls,
especially over doors and windows.
Windows and door frames distorted.
Floor slopes noticeable. Walls lean or
bulge noticeably, some loss of bearing
in beams. Utility services disrupted.
15 to 25 but also
depends on
number of
cracks
Greater
than 0.3
5
Very severe Major repair required involving partial
or complete reconstruction. Beams
lose bearing, walls lean badly and
require shoring. Windows broken by
distortion. Danger of instability.
Usually greater
than 25 but
depends on
number of
cracks
–
Metro tunnels
265
may have to be given to the owners of the damaged buildings nearby according to the
speciﬁed class of damage (Agarwal & Gupta, 2002).
The trafﬁc is stopped during blasting time for a few minutes and all the roads, other
exits/entries to the blasting site are closed for safety reasons. The ﬂying of rock pieces
during an urban blasting may have severe consequences.
17.6 SUBSIDENCE
The subsidence of ground and differential settlement of nearby structures takes place due
to underground tunnelling. The dewatering due to excavation causes more widespread
subsidence due primarily to the settlement of overlying loose deposit of soil, silt or clay
specially. In totally rocky areas, the subsidence is very small and does not cause any worry.
The following instruments are recommended for precision monitoring of structures.
• Precise levelling points,
• Tiltmeters,
• Crack gauges embedded in the nearby structures and
• Vibration monitoring of old/ancient structures.
In case the actual settlement is expected to go beyond the predicted subsidence, the
whole construction methodology must be reviewed. Table 17.4 may be used which speci-
ﬁes the maximum tensile strain caused by subsidence (= increment in spacing of columns
divided by the distance between columns, expressed in percentage).
17.7 PORTAL AND CUT SLOPES
It is better to locate the portals deeper into the ground or mountain where rock cover of
at least equal to width of tunnel is available. The slope of the portal should be stable.
Otherwise the same should be reinforced properly with the rock anchors. Alternatively
a thick breast wall (1 m) of concrete should be constructed to ensure stability of portals
(Singh & Goel, 2002).
It is needless to mention that the side slopes of open trenches should be stable. Deoja
et al. (1991) have suggested in Table 17.5, the dip of safe cut slopes with and without
protective measures for both rocks and soils. The rail lines are also being built in hilly
terrains. Table 17.5 is also recommended for deciding safe cut slope angles in the hills. The
utmost importance of the stable cut slopes is highlighted by the fact that landslides/rock
falls have taken place just near portals suddenly after heavy rains, thereby causing very
serious train accidents sometimes.
266 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 17.5 Preliminary design of cut slopes for height of cut less than 10 m (Deoja et al., 1991).
S.No.
Type of soil/rock protection
work
Stable cut slope without
any breast wall or minor
protection work (vertical :
horizontal)
Stable cut slope with
breast wall (vertical :
horizontal)
1.
Soil or mixed with boulders
(a) Disturbed vegetation
(b) Disturbed vegetation overlaid
on ﬁrm rock
1 : 1
Vertical for rock portion
and 1:1 for soil portion
n : 1*
Vertical for rock portion
and n : 1 for soil
portion
2.
Same as above but with dense
vegetation forests, medium
rock and shales
1 : 0.5
5 : 1
3.
Hard rock, shale, or harder rocks
with inward dip
1 : 0.25 to 1 : 0.10 and
vertical or overhanging
Breast wall is not
needed
4.
Same as above but with outward
dip or badly fractured
rock/shale
At dip angle or 1 : 0.5 or
dip of intersection of
joint planes
5 : 1
5.
Conglomerates/very
soft-shale/sand rock which
erode easily
Vertical cut to reduce
erosion
5 : 1
* n is 5 for H < 3 m; 4 for H = 3 −4 m and 3 for H = 4 −6 m.
The approach road/rail line to tunnel should be widened sufﬁciently. Catch drains
of proper depth and width should be made on both sides of the track, according to the
height and slope of cuts and size of boulders on the slope. A fence of 3.5 m height should
be erected along both drains and tied to steel poles at about 2 m center to center with
horizontal bracings at 1 m center to center. Then poles are anchored in the slopes. The
price is paid back if the wire net (4 mm φ wires welded at 10 × 10 cm or alternative)
withstands the impact of rock fall jumping. The wire net should then be replaced soon, if
required (Hoek, 2000).
REFERENCES
Agarwal, R. and Gupta, A. K. (2002). Rock excavation by controlled blasting in underground metro
corridor of Delhi MRTS. ISRM Symposium - Advancing Rock Mechanics Frontiers to Meet
the Challenges of 21st Century, New Delhi, IV 67- IV 78.
Broomﬁeld, J. D. and Denman, D. (2003). TBM rock tunnelling in India. Seminar on Productivity
and Speed in Tunnelling, Dehradun, India, 194-206.
Metro tunnels
267
Deoja, B. B., Dhittal, M., Thapa, B. and Wagner, A. (1991). Mountain Risk Engineering Hand-
book. International Centre of Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu, Part-II,
Table 22.15.
Heijboer, J., Hoonaard, J. Van den and Linde, F. W. J. (2004). The Westerschelde Tunnel.
A.A. Balkema, The Netherlands, 292.
Hoek,
E.
(2000).
Practical
Rock
Engineering.
Chapter
9,
2000
edition,
http://www.rocscience.com/hoek/practicalrockengineering.asp.
ITA (2004). Underground or above ground? Making the choice for urban mass transit systems.
Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 19, 3-28.
Mair, R. J., Taylor, R. N. and Burland, J. B. (1996). Prediction of ground movements and assess-
ment of risk of building damaged due to bored tunnelling. Conf. Geotechnical Aspects of
Underground Construction in Soft Ground, 713-718.
Sharma, V. M. (1998). Metro stations and rail tunnels of metro projects. National Workshop on
Underground Space Utilisation, ISRMTT, New Delhi, 131-163.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and
Tunnelling Hazards. A.A. Balkema, The Netherlands, 344.
Singh, M. (2003). Delhi metro line No.2 - tunnelling by shield tunnel boring machines. Seminar on
Productivity and Speed in Tunnelling Dehradun, India, 207-218.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
18
Tunnelling in swelling rocks
“Be prepared for the worst and hope for the best.”
Anonymous
18.1 INTRODUCTION
Swelling grounds cause major problems of supporting both during construction and during
the operational life of a tunnel due to excessive tunnel wall displacement. In certain cases,
invert heave of over 25 cm per year has been observed. The swell rates in the several
(75–100 years) old Swiss tunnels decreased to 0.5 to 1.0 cm per year with the passage of
time. However, the total invert heave was of the order of several meters requiring regular
repairs of the inverts.
In the Grenchenberg tunnel of Switzerland, the use of invert arch reduced the invert
heave (Golta, 1967). In Belchen tunnel of Switzerland through marl, anhydrite and
opalinus clay and shale; heaving of invert and cracking of drainage pipes was observed
soon after excavation (Huder & Amberg, 1970; Schillinger, 1970; Grob, 1972). A 17 m
high cavity was formed at the roof of the Sallsjo Tailrace tunnel in Sweden about an
year after the commissioning of the tunnel due to the presence of a 3 m wide shear
zone containing montmorillonite clays (Selmer-Olsen, 1970). In the Bozberg tunnel of
Switzerland, invert heave of 27 and 33 cm were observed in anhydrite (swelling mineral)
and opalinus clay shale respectively in 31 years between 1923 and 1954 (Beck & Golta,
1972). Similarly, in Udhampur–Katra tunnel of Northern Railway, India, ﬂoor heaving of
40–60 cm was observed in 2004 because of swelling of claystone having montmorillonite,
kaolinite and illite.
Some construction engineers harbor a wrong notion that swelling could be prevented
if the ground is hermetically sealed by sprayed concrete against air moisture. When such
a procedure was adopted in the Lieras tunnel of Norway, it was found that 10–20 cm
thick shotcrete cracked within a week (Cecil, 1970). However a second layer, applied
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
270 Tunnelling in weak rocks
after the cracking of the ﬁrst layer had ceased, proved to be adequate. According to
Wahlstorm (1973),
“theoretically, swelling can be prevented if the swell prone ground is sealed with imper-
meable concrete to prevent access of atmospheric water. However, such a measure rarely
helps in actual practice because of the presence of pore water within the clays.”
18.2 SUPPORT PRESSURES IN SWELLING GROUND
The swelling pressures on tunnel supports may be very high. Swelling grounds have
normally low modulus of deformation and are capable of exerting high pressures even
at moderate depths. Baldovin and Santovito (1973) measured contact pressures up to
3.5 MPa on provisional concrete lining (placed about 20 days after excavation) in the
Foretore tunnel in Southern Italy.
Einstein and Bischef (1975) have proposed an analysis cum design method for tunnels
in swelling rock. The procedure consists of the following seven steps:
(i) Determination of the primary state of stress,
(ii) Determination of the swell zones around the openings based on the primary state
of stress and the stress changes caused by the opening,
(iii) Laboratory swell tests in the oedometer on samples taken from swell zones,
(iv) Determination of time-swell properties from oedometer tests by measuring the
time displacement relations for several stress increments,
(v) Derivation of the swell-displacements for the stress difference between the
primary state of stress and the state of stress after excavation,
(vi) Performing swell-time computations and
(vii) In situ measurements of swell-displacements and swelling pressures.
Further, they recommended the following design features based on the above
procedure:
(i) Use an invert arch instead of horizontal struts,
(ii) Bolt the swelling zone with the ground below it,
(iii) Use compressible backﬁll between the support and the swelling ground,
(iv) Trim the ﬂoor,
(v) Employ grouting to seal off preferential paths supplying water to the swell prone
zone,
(vi) Provide constraint to the swelling ground by cutting slots and injecting grout
under pressure through these slots,
(vii) Avoid exposure of the swelling ground to atmospheric moisture by applying
sprayed concrete (SFRS) and
(viii) Provide good drainage inside the tunnel.
In practice sometimes it is difﬁcult to separate the squeezing and swelling components
of support pressure from the total pressure acting on tunnel supports. Jethwa et al. (1977)
Tunnelling in swelling rocks 271
considered the total support pressure as the sum of the loosening pressure (pl), squeezing
pressure ( pg) and the swelling pressure ( ps). The total of ﬁrst two kinds of pressures
was estimated from elasto-plastic theory (Daemen, 1975), and the swelling pressure was
estimated after an empirical relation of Komornik and David (1969) as given below:
log ps = 2.132 + 0.0208 wL + 0.000665 γd −0.0269 wn
(18.1)
where
ps = swelling pressure (kg/cm2) at zero swelling strain,
wL= liquid limit (%),
γd = natural dry density (kg/m3) and
wn = natural moisture content (%).
It may be noted that the swelling pressure decreases rapidly with increasing swelling
strain or tunnel closure.
Later, Daemen (1978) raised doubts on the validity of assuming the total sup-
port pressure as the arithmetic sum of the three kinds of pressures (loosening +
squeezing + swelling). Subsequently, Singh (1978) emphasized on the interaction
between the squeezing and swelling pressures and suggested that only the greater of
the two should be considered. If radial stress is more than swelling pressure, the rock will
behave as non-swelling rock in squeezing ground conditions. Thus, the short-term support
pressure (pio) may be given as follows:
when
pg > ps
pio = p1 + pg
(18.2)
when
pg < ps
pio = p1 + ps
(18.3)
and,
pult = 2 to 3pio < overburden pressure
(18.4)
where
pg = pressure in the squeezing ground condition,
pio = total short-term support pressure,
pl
= loosening pressure due to the gravity and
pult = long-term support pressure.
It may be mentioned here that the total support pressure may never exceed the overbur-
den pressure at the crown of a tunnel, irrespective of the magnitude of swelling pressure.
The zone of swelling may extend upto a radius, where the radial stress is equal to the
swelling pressure corresponding to no swelling strain.
Jethwa(1981)haspreparedadesignchartforestimatingthelong-termsupportpressure
in terms of cover pressure (pult/P) for different values of peak angle of internal friction of
rockmasses, accordingtothedegreeofsqueezing(Fig. 18.1). Heusedelasto-plastictheory
of Daemen (1975) and modiﬁed it for time-dependent support pressures. He assumed
272 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Highly Squeezing
Moderately Squeezing
Mildly Squeezing
Non Squeezing
< 0.2
0.2 - 0.4
0.4 - 1.0
> 1.0
Degree of Squeezing
qcmass/2P
φp–φr= 10°
b / a ≥ 4
cr=0 MPa
Poor
Rock Mass
Fair
Rock Mass
Very Poor
Rock Mass
25°
30°
35°
40°
φp, degrees
Highly Squeezing
Moderately Squeezing
Mild Squeezing
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
pult / P
qcmass/2P = 0.05
0.20
0.40
Fig. 18.1
Chartforultimatesupportpressure(pult)insqueezinggroundconditions(P = overburden
pressure).
Mohr’s theory of shear strength which is applicable to clays, crushed shales/clay stones,
etc. within thick fault zones. It was found that pult is nearly constant beyond a radius
of broken (plastic) zone which is more than four times the radius of tunnel. Limited
experience proves the chart to be useful in estimation of support pressures approximately.
The angle of internal friction of normally consolidated clays within the fault zones may
be found from equation (7.10).
18.3 VARIATION OF SUPPORT PRESSURE WITH TIME
The soil parameters for the black clay within the intra-thrust zone of Chhibro–Khodri
tunnel, Yamuna hydroelectric project, in lower Himalaya were found as follows
(Chapter 20):
Liquid limit
= 50
Natural water content
= 6.6 percent
Tunnelling in swelling rocks 273
Dry unit weight
= 2.2 gm/cc
Plasticity index
= 27
Height of overburden above crown
= 280 m
Diameter of tunnel
= 9.0 m
Estimated swelling pressure from equation (18.1) = 3.9 kg/cm2 (0.39 MPa)
Observed support pressure
= 12.8 kg/cm2 (1.28 MPa)
The support pressures on steel rib supports were observed with the help of load cells
and contact pressure cells. The red shales and the black clays of the Chhibro–Khodri
tunnel and the shales of the Loktak tunnel contained swelling minerals. However, the
swelling pressures have been neglected as discussed earlier, because the swelling pres-
sures (from equation (18.1)) worked out to be much less than the squeezing pressures.
For example, the predicted swelling pressures (Jethwa et al., 1977) are 0.6 and 3.9 kg/cm2
in comparison to the squeezing pressures of 3.5 and 10.0 kg/cm2 (against observed pres-
sures of 3.07 kg/cm2 and 12.8 kg/cm2) in the cases of the red shales and the black clays,
respectively.
At the Yamuna project, in a test-section in clays it was observed that an early non-
uniform stress distribution around steel supports changed to nearly uniform distribution
with passage of time (Fig. 18.2). Likewise, placement of concrete lining in the early stages
would have loaded the same, non-uniformly (Jethwa et al., 1977).
Observations up to a period of about two years on support pressures on steel supports
at a test-section in clays at the Yamuna project (Jethwa & Singh, 1973), when plotted
on a log–log scale, make a straight line (Fig. 18.3). These observations revealed that the
X
X
X
X
X
X
σv
σv
σh
σh
σv
σh
Support Pressure, kg/cm2
Time, days
0
4
8
12
0
200
400
600
800
Fig. 18.2
Observed support pressure vs. time in black clays, Yamuna project (9.0 m diam. tunnel).
274 Tunnelling in weak rocks
σh
σv
σh
σh
σv
σv
10
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
1.0
4.0
6.0
10
20
40
100
200
400
1000
Time, days
Support Pressure, kg/cm2
Fig. 18.3
Observed support pressure vs. time in black clays, Yamuna project (3.0 m diam. tunnel).
initial non-uniform stress distribution on tunnel supports becomes almost uniform with
passage of time. Thus, swelling or time-dependent deformation may in fact prove to be
beneﬁcial for stabilizing the concrete lining, because a uniform support pressure simply
tries to pre-stress the lining. It may be highlighted here that concrete lining is essential in
case of water tunnels.
18.4 CASE HISTORIES
18.4.1 Malgovert tunnel
Jaeger (1972) described a case history of Malgovert tunnel in France. It is a 15 km
long tunnel of Tignes hydroelectric project, subjected to a 750 m head of water. At one
location, this tail race tunnel (TRT) passed through swelling ground and the strata of
badly crushed shales, which was located near a fault. These shales were nearly dry and
so tunnelling was easy. Soon the ground became wet causing so much of swelling that
even ﬂange-to-ﬂange polygonal steel supports buckled under high swelling pressures.
The excavation of heading was then stopped and a diversion tunnel was created. But
unfortunately a failure in the crown near the same fault caused heavy in-ﬂow of water
(nearly 4000 gal/min), which ﬂooded the tunnel. Yet again the excavation was stopped and
several pumps were used to drain the water. Consequently, the tunnelling was hampered
for several months.
Tunnelling in swelling rocks 275
The concrete lining was delayed until swelling and time-dependent deformations were
stabilized. It was found that tunnel sofﬁt had been lowered on average by 30–60 cm over
a length of several kilometers and the size of the tunnel was thus reduced signiﬁcantly.
For smooth ﬂow of water, it was decided to cut the crown to the planned height before
concreting in lining of the tunnel.
It is clear that the presence of swelling clays in an otherwise competent rock mass may
present serious problems of supporting. As such, it is advisable to check the presence of
swelling minerals (montmorillonite, anhydrite, etc.) in clays whenever a thick shear zone
or fault gouge or soft shale or mudstone is encountered in a tunnel. Once the presence
of swelling clays is established, it would be better to allow the ground to swell before a
concrete lining is installed. A thin layer of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) may be
applied near the tunnel face soon after excavation for the immediate support, if the stand-
up time of the rock mass is too short. It should also be realized that fragile swelling rocks
may be fractured in over-stressed reaches where support pressure in squeezing ground
condition may be much higher than the swelling pressure. As such, a circular shape of an
opening is recommended. Its diameter should be 1.1 B, where B is the design diameter of
the opening without lining.
In highly swelling rocks, one should use the closely spaced steel supports with invert
struts which are embedded all around in the SFRS for its lateral stability. It is also sug-
gested that the drainage system of the tunnel should be made better to prevent water from
seeping into the rock mass. It is wise to monitor the behavior of rock mass with borehole
extensometers and load cells, etc. to improve conﬁdence. The monitoring may continue
to at least whole period of stabilization of tunnel wall closure.
18.4.2 Bolu tunnel
Dalgic (2002) describes a very interesting case of tunnelling in clays of a wide intra-thrust
zones of Bolu tunnel, Turkey. The twin road tunnels are 12 m wide with a rock pillar of
40 m width under rock cover of 70 m. As expected, shotcrete (with horizontal slots to allow
the tunnel closure) failed, because lower most part of the lining squeezed more inside the
tunnel. Further, rock bolts also suffered failure due to the little bonding with clay and
adverse affect on remolding of clays. Excessive radial closure of 110 cm was observed.
The ribs encased with 30 cm thick SFRS contained the deformation to 5 cm. The reinforced
cement concrete lining was planned to be provided within both the intra-thrust zones after
about a year when the observed rate of deformations per month are less than 2 mm. An
earthquake of 7.2 M occurred causing horizontal acceleration of 0.8 g. Unfortunately, the
SFRS lining failed in the intra-thrust zones only, perhaps due to dynamic earth pressures
(see Appendix I.4), before RCC lining could be built. The broken or plastic zone increased
upto the ground surface, causing two sink holes on the ground surface during earthquake.
He concluded that NATM ﬂexible support system failed. Yet more heavy SFRS (with
ribs) support system succeeded in the clays of fault zones.
276 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Design (several alternatives)
Construction
Monitoring
Analysis
Lab. testing
Exploration
Physical characteristics
2
3
1
Fig. 18.4
Integrated analysis-design approach for rock structure (ISRM, 1994).
18.5 DESIGN APPROACH
ISRM (1994) recommends the integrated analysis-design approach to any engineered
rock structure specially to the tunnel as shown in Fig. 18.4. It is interesting that ISRM
recommends the ﬁeld instrumentation.
In some road tunnels, the rock is allowed to swell freely and is regularly removed
(shaved off ) such that the tunnel continues to be usable.
Drainage of water ﬂowing into the tunnel is one of the most effective measures against
swelling. Sealing of all exposed surfaces is also very effective measure. However, swelling
still does take place due to the migration of moisture to the zones of stress relaxation which
are formed by excavation. In shales, the suction effect is very signiﬁcant. Further, in the
case of jointed shales, grouting may provide a barrier against further ﬂow of moisture or
seepage water through rock joints. The swelling cum heaving of tunnel bottom has been
arrested by providing rock anchors below its bottom. Some engineers prefer rigid RCC
tunnel lining to withstand high swelling pressures.
REFERENCES
Baldovin, G. and Santovito, D. (1973). Tunnel construction in high swelling clays. Proc. VIII Int.
Conf. on SMFE, Moscow, 2, Part II, 13-16.
Beck, A. and Golta, A. (1972). Tunnelsanierungen der Schweizerischen Bundesbahnen. Schweiz
Bauzeitung, 90(36), 857-863.
Cecil, O. S. (1970). Shotcrete support in rock tunnels in Scandinavia. Civil Engineering, ASCE,
74-79.
Daemen, J. J. K. (1975). Tunnel support loading caused by rock failure. PhD thesis, University of
Minnesota, U.S.A.
Tunnelling in swelling rocks 277
Daemen, J. J. K. (1978). Personal communication with Prof. Bhawani Singh.
Dalgic, S. (2002). Tunnelling in squeezing rock, the Bolu tunnel, Anatolian motorway, Turkey.
Engineering Geology, 67, 73-96.
Einstein, H. H. and Bischef, N. (1975). Design of tunnels in swelling rock, Design methods in rock
mechanics. Proc. 16th Symp. on Rock Mechanics, Univ. of Minnesota, U.S.A., 185-195.
Golta, A. (1967). Sohlenhebungen in Tunnels and Stollen. Prov. Bericht an die Schweiz,
Bundesbahnen, 49.
Grob, H. (1972). Schwelldruck I Belchen tunnel. Int. Symp. on Underground Opening, Lucerne,
99-119.
Huder, J. and Amberg, G. (1970). Quelling in Mergel. Opalinuston und anhydrit. Schweiz
Bauzeitung, 88(43), 975-980.
ISRM (1994). Comments and recommendations on design and analysis procedures for structures in
argillaceous swelling rock. Int. J. Rock Mech. and Mining Sciences, 31, 537-546.
Jaeger, C. (1972). Rock Mechanics and Engineering. Cambridge University Press, Art. 2.2.2, 417.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressures in tunnels through squeezing ground in lower
Himalayas. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India, 272.
Jethwa, J. L. and Singh, B. (1973). Instrumentation for evaluation of rock loads in the intra-thrust
zone at kalawar for head race tunnel of Yamuna hydro-electric scheme, Stage-II, Part-II.
Symp. on Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling Problems, Kurukshetra.
Jethwa, J. L., Singh, Bhawani, Singh, B. and Mithal, R. S. (1977). Rock pressures in tunnel lining
in swelling and viscous rocks. Int. Symp. on Soil-Structure Interaction, IIT Roorkee, India,
45-50.
Komornik, A. and David, D. (1969). Prediction of swelling pressures of clays. Proc. ASCE, SMFE,
95, SM-1, 209-255.
Schillinger, G. (1970). Die Feldsdrucke im gipskenper beim Ban des Belchentuuneb. Publication
No. 80, Schweiz, Ges. F. Bodenmechanic u. Fundationstechnik, 31-36.
Selmer-Olsen, R. (1970). Problems with Swelling Clays in Norwegian Underground Construction
in Hard Rocks, Lecture at Swedish Geotechnical Institute. Report No. 40, 1971.
Singh, Bhawani. (1978). Analysis and design techniques for underground structures. Proc. Conf.
Geotechnical Engineering, IIT Delhi, 2, 102-112.
Walhstorm, E. E. (1973). Developments in Geotechnical Engineering. Elsevier Science Ltd., U.K.,
122-124.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
19
Tunnelling through squeezing ground
condition
“Strength and weaknesses go together both in matter and life. If nature has given
weakness, nature will compensate. No one is perfect.”
Source: IIT Roorkee
19.1 INTRODUCTION
The squeezing or elasto-plastic pressure (also called genuine mountain pressure in Europe)
is mobilized due to failure of a weak rock mass around a tunnel under inﬂuence of high
overburden pressure or tectonic stresses. The over stressed zone of rock mass fails where
tangential stress (σθ) exceeds the mobilized UCS of rock mass. The failure process will
then travel gradually from the tunnel boundary to deeper regions inside the unsupported
rock mass. The zone of the failed rock mass is called the “broken zone.” This failed rock
mass dilates on account of the new fractures. A support system after installation restrains
the tunnel closure and gets loaded by the support pressure. Chapter 13 presents the criteria
of squeezing ground condition.
The tunnel closure may be both instantaneous and time dependent. It is the time-
dependent displacement which dominates in fragile rock masses under high overburden,
particularly when a broken zone is formed around an opening. Therefore the support
system attempts to curb these time-dependent tunnel closure and in turn attracts higher
loads (Jethwa, 1981; Dube, Singh & Singh, 1986).
Terzaghi (1946) advocated that support pressure for squeezing rocks is higher for
greater overburden and is directly proportional to the tunnel width. The experience is that
a weak strata in the beginning gave the impression of non-squeezing ground but the same
weak strata under high overburden showed signiﬁcant squeezing later on, upsetting the
engineers. At another location in little stronger rock mass, squeezing did not occur at
even 1400 m overburden, happily surprising every one. Thus real problems are: (i) how
to anticipate squeezing condition and assess the degree of squeezing, (ii) how to esti-
mate the short-term and long-term support pressures as well as allowable tunnel closures
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
280 Tunnelling in weak rocks
and (iii) what should be the strategy of supporting severe squeezing grounds. It is possible
to tackle these challenging problems by the grace of God, if the “tunnel mechanics” of
squeezing ground is better understood. Barla (2004) has given an excellent review of the
state-of-the-art.
Appendix I gives the details of the equations for stress distribution within elastic and
broken zones. Sections 19.2 and 19.3 below are only brief summaries of expressions for
support pressures in the squeezing ground.
19.2 CRITERION FOR SQUEEZING GROUND CONDITION
According to Mohr’s theory the criterion of squeezing is
σθmax > qcmass
(19.1)
where
σθmax = maximum tangential stress at the face of excavation and
qcmass = UCS of rock mass.
Since rock mass is anisotropic due to joints, the intermediate principal stress σ2 also
enhances the deviatoric strength (differential stress at failure) of rock mass as follows:
σ1 −σ3 = qcmass + σ2 + σ3
2
A
(19.2)
where
A = rock mass parameter,
= 2 sin φp/(1−sin φp).
Thus, the criterion of squeezing according to the modiﬁed Mohr equation is (σ3 = 0
and σ2 = Po),
σθmax > qcmass + PoA/2 = q′
cmass
(19.3)
where
σθmax = tangential stress at the periphery of a tunnel,
∼= 2γH in nearly circular tunnels,
qcmass = compressive strength of rock mass,
= 7 γ Q1/3 MPa,
= 5.5 γ N1/3/B0.1 MPa,
γ
= unit weight of rock mass in gm/cc,
B
= width of tunnel in meters,
Q
= post-construction rock mass quality,
N
= rock mass number (= Q assuming SRF = 1.0),
Po
= in situ stress along the tunnel axis,
∼= γH
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 281
A
=
2 sin φp
1 −sin φp
,
φp
= peak angle of internal friction of jointed rock mass,
q′
cmass = biaxial compressive strength of rock mass and
H
= height of overburden above the crown of tunnel.
It may be noted that the ratio of σθmax and qcmass may not predict the degree of
squeezing realistically. In the case of hard rock masses with rough dilatant joints and
higher A parameter, squeezing may not take place even if σθmax ≫q′
cmass. So, equation
(19.3) is a better criterion of squeezing.
19.3 ELASTO-PLASTIC THEORY OF SQUEEZING GROUND
Daemen (1975) developed the theory of support pressures in the squeezing ground
condition. With modiﬁcation in the Mohr strength criterion, his equations have been
rederived in Appendix I. Perhaps, this 2D theory may also be applied in banded strata
where thickness of weak strata is more than the width of the tunnel.
The horizontal support pressure ph is given by the following equation in nearly
hydrostatic case (λ = 1) (Fig. A1.3 in Appendix I)
ph =

2P −qcmass −
	
APo/2
2 + (A/2)
+ cr · cot φr
 a
b
α
−cr cot φr
(19.4)
where Po is the in situ stress along the tunnel axis; and P is the vertical and horizontal in
situ stress across the tunnel axis. The residual cohesion is cr and angle of internal friction is
φr within the broken zone. The radius of circular tunnel is “a” and the radius of concentric
broken zone is “b.” It may be noted that the parameter A reduces the support pressure
drastically, where A is signiﬁcant such as in jointed hard rocks with rough joints.
The vertical support pressure is,
pv = ph + γMγ
	
b −a
(19.5)
where γ is unit weight of rock mass and parameter Mγ is given by equation (AI.30)
in the Appendix I.
Further, elasto-plastic theory shows that the support pressure decreases rapidly with
increasing size of the broken zone. Thus development of broken zone should be permitted
upto three times the radius of the opening for reducing support pressures. The vertical and
horizontal support pressures may be considered of the same order.
Obviously the support pressures given by equations (19.4) and 19.5) are the short-
term pressures. The long-term support pressures will be much higher, two or three
times the short-term support pressures unlike non-squeezing ground conditions where
generally the long-term support pressure is 1.7 times the short-term support pressure
(Barton et al., 1974).
282 Tunnelling in weak rocks
19.4 DISPLACEMENTS OF TUNNEL WALLS
It is common knowledge that the rock failure is associated with volumetric expansion due
to creation and progressive widening of new fractures. Consequently, all the points within
the broken zone in a circular tunnel shift almost radially towards the opening because the
expanding rock mass is kinematically free to move only in the radial direction. Labasse
(1949) assumed that the volume of failed rock mass increases at a constant rate (called
coefﬁcient of volumetric expansion K).
The displacement at the boundary of broken zone (ub) is negligible compared to that
at the opening periphery (ua). So the coefﬁcient of volumetric expansion is deﬁned as
follows:
K = πb2 −π
	
a −ua
2 −π(b2 −a2)
πb2 −πa2
(19.6)
Equation (19.6) can be solved as below for obtaining ua
ua = a −

a2 −K(b2 −a2)
(19.7)
Jethwa (1981) has found the overall values of K from instrumented tunnels in
Himalaya. These values are listed in Table 8.1. Actually, K varied with time and radius
vector. K was more in roof than in walls. So only peak overall values of K are reported
and considered to have stabilized to a great extent with time (15–30 months). It is heart-
ening to note that the value of K for crushed shale is the same at two different projects.
It may be noted that higher degree of squeezing was associated with rock masses of higher
K values.
Fig. 19.1 shows observed radial displacements within the broken zone of a tunnel
in highly squeezing ground condition, at Giri Hydroelectric Project, in Himalaya, India
(Dube et al., 1986). It is interesting to note that the displacement vs. radius curves tend to
converge at a point X after some time. The radius at the convergence point is believed to be
equal to radius (b) of the broken zone. Its ordinate is thus equal to the displacement at the
boundaryofthebrokenzone(ub). Thisisagraphicalmethodforestimatingtheradiusofthe
broken zone approximately from the observations of multiple borehole extensometer(s)
and tunnel closure (Dube, 1979; Dube et al., 1986).
Why squeezing rock is creeping so much, compared to the same rock mass in non-
squeezing condition under shallow overburden? What is the cause of extensive creep or
time-dependent deformations for more than 1000 days? Whereas the tunnel closures are
stabilized within 25 days in the non-squeezing ground conditions. Further research is
needed on creep models of rock mass in the failure condition. It may be the tertiary creep.
It may be pointed out that heaving of the tunnel bottom occurred in severe squeezing
ground conditions. Engineers tried in vain to chop off heaving frequently to maintain the
rail line for haulage of muck. The better solution is rock bolting and shotcreting of the
ﬂoor to withstand the heavy support pressures in the bottom.
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 283
0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0
40
80
120
160
200
240
280
X
b
ub
Radial distance, m
Radial displacement, mm
413
308
241
157
96
56
19
12
4
793 days
Fig. 19.1
Variation of radial displacement with radial distance within slates/phyllites of Giri
Tunnel, India (Dube et al., 1986).
For tunnel under a deeper overburden, only squeezing failure occurs at both sidewalls
(Fig. 19.2). The roof does not collapse, due to the higher horizontal stress (Hsu et al.,
2004). The critical location of the interbedded formation is at one of the sidewalls, where
the dipping direction of the bedding plane is unfavorable. For the formation located at the
other sidewall, only minor squeezing failure develops. An increase of horizontal stress
will help to reduce the amount of squeezing deformation for a tunnel in a steeply dipping
formation. A tunnel with a steeply dipped formation at the portal section or under a shallow
overburden is prone to cave-in failure. Cave-in failure starts at one sidewall, due to ﬂexural
tensile buckling, and then leads to the roof rock sliding, followed by the squeezing of the
other sidewall (Hsu et al., 2004).
Shalabi (2005) analyzed the rise in contact pressure on lining of still-water tunnel
(Utah, USA) in squeezing ground condition in a 200 m wide fault zone under overburden
of 700 m. The rock consists of moderately to heavily jointed shale, silt and clay. All param-
eters of the power law creep model were determined in the laboratory. The measured
support pressure on the concrete segments was about 7 percent of the overburden pres-
sure after a time period of three months, against predicted contact pressure of 12 percent
which may rise to 16 percent in 10 years. Actual delay of four days in the lining may
reduce the contact pressure by 20 percent.
284 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Tunnel Profile
before Failure
Fig. 19.2
Squeezing failures occur ﬁrst at the sidewalls for a tunnel (the bedding spacing is 0.5 m
and dip angle is 80◦) [Hsu et al., 2004].
Yassaghi and Salari (2005) reported squeezing of 3 percent of diameter at the contact
zone between andesite–basaltic bodies and the tuff rocks under an overburden of 300 m
in a 6 m wide Taloun road tunnels, Iran. The GSI of contact zone is only 14. Therefore,
heavy supports were applied consisting of steel arches at spacing of 1 m and concrete
lining of 30 cm thickness. The initial convergence rate of 60 mm/month was reduced to
less than 3 mm/month. The analysis of the lining using UDEC showed that the stress, due
to bending moment is greater than that of the axial forces on the lining due to the high
shear forces near the heterogeneous contact zone.
19.5 COMPACTION ZONE WITHIN BROKEN ZONE
Jethwa (1981) observed that the values of K are negative near the tunnel and increased
with radius vector. Thus, he postulated the existence of compaction zone within the broken
zone (Fig.19.3). The radius of the compaction zone (rc) is estimated to be approximately
equal to
rc = 0.37b
(19.8)
Thus broken zone will not develop where b is equal to a/0.37 or 2.7a. This is the
reason why compaction zone was not observed in European tunnels in the squeezing
ground conditions as b was perhaps less than 2.7a.
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 285
rc = 0.37b
b = 3 - 6 a
4b
Concrete
lining
Broken zone
a
b
rc
Compaction zone
Fig. 19.3
Compaction zone within broken zone in the squeezing ground condition (Jethwa, 1981).
In an ideal elasto-plastic rock mass, the compaction zone should not be formed. The
formation of the compaction zone may be explained as follows. A fragile rock mass around
the tunnel opening fails and dilates under the inﬂuence of the induced stresses. The dilated
rock mass then gets compacted due to the passive pressure exerted by the support system
in order to satisfy the ultimate boundary condition, that is zero rate of support deformation
with time. The development of the support pressure with time would reduce the deviator
stresses (σθ −σr) within the compaction zone which in turn will undergo creep relaxation
manifested by the negative K values.
19.6 FACE ADVANCE FOR STABILIZATION OF BROKEN ZONE
Daemen (1975) and Jethwa (1981) showed that the radius of the broken zone increases
with face advance (Fig. 19.3). The broken zone is stabilized after some face advance
and time. Fig. 19.4 compiles data of the ﬁnal radius of the broken zone (b/a) and the
corresponding face advance (z/a). It is seen that
z = 4b
(19.9)
The concrete lining should be laid only after displacements have stabilized. This means
that concrete lining should not be built in the tunnel length of z = 4b from the tunnel face.
19.7 GROUND RESPONSE CURVE
Equations (19.5) and (19.7) are used to calculate the support pressure and closure in roof
for different values of radius of broken zone. The curve between support pressure and
tunnel closure is plotted as shown in Fig. 19.5. This curve is called ground response
(reaction) curve. It is evident that the support pressure decreases rapidly with increasing
tunnel closure.
286 Tunnelling in weak rocks
RLC
R
R
C
L
RL C
L
R
0
10
20
30
40
2
6
8
10
4
0
1
4
z/a
b/a
Phyllites, Giri Hydel Tunnel
Claystone/siltstone, Giri Hydel Tunnel
Red shales, Chhibro-Khodri Tunnel
Black clays, Chhibro-Khodri Tunnel
Sandstone, Chhibro-Khodri Tunnel
Shales, Loktak Hydel Tunnel
R = Right wall; L = Left wall; C = Roof
Fig. 19.4
Face advance (z) for stabilization of broken zone (b).
2a
2rc
2b
Failure or
broken zone
Compaction
zone (rc=0.37b)
6 Percent
Tunnel Closure
Onset of sympathetic failure
Support Pressure
cr=0
cr≠0
Flexible
Stiff
Fig. 19.5
Effect of sympathetic failure of rock mass on theoretical ground response curve of
squeezing ground condition. Support reaction curve of stiff and delayed ﬂexible supports are
superposed.
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 287
Hence, the need for allowing signiﬁcant displacement to reduce the cost of the support
system. This is the secret of success in tunnelling through squeezing ground condition.
In case one chooses to install very stiff support system, it may be seen from Fig. 19.5
that the stiff support system will attract high support pressure as it will restrict the tunnel
closure. If a ﬂexible support system is built after some delay, it will attract much less
support pressure. This is an ideal choice. However, too late and too ﬂexible support
system may attract high support pressure due to excessive loosening of rock mass in the
broken zone. Yet the squeezing ground comes to equilibrium after years even in severe
squeezing ground condition. Although the ﬁnal deformations may be undesirable, and so
corrective measures are required.
The normalized observed ground response curve is plotted in Figs 5.4a and b. It is
same as the curve for correction factor f ′ for squeezing ground condition. Figs 5.4a and b
may be replotted between 0.2(Qi)1/3·f· ( f ′/Jr) and ua to ﬁnd the actual ground response
curve for the short-term support pressures in the roof and wall, respectively. Section 6.8
and Fig. 6.3 also show an observed ground response curve using the rock mass number.
The data suggests that the support pressure jumps up after tunnel closure of about 5 to
6 percent. Then there is sympathetic failure of entire brittle rock mass within the broken
zone, rendering its residual cohesion cr = 0 in the highly squeezing ground. The theoretical
ground response curve is plotted in Fig. 19.5 on the basis of this hypothesis. One gets
the same trend as observed in Fig. 5.4. The sympathetic failure is in fact unstable and
widespread fracture propagation in the entire failure zone, starting from the point of
maximum shear strain. This brittle fracture process may be taken into account in the
elasto-plastic theory by assuming cr = 0 after critical tunnel closure of 6 percent. Thus it
is recommended that tunnel closure should not be permitted beyond 4 percent of tunnel
radius, to be on safer side.
19.7.1 Validation of theory in ﬁeld
Singh and Goel (2002) computed tunnel closures and support pressures in 10 tunnels in
Himalaya. There is a good cross-check between elasto-plastic theory based on poly-axial
failure criterion (equations (19.2) and (8.15)) and observed support pressures both in the
roof and walls, except in a few cases. Thus, the assumptions made in the theory are
justiﬁed partially. Further the predictions are generally conservative. It is recommended
that empirical equation (19.10) should be preferred for assessment of support pressures,
as the same is closer to observations than that for elasto-plastic theory.
pult = 0.2
Jr
· Q−1/3
i
· f · f ′ · f ′′
MPa
(19.10)
where
pult = ultimate roof support pressure in MPa,
Qi = 5Q = short-term rock mass quality,
288 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Jr = joint roughness number of Barton et al. (1974),
f
= correction factor for overburden = 1 + (H−320)/800 ≥1,
f ′ = correction factor for tunnel closure (Table 5.10) obtained from Fig. 5.4,
= 1 in non-squeezing ground,
f ′′ = correction factor for the time after excavation = log (9.5 t 0.25),
H = overburden above crown or tunnel depth below ground level in meters and
t
= time in months after excavation.
The theoretical support pressures assuming Mohr’s theory for elastic zone also were
too conservative when compared with the observed support pressures. So the same is not
recommended.
19.8 STRAIN CRITERION OF SQUEEZING GROUND CONDITION
The experience proved that squeezing occurred when overburden exceeded 350Q1/3 m
(Singh et al., 1992). One should calculate the corresponding tunnel closure which is as
follows:
ua = (1 + v) · a · P
Ed
(19.11)
ua
a = (1 + v) · γ · H
Ed
= (1 + v) · γ · H
Q0.36 · H 0.20 × 10−5 %
Substituting H = 350Q1/3, γ = 2.5 t/m3, ν = 0.20, and Q = 0.1 to 0.01, one gets the
following value of strain for squeezing to occur
ua
a = 0.8 to 1%
(19.12)
On the basis of ﬁeld observations and instrumentation, Sakurai (1983) concluded that
tunnel closure more than 1 percent was followed by the onset of tunnel instability and
difﬁculties in providing adequate support. Field data of Cheru et al. (1998) conﬁrmed
the observation of Sakurai (Fig. 19.6). The calculated values agree with this observation.
Equation (19.12) proves that the strain criterion for squeezing is nearly independent of
the rock mass quality or UCS. Therefore, degree of squeezing has been deﬁned by Hoek
(2001) as shown in Fig. 19.7. The uniaxial compressive strength of rock mass qcmass may
be estimated from correlations (equation (8.9) or preferably equation (8.5) of Hoek, 2001).
The tunnel strain (ua/a) may be predicted after knowing the ratio qcmass/P. Then, one may
have an idea of the degree of squeezing and the associated problems. The tunnel strain
is reduced by the support capacity (pi). Hoek (2001) has plotted theoretical curves and
ﬁeld data to get the tunnel strain (ua/a) for a given value of qcmass/P and pi/P (Fig. 19.8).
Tunnel with Safety Problems
Tunnel with no Safety Problems
0.1
1
10
100
0.1
1
10
Uniaxial Compressive Strength, MPa
Percentage Strain (ε) = (Tunnel Closure/Tunnel Diameter)×100
Fig. 19.6
FieldobservationsbyCheruetal. (1998)fromsecondFreeway, PinglinandNewTienlun
Headrace Tunnels in Taiwan.
Strain greater than 10%
Extreme squeezing problems
Strain between 5% and 10%
Very severe squeezing problems
Strain between 2.5% and 5%
Severe squeezing problems
Strain between 1% and 2.5%
     Minor squeezing problems
Strain less than 1%
   Few support problems
a
0.1             0.2              0.3              0.4             0.5            0.6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Rock Mass Strength/In situ Stress
Strain ε = (Tunnel Wall Displacement ua/Tunnel Radius a)×100
ua
Fig. 19.7
Tunnelling problems associated with different levels of strain (Hoek, 2001).
290 Tunnelling in weak rocks
16
0.25
0.20
0
5
11
14
9
4
13
12
10
0.10
0.05
0.15
1
7
2
3
15
6
8
0.1
0.0
0
5
10
0.2
15
20
25
30
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.6
Strength values considered reliable
Strength values estimated
Rock Mass Strength qcmass/In situ Stress P
Percent Strain ε = (Tunnel Deformation/Tunnel Radius)×100 
Support Pressure pi/In situ Stress P
Fig. 19.8
Inﬂuence of internal support pressure pi upon deformation of tunnels in weak ground
(Numbered points are from case histories) (Hoek, 2001).
Conversely, the support pressure ( pi) may be assessed from Fig. 19.8 for a pre-planned
value of tunnel strain for a given overburden pressure P.
Fig. 19.6 and experiences in Himalaya suggest that tunnels, in minor to severe squeez-
ing ground conditions, have been completed successfully but the construction problems
increased with increasing tunnel strain. Tunnelling through very severe squeezing ground
condition was naturally most difﬁcult and must be avoided by changing alignment of
tunnel to reduce the overburden.
An educative case history of extreme squeezing ground conditions at Tymfristos tunnel
(11 m diameter), Greece has been illustrated by Kontogianni et al. (2004). The tunnel
closure was 20 percent. The redesigned supports also failed after 6 percent closure. The
tunnel cost increased by 10 times. The rock mass is claystone and slickensided argillaceous
schist, intensely folded and tectonized (qc = 5–50 MPa). The overburden was only 153 m.
It should be realized that re-excavation and installation of the new supports should be
done after closure has stabilized. The latter may take several years of monitoring in very
severe squeezing ground conditions.
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 291
19.9 SUPPORT DESIGN
Fortunately, the steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete with embedded ribs has proved to be
successful in supporting tunnels in the mild to severe squeezing ground conditions. The
Fig. 10.2 may be used for the design of support system. The following detailed strategy
has been adopted in squeezing grounds as shown in Fig. 19.9.
(i) Circular or horseshoe shaped tunnel should be planned in the squeezing ground
condition. The tunnel width should preferably be less than 6 m in severe or very
severe squeezing grounds. The excavated diameter may be 10 percent more than
the design diameter.
(ii) The excavation should be by heading and benching method in minor squeezing
ground and by multiple drift method in severe or very severe squeezing grounds.
Drill 10 m advance probe hole ahead of the tunnel face to know the rock mass
quality and drain out ground water if any.
(iii) The horizontal drill holes of 3 m length are drilled ahead of the tunnel face and the
forepoles of mild steel rods are inserted and welded to the nearest steel ribs. Then
smooth blasting is adopted with short length of blast holes (1 m) to cope up with
the low stand-up time.
(iv) A steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) layer of 2.5 cm thickness is sprayed
immediately to prevent rock loosening. Full-column grouted bolts are installed all
around the tunnel including the bottom of tunnel.
(v) Steel ribs with struts at the bottom are erected and designed to support the forepole
umbrella and rock support pressure. The struts should be strong enough to resist
high wall support pressures in the squeezing grounds.
(vi) The additional layers of SFRS are sprayed after some delay to embed the steel ribs.
It will provide lateral stability of ribs and also create a structurally robust lining.
Drift
Umbrella of
Forepoles Welded
to Steel Ribs
Steel
Ribs
Rock Bolts
Invert Strut
SFRS
Fig. 19.9
Support system in severe squeezing ground condition.
292 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(vii) The SFRS should also be sprayed on the ﬂoor to cover steel struts and counter
heaving tendency of the squeezing ground by withstanding high bottom support
pressures.
(viii) The convergence of the tunnel roof and walls should be monitored and plotted
with time. In case rate of convergence/closure is not dropping with time, addi-
tional SFRS layers need to be sprayed. It is a good tunnelling practice if multiple
borehole extensometers are installed to know what is happening within the broken
zone particularly in severe or very severe squeezing ground conditions.
19.9.1 Precautions in tunnelling
In the cases of big tunnels (10 to 16 m span), the recommendations of Hoek (2001) need
to be followed. It is a very challenging task.
It may be mentioned that TBM is obviously a failure in squeezing grounds, as it is
struck inside the ground and may have to be abandoned.
In very poor ground, stand-up time is only a few hours. It is difﬁcult to install support
system within the stand-up time. So length of blast holes may have to be decreased to
1 m to increase the stand-up time for unsupported span of 1 m. In very poor ground, it is
difﬁcult to keep drill holes open for rock bolting. SFRS without rock bolt may work well
in such situation. Forepoling is difﬁcult here.
For a very severe squeezing condition, rock anchors (dowels) may be added on the
tunnel face where the face is also squeezing, particularly in the big tunnels. This is in
addition to the forepole umbrella. A frequent mistake is made in using the large forepoles
for protecting the tunnel face. The steel ribs which support the forepoles are loaded
adversely, specially in big tunnels. Full face tunnelling method may be a failure due to
slow progress of tunnelling. It is good practice to install forepoles ﬁrst and then make drill
holes for blasting.
It may be realized that there is no time to use lengthy software packages and for
academic advice at the tunnel face. Spot decisions have to be made on the basis of past
experiences. It is, therefore, justiﬁed that a tunnel engineer who understands the tunnel
mechanics and has experience should be made sole in charge of supporting the ground
and related works.
REFERENCES
Barla, G. (2004). Tunnelling Under Squeezing Rock Conditions. www.polito.it/ricerca/rockmech/
publcazioni/art-rivista.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Cheru, J. C., Yu, C. W. and Shiao, F. Y. (1998). Tunnelling in squeezing ground and support
estimation. Proc. Reg. Symp. Sedimentary Rock Engineering, Taipei, 192-202.
Tunnelling through squeezing ground condition 293
Daemen, J. J. K. (1975). Tunnel Support Loading Caused by Rock Failure. PhD thesis, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, U.S.A.
Dube, A. K. (1979). Geomechanical Evaluation of Tunnel Stability under Failing Rock Condi-
tions in a Himalayan Tunnel. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, University of
Roorkee, India.
Dube, A. K., Singh, B. and Singh, Bhawani (1986). Study of squeezing pressure phenomenon
in tunnel Part-I and Part-II. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 1(1), 35-39
(Part-I) and 41-48 (Part-II), U.S.A.
Hoek, E. (2001). Big tunnels in bad rock, The 36th Karl Terzaghi lecture. Journal of Geotechnical
and Geo-environmental Engineering, A.S.C.E., 127(9), 726-740.
Hsu, S. C., Chiang, S. S. and Lai, J. R. (2004). Failure mechanism of tunnels in weak rock with
interbedded structures, Sinorock 2004 Paper. Published in special issue of International
Journal of Rock Mech. & Mining Sciences, 41, UK.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of Rock Pressures in Tunnels through Squeezing Ground in
Lower Himalayas. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Roorkee,
India, 272.
Kontogianni, V., Tzortzis and Stiros, S. (2004). Deformation and failure of the tymfristos tunnel,
Greece. J. Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, ASCE, 30(10), 1004-1013.
Labasse, H. (1949). Les Pressions de Terrians antour des Puits. Revue Universelle des Mines,
92 e Annee, 5-9, V-5, Mars, 78-88.
Sakurai, S. (1983). Displacement measurements associated with the design of underground
openings. Proc. Int. Symp. Field Measurements in Geomechanics, Zurich, 2, 1163-1178.
Shalabi, F. I. (2005). FE analysis of time-dependent behaviour of tunnelling in squeezing ground
using two different creep models. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology, In Press.
Singh, Bhawani, Jethwa, J. L., Dube, A. K. and Singh, B. (1992). Correlation between observed
support pressure and rock mass quality. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology,
Pergamon, 7(1), 59-74.
Singh, B. and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and Tunnelling
Hazards. A. A. Balkema (Swets & Zeitlinger), The Netherlands, 344.
Terzaghi, K. (1946). Rock Defects and Load on Tunnel Supports, Introduction to Rock Tun-
nelling with Steel Supports, by Proctor, R. V. and White, T. L., Commercial Shearing
and Stamping Co., Youngstown, Ohio, U.S.A.
Yassaghi, A. and Salari-Rad, H. (2005). Squeezing rock conditions at an igneous contact zone
in the taloun tunnels, Tehran-Shomal freeway, Iran: A case study. Int. J. Rock Mech. &
Min. Sciences, January, 42(1), 95-108.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
20
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground∗
“The ﬁrst sound and the ﬁrst sign of instability is noted initially by the foreman and the
workers at the tunnel face, much before the big thud of collapse is felt in the designer’s
ofﬁce.”
Source: THDC, India
20.1 INTRODUCTION
This is a case history of tackling serious tunnelling problems in squeezing ground within
the intra-thrust zone in lower Himalaya.
Stage II of the Yamuna hydroelectric scheme in the lower Himalayan region aims at
complete utilization of the power potential of the river Tons between Ichari and Khodri
(Fig. 20.1). A diversion dam at Ichari, and a 6.25 km long pressure tunnel of 7.0 m
diameter from Ichari to Chhibro with an underground powerhouse of 240 MW capac-
ity at Chhibro to utilize a drop of 120 m, are the major components of part I of the scheme.
In part II, a 5.6 km long tunnel of 7.5 m diameter has been constructed between Chhibro
and Khodri to utilize the discharge from the Chhibro powerhouse. A surface powerhouse
of 120 MW capacity is built at Khodri to utilize a drop of 64 m.
Tunnel construction in part II was started from both the Chhibro and the Khodri ends.
Near Kalawar, a village midway between these two places, a small incline (2 × 2.5 m),
called the Kalawar Inspection Gallery, was driven up to the tunnel level to observe the
behavior of rock masses in the fault zone (Fig. 20.1). Subsequently, this gallery was used
to construct the main tunnel through this zone by opening two additional headings.
20.2 REGIONAL GEOLOGY, TUNNELLING PROBLEMS AND
ALTERNATIVE LAYOUTS
The regional geology of the area was mapped by Auden (1934, 1942) followed by Mehta
(1962) and Krishnaswami (1967). Additional information was presented by Shome et al.
∗This chapter is reproduced from the paper by Jethwa et al. (1980).
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
296 Tunnelling in weak rocks
F
F
Limestone, lower Krol
Slates, infra Krols
Slates
Boulder bed
Blaini
Quartzites, Nagthat
Slates, Chandpur
Limestone, Bansa
Limestone, Dhaira
Phyllites & slates - Mandhali
Quartzites Bhadraj
Sandstone, Nahan
Fault
Thrust
Drift
Drill hole
Village, colony
E
Khodri
4×30 MW
surface
powerhouse
F
K  Thrust
K  Thrust
K  Thrust
D3
D2
D1
D1
D1
Kg
Kg
Kg
Construction shaft
at Chhibro
F
B
C
G
A2
A2
A2
A
7-7.5 m dia finished
River Yamuna
Khadar
Kalsi
Kalsi
Kalsi
Dhaira
Dhaira
Dhaira
4×60 MW
Underground
Powerhouse
Chhibro
7.0 m dia finished 6.25 km long HRT
Tons River
Diversion Dam
at Ichari
INDEX
R.F.  1:31680
N
Alternative alignments
1            AE
2            AKgE
3            GE
4,5         ABCE
6            A2BCE
5.6 km HRT
5.6 km HRT
5.6 km HRT
Fig. 20.1
Regional geology and alternative layout of the Yamuna hydroelectric scheme, stage II,
part II.
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
297
(1973) based on their observations in a few drifts, drill holes and trenches near the villages
of Kalawar and Kala-Amb and some surface features in the region (Fig. 20.1).
20.2.1 Tectonic sequence
The following tectonic sequence from north to south was postulated by Auden (1934)
between Ichari and Khodri.
Simla slates
Nummulitics
Tons thrust
Nagthat quartzites
Thrust Bound
Chandpur series
Jaunsar Syncline
Mandhali series
Krol thrust
Nummulitics
Nahan thrust
Nahan series
20.2.2 Lithology
The Chhibro–Khodri tunnel passes through the following three formations from north to
south (Shome et al., 1973):
Mandhali series
Boulder slates;
(Palaeozoic)
Graphitic and quartzitic slates;
Bhadraj quartzite unit of width 5–10 m
Crushed quartzites near the Krol thrust.
Krol thrust
Subathu–Dagshai series
1–3 m thick plastic black clays along the
(Lower miocene)
thrust, red and purple shales and siltstones;
Minor grey and green quartzites, 22 m thick
black clays with thin bands of quartzites;
5–10 m thick plastic black clays along the
Nahan thrust.
Nahan thrust
Nahan series
Greenish-grey to grey micaceous sandstone;
(Upper tertiary)
Purple siltstone;
Red, purple, grey and occasional mottled blue
concretionary clays.
298 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The regional strike of these formations is almost normal to the tunnel alignment with
the dips ranging from 20◦to 60◦in NNW to NNE direction, i.e., towards the upstream.
20.2.3 Structural features
The major structural features in this area are the two main boundary faults running from
Punjab to Assam along the foothills of the Himalaya. The faults are observed across the
river Tons near Khadar and at a few gully exposures near Kala-Amb and Kalawar. These
were further explored with the help of a few drill holes, drifts and trenches (Fig. 20.1).
The dips of the Nahan and the Krol thrusts vary from 27◦to 30◦due N10◦E to N10◦W,
and 26◦due N26◦W, respectively. The strike is almost normal to the tunnel alignment.
20.2.4 Anticipated tunnelling problems and alternate layouts
Krishnaswami(1967)anticipatedsqueezingproblemsintheintra-thrustzoneandindicated
that locked-up water was likely to be present in large quantities in the crushed Mandhali
quartzites. Subsequently, Krishnaswami and Jalote (1968) attempted either to avoid the
intra-thrust zone or to reduce the tunnel length through it, and they proposed several
layouts, as alternatives to a straight tunnel. These are shown with costs (of 1968) in
Table 20.1 and Fig. 20.1.
Table 20.1 Alternate layouts proposed for the Yamuna hydroelectric scheme, stage II, part II
(Fig. 20.1).
Increase in cost
related to layout
one in 1968
No.
Details of layout
(million rupees)
1.
5.5 km long and 7–7.5 m diameter straight tunnel AE, width of
intra-thrust zone = 800 m
Original
2.
5.6 km long and 7–7.5 m diameter tunnel AKg, E with a kink at Kg,
near Kalawar village, width of intra-thrust zone = 230 m
nominal
3.
A 51 m high earth and rockﬁll dam near Kalsi, a 3.0 km long and
7.0 m diameter tunnel GE, intra-thrust zone eliminated
33.8
4.
A 2.4 km long and 7.0 m diameter tunnel AB, a 30 m high and
1.6 km long reservoir BC at Kalawar and a 2.8 km long and 7.0 m
diameter tunnel CE, open reservoir across intra-thrust zone
68.4
5.
Replacing of open reservoir at Kalawar in layout No.4 by a 1.45 km
long open channel BC, open channel across intra-thrust zone
22.3
6.
A 50 m high concrete dam at Dhaira, a 1.2 km long and 8.0 m
diameter tunnel A2B, a 1.2 km long open channel BC at Kalawar
and a 2.8 km long and 7.0 m diameter tunnel CE, open channel
across intra-thrust zone
21.1
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
299
Layout No.2, with a kink at Kalawar, was accepted on account of cost considerations.
Although the total length of the tunnel along this layout was increased by 0.4 km as
compared to the straight tunnel, the width of the intra-thrust zone was reduced from 800
to 230 m. Fig. 20.2a shows the original geological cross section along this alignment
(Auden, 1942).
20.2.5 Recurrence of intra-thrust zones
In addition to their presence at Kalawar, the Subathu–Dagshai red shales were again
intercepted in the tunnel between 1140 and 1300 m from the Chhibro end.
A hole drilled at 1180 m (from Chhibro) in the tunnel roof at an inclination of 60◦due
E established the presence of the Krol thrust over the tunnel. Finally, Jain et al. (1975)
presented an ingenious interpretation of the existing geological data and predicted the
existence of a series of tear faults (Fig. 20.2b) between Chhibro and Kalawar with a third
intra-thrust zone between 1861 and 2166 m (from Chhibro). Thus, the total width of the
intra-thrust zones was found to be 695 m against an estimated width of 230 m along the
tunnel alignment. Hence, there is a need for subsurface geological and proper rock mass
classiﬁcation.
Considerable tunnelling difﬁculties were encountered within the intra-thrust zones.
Themulti-driftmethodwasadoptedtopreventfrequentrockfallsattheface. Acentralpilot
had to be excavated by forepoling. Heavy steel arches (300 × 140 mm and 150 × 150 mm
sections with 20–25 mm thick plates welded on ﬂanges) were erected at 0.25–0.50 m
spacing, (see Table 20.4 and Fig. 20.11) to cope with high squeezing pressures.
20.2.6 Branching of the main tunnel into three small tunnels
The project was delayed by over six years due to the very slow progress of tunnelling
(5–6 m per month) through the intra-thrust zones. At this rate, it would have taken ﬁve
and a half years to excavate the remaining 695 m (between P and Q, Fig. 20.2b) from the
two ends. At this stage, the project authorities considered it wiser to replace the main tunnel
by three smaller tunnels (5.0 m excavated diameter). Consequently, driving of the central
tunnel was started at the end of 1976 and was completed by the middle of 1979. Assuming
that the remaining two small tunnels would be excavated simultaneously during the same
length of time as the central tunnel, the saving in time would be barely six months. Thus,
branching of the main tunnel into three small tunnels is not proving to be a wise decision.
However, simultaneous excavation of the three tunnels could have been quicker.
20.2.7 Flooding of the tunnel at Kalawar
In November 1972, the perched water of the rock mass suddenly punctured the impervious
layer of argillaceous clays along the Krol thrust and rushed in from the tunnel roof at 182 m
towards Chhibro from Kg (the point of inter-section of the Kalawar inspection gallery and
300 Tunnelling in weak rocks
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
?
?
?
?
?
?
F
F
From Under Ground
Power House at Chhibro
River Tons
Chhibro
Khodri
Kg
Kg
7.0 m - 7.5 m  Dia.  (Finished 
)
Head Race Tunnel
2590 m
Surge
Tank
??
(a)
S19° E
To be excavated
Excavated
Excavated
m
Index
Quartzites, Slates, Lime Stones
Intra-thrust zone consisting of crushed
red shales, silt stones, clays
Sand stone, siltstone, claystone
F-----F
Kg
Talus
Fault
Thrust
Intersection of Kalawar inspection
gallery and H. R. T.
0
200
400
600 m
SCALE
P
Q
?
From Under Ground
Power House At Chhibro
River Tons
Chhibro
Khodri
7.0 m - 7.5 m  Dia
.
Head Race Tunnel
2590 m
Surge
Tank
(b)
S19°E
To be Excavated
Excavated
Excavated
m
?
?
N.Th
N.Th
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
N.Th
1861 m
1139 m
2166
2166
m
2166
m
?
?
5600 m
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
F
F
F3
F3
F1
F1
F2
F2
Krol
Thrust
Thrust
Nahan
Nahan
Thrust
Construction
Construction
Shaft
Shaft
Construction
Shaft
Kg
?
?
Construction
Construction
Shaft
Shaft
Construction
Shaft
K.Th
K.Th
K.Th
N.Th
K.Thrust
K.Thrust
K.Thrust
1297
m
2377 m
2377 m
2377 m
?
Kg
Kg
Kg
Fig. 20.2
(a) Original geological section along the Chhibro–Khodri tunnel (Auden, 1942); (b) Revised geological section along the Chhibro–Khodri
tunnel (Jain et al., 1975).
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
301
Probable Trace of
Krol Thrust
Conjunctured Cavity
Observed Cavity
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Tunnel  Excavation
Face
S 19° E  Khodri
N 19° W  Chhibro
Elevation with respect to invert, m
Distance  from  Kg  towards  Chhibro, m
Index
Water  Bearing  Crushed  Quartzites  of  Mandhali  Series
Black  Clays  Along  Krol  Thrust
Red  Shales,  Silt  Stones  and  Minor  Quartzites  of  Subathu   Series
Non - Coring  Drill  Hole
Shear  Zone,  Upto  5 cm  Gouge
Shear  Zone,  Upto  50 cm  Gouge
Fig. 20.3
Geological features causing ﬂooding of tunnel at Kalawar (Shome et al., 1973).
the main tunnel) and ﬂooded the whole tunnel at Kalawar. Fig. 20.3 illustrates the detailed
geology around Kg (Shome et al., 1973). The rate of inﬂow was estimated to be 1.2 cusecs
(34 liters/s), and 110,000 m3 of water were pumped out in three months.
20.2.8 Properties of rock masses
The properties of the Subathu red shales and black clays are given in Tables 20.2a and b.
The samples were collected from the Kalawar inspection gallery and from gully exposures
near Kala-Amb.
Table 20.2a
Properties of red shales and black clays.
Red shales
Black clays
Particulars
Kalawar
Kala-Amb
Kalawar
Kala-Amb
General properties:
Unit weight (g/cm3)
2.73
–
2.64
–
Natural dry density (g/cm3)
–
1.43−1.68
–
2.1
Density at zero moisture content (g/cm3)
1.86
–
1.88
–
Natural moisture content (% by wt)
8.02
9.5
11.7
18.95
Optimum moisture content (% by wt)
7.32
–
16.25
–
Grain-size distribution (%):
Gravel (above 2.0 mm)
58.40
10.50
Very coarse sand (1.0–2.0 mm)
2.50
3.50
Coarse sand (0.5–1.0 mm)
2.00
78–84
2.00
38–50
Medium sand (0.25–0.5 mm)
1.50
1.50
Fine sand (0.1–0.25 mm)
1.50
3.50
Very ﬁne sand (0.05–0.1 mm)
0.46
21.20
Silt (0.005–0.05 mm)
12.00
9–14
26.05
23–29
Clay (below 0.005 mm)
21.64
7
31.75
27–33
Chemical analysis (%):
Silicon oxide
73.54
56.42
72.55
53.00
Iron oxide
6.93
1.40
7.32
3.14
Aluminum oxide
12.93
29.00
15.52
30.98
Calcium oxide
1.40
1.00
2.1
1.10
Magnesium oxide
–
2.00
–
1.30
Sulphite
–
2.30
–
3.65
Atterburg’s limits:
Liquid limit (%)
12.0–16.0
21.0–65.0
16.0–44.3
36.0–52.5
Plastic limit (%)
13.0–22.7
15.0–16.8
12.0–22.7
19.8–21.0
Plasticity index
3.0
4.3–40.0
4.0–26.6
–
Strength parameters:
Unconﬁned compressive strength (kg/cm2)
21.0
2.54
0.33
1.35
Cohesion (kg/cm2)
(1) at optimum moisture content
1.0
0.29
0.20–0.42
0.18
(2) at saturation
–
–
0.35–0.61
–
Angle of internal friction (degree)
(1) at optimum moisture content
8.54
3.0
12.0
18.0
(2) at saturation
–
28.0
11.5
–
Free swell (%)
–
60
–
55
Mineralogical composition of clay content:
Illite
–
35
–
35
Kaolinite
–
25
–
15
Chloride
–
10
–
10
Continued
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
303
Table 20.2a—Continued
Attapulgite
–
15
–
15
Montmorillonite
–
0
–
5
Mica
–
5
–
5
Table 20.2b Modulus of deformation of red shales and Black clays.
Modulus of deformation
(103 kg/cm2)
Location
Rock type
Method
Horizontal
Vertical
Kalawar inspection gallery
Black clays
Plate-bearing test
2.7
12.18
Flat jack test
–
6.10
3.0 m diam. pilot tunnel
Black clays
Plate-bearing test
1.405
–
3.0 m diam. pilot tunnel
Red shales
Tiwag radial
3.7
(minimum)
Press test
35.2
(maximum)
19.5
(average)
20.3 TECTONIC ACTIVITY AND TUNNEL LINING
20.3.1 Seismic history
The project area is located in the Garhwal Lower Himalaya, adjacent to the main boundary
faults. The region is traversed by a number of secondary faults and thrusts and is known
for intense tectonic activity. The age of these activities is not known, but Auden (1934)
considered that the Krol thrust might have resulted from seismic activity spread over a
long period of time, from pre-pliocene to post-pliocene. In recent times, the only major
earthquake reported near the area was the one in 1905 with its epicenter between Kangra
and Dharamshala, while a minor region of intensity greater than isoseismal seven occurred
in Doon Valley. As a result of this earthquake, the town of Dehradun was lifted up by
0.13 mrelativetoMussoorie. Otherindicationsofrecenttectonicactivityarehugeboulders
of quartzites (overall size 5 m) lying in the valley near the drift at Kala-Amb and elongated
spindle-shaped “boudins” of quartzite found embedded in the brecciated, pulverized and
gouged material along the Nahan thrust.
20.3.2 Measurement of tectonic movement
Agrawal and Gaur (1971) ﬁxed a pillar on the Nahan sandstone and another pillar on
the Subathu clays across the Nahan thrust in the cross-cut from the Kalawar inspection
gallery (Fig. 20.4). They measured the relative vertical displacement between the two
pillars with the help of a water-tube tiltmeter. At the end of three years, they reported that
the rate of the vertical component of the relative displacement across the Nahan thrust
304 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Subathu
Shales and Clays
Cross Drift
TO
H. R. T.
Kalawar Gallery
N
Nahan
Sandstones
2 m 25 m
20 m
18 m
5 m
0
282 m
2 m
2
1
19 m
2 - Tiltmeter  
1,
Nahan Thrust
Fig. 20.4
Plan of tiltmeter bases for measuring tectonic movement along the Nahan thrust
(Agrawal & Gaur, 1971).
varied from 0.4 to 1.0 mm per month. However, they conceded that a substantial portion
of this movement might be attributed to the squeezing of the clays and concluded that the
rate of the vertical component of the tectonic slip across the Nahan thrust was 0.5 mm per
month. Subsequently, Jethwa and Singh (1973) reported that the rate of radial closure in
the clays, as measured at the end of two years of excavation, was 1 mm per month in the
vertical direction.
A single-point rod-type borehole extensometer was installed across the Nahan thrust
in the Kalawar inspection gallery to measure the relative movement between the Nahan
sandstone and the Subathu red shales (Fig. 20.5). Observations, spread over six months,
did not show any movement across the Nahan thrust.
A conclusion which follows from the above measurements is that squeezing of the
clays should not have been ignored while assessing the fault slip.
20.3.3 Flexible tunnel lining
Based on the work of Agrawal and Gaur (1971), Jai Krishna et al. (1974) suggested
that the tunnel lining for the intra-thrust zone should be designed to withstand a total
vertical dislocation of 0.5 m expected during the life of the project (100 years). Further,
they considered that the total slip would be distributed uniformly along the width of the
intra-thrust zone. Based on the above assumptions, they proposed a “ﬂexible lining” to
cope with the tectonic slip (Fig. 20.6). It consisted of circular segments of varying lengths
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
305
Nahan
Sandstone
Inspection
Subathu
Clay
Subathu
Shales
Nahan
Thrust
Kalawar
Gallery
Fig. 20.5
Schematic arrangement for measuring displacement across the Nahan thrust by single-
point borehole extensometer.
Nahan
   Thrust
Krol
   Thrust
Flow
H . R . T .
D
C
B
A
B
C
B
A
B
C
3D
3D
Mixture  of  Bitumen  and  Sand
75  mm  Thick  Shotcrete
Wire  Mesh
Steel  Arches
Concrete
Rock
A–   Segments  of  1.5 m  each
B–   Segments  of  3.0 m  each
C–   Segments  of  6.0 m  each
(a)
(b)
Fig. 20.6
Flexible tunnel lining in intra-thrust zone: (a) segmental lining; (b) ﬂexible joint.
306 Tunnelling in weak rocks
connected together by ﬂexible joints. Contrary to the above assumption, tectonic slip in
thick fault gouge may take place along any one plane as suggested by Brace and Byerlee
(1967) who explained the mechanism of earthquakes by the “stick-slip” phenomenon.
It cannot be proved conclusively from the above that the faults are active. Even if this
is so, it may be questionable to provide a tunnel lining on the assumption that the tectonic
slip would be uniformly distributed along the entire width of the intra-thrust zone.
20.4 TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION AND INSTRUMENTATION IN
THE INTRA-THRUST ZONE AT KALAWAR
20.4.1 Support behavior in Kalawar inspection gallery
Steel ribs for the Kalawar inspection gallery, under a maximum cover of 280 m were ﬁrst
designed for Terzaghi’s (1946) rock load factor of 1.1 (B + Ht) where B is width and Ht is
height of the opening (Table 20.3). It corresponds to squeezing rocks at moderate depths.
The water table was observed to be below the tunnel invert but was considered to be above
the tunnel crown for the purpose of design. In order to arrest rib deformations, the rock
load factor was gradually increased to 3.5 (B + Ht), which is equivalent to squeezing
rocks at “great depths.”
20.4.2 Tunnel construction
A pilot tunnel of 3.0 m diameter was driven on both sides from Kg. In the Subathu red
shales, this diameter was enlarged to 9.0 m towards Chhibro from a point 36 m away from
Kg. The tunnel was excavated by the multi-drift method. The heading was supported
by semi-circular steel arches with temporary invert struts to withstand side pressures
(Fig. 20.7). The Nahan thrust was exposed in the pilot tunnel at a distance of 40 m from
Kg towards Khodri, whereas the Krol thrust was exposed at a distance of 190 m from Kg
towards Chhibro. The gouge in the 230 m wide intra-thrust zone consisted of soft and
plastic black clays over lengths of 16 m and 2 m along the Nahan and the Krol thrusts,
respectively, and of crushed, sheared and brecciated red shales and siltstones over a length
of 212 m between the layers of the black clays.
20.4.3 Instrumentation
The necessity for tunnel instrumentation was felt in order to evolve a rational tunnel
support system which could cope with the squeezing ground conditions encountered in
the intra-thrust zone. The instrumentation program consisted of measuring: (i) hoop load in
the steel arches by hydraulic load cells (ii) contact pressure at the rock-support interface by
contact pressure cells (iii) “tunnel closure,” deﬁned as reduction in the size of the opening,
by an ordinary steel tape to an accuracy of ±1 mm and (iv) “borehole-extension” (deﬁned
Table 20.3 Support details in the Kalawar inspection gallery.
Assumed rock load factor
Equivalent support pressure
Support details
Reach
Rock
(Terzaghi, 1946)
(kg/cm2)
Cross section
Spacing
Deformational behavior
(m)
type
Vertical (Hp)
Horizontal
Horizontal
Vertical
Shape and size
(mm)
(mm)
of supports (visual)
160 to
Black
1.1 (B + Ht)
0.3 (Hp + Ht)
1.30
4.48
D-shaped ribs
100 × 75
500
Intolerable rib deformations,
273
clays
with inverts,
buckling of invert and bulging
Ht = 2.5 m
of vertical legs into the opening
B = 2.0 m
273 to
Black
2.1 (B + Ht)
0.3 (Hp+ Ht)
2.57
0.83
As above
As above
250
As above
295
clays
295 to
Black
As above
As above
3.44
1.28
Circular ribs
As above
250
Moderate rib deformation
378
clays
Ht = B = 3.0 m
378 to
Red
3.5 (B + Ht)
3.5 (B + Ht)
5.73
5.73
As above
150 × 150
400 to
Negligible rib deformation
440
shades
600
Notations: B = width of opening; Ht = height of opening.
308 Tunnelling in weak rocks
2
1
I
Roof
I
II
II
3
1
4
Roof
4.5m
II
I
II
III
5
6
I   - Excavation of central pilot in
      heading
II  - Excavation of side pilots in
      heading
III - Excavation of bench
1  - Wooden sleepers
2  - Vertical Posts
3  - RCC Sleepers
4  - Temporary invert strut
5  - Steel ring support 150x150mm or
      300x140mm RSJ at 40cm spacing
6  - Joint of circular support
Fig. 20.7
Sequence of excavation and support for the main tunnel through the intra-thrust zone at
Kalawar.
as the relative movement between the tunnel periphery and the interior of the rock mass)
by single-point, rod-type borehole extensometers (depth equal to the diameter of opening)
to an accuracy of ±0.02 mm.
These instruments were designed and developed at the Central Mining Research Insti-
tute, Dhanbad (India). Test sections were established with “loose backﬁll” and “tight
backﬁll” in both the red shales and the black clays. The loose backﬁll consisted of a 30 cm
thick layer of tunnel muck thrown manually in the hollows around steel arches. The tight
backﬁll consisted of systematically packed PCC (precast cement concrete) blocks.
20.4.4 Test sections
The instruments were installed at the tunnel face soon after excavation. Support density,
type of backﬁll and the method of tunnelling were kept unchanged on either side of
the test sections over a length equal to the tunnel diameter. Table 20.4 describes the
Table 20.4 Location of test sections, support details, type of backﬁll and results of instrumentation in intra-thrust zone at Kalawar.
Results of instrumentation
Distance
Support details
(maximum observed value)
No. of from
Size and
Size
Spacing
Capacity
Period of
Pressure
Closure
∗Borehole extension
test
Chhibro shape of
Rock
Method
(mm)
(mm)
(kg/cm2)
obersvation
(kg/cm2)
(cm)
(cm)
section (m)
opening
type
mining
Backﬁll
days
Pv
PH
Urv
UrH
Uby
UbR
UbL
1.
2575
3.0 m φ
Red
Full face
150×150
500
6
Tight
155
3.07
1.72
4.65
2.25
3.058 1.706 2.052
pilot
shales
mild blast
tunnel
2.
2535
9.0 m φ
As above Heading
150×150
415
10
Loose
828
–
–
–
–
0.402 1.114 2.206
main
and bench,
with 16 mm
tunnel
mild blast
plate on
outer ﬂange
3.
2530
As above As above As above
As above
As above As above As above 824
0.8
0.4
–
–
3.772 1.250 0.332
4.
2621
3.0 m φ
Black
Full face
As above
250
12
As above 758
3.20
2.70
13.40 14.30 –
–
–
pilot
clays
mild blast
tunnel
5.
2631
9.0 m φ
As above Heading
300 × 140
275
20
Tight
719
11.50 12.20 –
–
5.512 1.620 4.408
main
and bench,
with 20 mm
tunnel
mild blast
plates on
both ﬂanges
Notations: φ = Diameter; Pv = Support pressure at roof; PH = Support pressure at sides; Urv = Radial tunnel closure in vertical direction; UrH = Radial tunnel closure in horizontal
direction; Uby = Borehole extension at roof; UbR = Borehole extension at right wall; UbL = Borehole extension at left wall; [* Borehole extension is deﬁned as relative displacement
between two points – one located on the tunnel periphery and the other located at a depth equal to tunnel diameter].
310 Tunnelling in weak rocks
P,B
P
L,B
B
L,C,B
L,C
?
?
?
?
?
? ? ?
?
?
?
?
?
........
1
6
Test Section
B....  Bore Hole Extension
L....  Hoop Load in Ribs
C....  Tunnel Closure
P....  Contact pressure between
        rock and rib
Intersection Of Kalawar Inspection Gallery
and H. R. T
Thrust
Crushed Quartzites, Slates, Lime Stones
Crushed, Brecciated, Sheared Red Shales, Silt Stone
Soft, Plastic Black Clays
Sandstone, Silt Stone, Clay Stone
Kg
Index
40 m
20
0
Scale
Head Race Tunnel
Gallery
Inspection
3.0 m Dia. Kalawar
N 19 W
Thrust
Krol
9.0 m Diam. (Excavated)
2590 m
   Thrust
Nahan
Kg
From Chhibro
6
3
2
1
4
To Khodri
5
Fig. 20.8
Locations of test sections and details of instrumentation in the intra-thrust zone at
Kalawar.
30
20
10
2400
2500
2600
2700
Distance  From  Chhibro  End, m
Support capacity,
kg/cm2
Kg
Fig. 20.9
Support density in the intra-thrust zone at Kalawar.
locations of test sections, the size and shape of the opening, details of steel arches, type of
backﬁll and results of instrumentation. Test section 5 was set up in the black clays (near
the Nahan thrust) when the 3.0 m diameter pilot tunnel was widened to 9.0 m diameter.
Fig. 20.8 shows the locations of test sections and Fig. 20.9 shows the density of supports
provided in this zone. Typical observations of support pressure and radial tunnel closure,
and borehole extension are shown in Fig. 20.10.
20.4.5 Design of supports
Tight backﬁll was used to minimize the loosening of the rock mass above the tunnel crown
in order to minimize the risk of ﬂooding (although the loose backﬁll relieved the rock
load). Hence higher support pressures were assumed; for example, 6.0 kg/cm2 (0.6 MPa)
in the red shales and 20–22 kg/cm2 (2.0 to 2.2 MPa) in the black clays against observed
support pressure of 3.07 and 12.2 kg/cm2 (0.3 to 1.22 MPa), respectively (Fig. 20.10, a
and f). The support pressure was increased gradually from 6.0 kg/cm2 (0.6 MPa) in the
middle portion of the intra-thrust zone to 22 kg/cm2 (2.2 MPa) in the black clays along the
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
311
(a)
(b)
(c) 
Left
Right
Vertical
Horizontal
Vertical
Horizontal
Vertical
4
3
2
1
0
5
3
4
2
1
0
2
1
0
Radial tunnel
closure, cm
Radial tunnel
closure, cm
Support pressure,
kg/cm2
0
40
80
120
160
Time after excavation, days
0
200
400
600
800
0
4
8
12
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
Horizontal
Vertical
Horizontal
(d)
Vertical
Horizontal
(e)
Vertical
(f)
Time after excavation, days
Support pressure,
kg/cm2
Radial tunnel
closure, cm
Support pressure,
kg/cm2
(a) & (b)   Red shales at Kalawar, Test section 1
(c)            Red shales at Kalawar (closure at 3m),
                Test section 1
(d) & (e)   Black clays at Kalawar, Test section 4 
(f)             Black clays at Kalawar, Test section 5
Fig. 20.10
Monitoring of support pressure and radial tunnel closure in red shales and black clays
in different instrumentation test sections at Kalawar.
thrusts (Fig. 20.9). The support density was reduced gradually to 6.0 kg/cm2 (0.6 MPa) on
either side of the intra-thrust zone. Subsequent embedment of these supports in concrete
has not shown any sign of distress.
20.5 TUNNEL CONSTRUCTION AND INSTRUMENTATION IN
INTRA-THRUST ZONE AT CHHIBRO
20.5.1 Tunnel construction
Local geology and construction details of the tunnel through this zone are shown in
Fig. 20.11. In the beginning, the unexpected exposure of the red shales at 1139 m while
tunnelling from Chhibro was considered to be a local occurrence and the support den-
sity was kept unchanged. With continuation of the red shales, it was realized that a
second intra-thrust zone had been intersected. The support pressure beyond 1185 m was
312 Tunnelling in weak rocks
11.3
11.3
0.6
0.6
Excessive
Precast Concrete Blocks
1.0
1.5
3.0
6.0
12.8
13.0
17.0
14.5 12.7 11.3
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.35
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.35
3.4 0.6
1
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
6
6
6
9.0 m  Dia. Half Ring
Mild Blast and Pavement Breakers
Heading Only
4 - 300 mm x 140 mm with 250 mm x 20 mm
     Plate welded on outer flange
3 - 300 mm x 140 mm
2 - 250 mm x 125 mm
Block Concrete
9.0 m Dia. Full Ring
Mild Blast
F1
Full  Face
1139 m
Heading and
Bench
F1
6 - 150 mm x 150 mm with 250 mm x 25 mm  plate
     welded on outer flange and 125 mm x 25 mm plate
     welded on inner flange
5 - 150 mm x 150 mm with 250 mm x 25 mm plate
     welded on outer flange
F3
1297 m 
F3
Distance
from Chhibro
Red  shales
and siltstone
To Khodri
Mandhali  quartzites
and slates
Driving
Breaking
Supports
Shape and Size
Cross Section*
Spacing, mm
Back Fill
Support
Deformation
Mandhali quartzites
and slates
1312m
1304
1296
1277
1243
1220
1185
1175
1148
1135
Capacity, kg/cm2
Minor
*1 - 150 mm x 150 mm
3.8
0.5
Fig. 20.11
Geological plan and construction details of head race tunnel through intra-thrust zone at Chhibro.
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
313
increased to 6.0 kg/cm2 (0.6 MPa) (as at Kalawar). Full-face excavation was replaced by
the heading and bench method. The heading was excavated by the multi-drift method to
prevent frequent loose falls at the face. Since invert struts were not provided, the legs
of the semi-circular heading supports were free to move in the opening under the inﬂu-
ence of side pressure. Severe buckling and bending of supports followed despite raising
their capacity to 17.0 kg/cm2 (1.7 MPa). It may be noted that relatively lighter supports
(6 kg/cm2 capacity) had undergone only minor deformations in the similar rock mass at
Kalawar where temporary invert struts were provided in the heading (Fig. 20.7).
20.5.2 Instrumentation
It became necessary to instrument the tunnel in this zone in view of intolerable deforma-
tions of heavy steel-arch sections found adequate in the similar rock mass at Kalawar. The
instrumentation was aimed at measuring: (i) support pressure by contact pressure cells
and (ii) tunnel closure by an ordinary steel tape.
Support pressure
Four contact pressure cells, two at 30◦and two at 60◦from the vertical
were installed over a 9.0 m diameter semi-circular steel rib at 1199 m in the heading
(Fig. 20.12). The bench was excavated and the lower half of the rib was erected 115 days
after the excavation of the heading. The backﬁll consisted of tightly packed PCC blocks.
The observed support pressure varied from 6.5 to 13.0 kg/cm2(0.65 to 1.3 MPa), giving
an average support pressure of 10.75 kg/cm2 (1.075 MPa) in the vertical direction. The
loss of support resistance due to bench excavation reduced the observed support pressures
temporarily.
Tunnel closure
Tunnel closures in horizontal and vertical directions were measured at
twenty-three locations in this zone. A typical plot of radial closure vs. time (Fig. 20.13)
indicates that the sides of the semi-circular opening squeezed in by over 20 cm whereas
the roof was pushed up by about 8 cm. A similar deformation pattern was observed in
this zone from 1220 to 1295 m (where the bench excavation was delayed by a year and
heading supports lacked invert struts). More details are presented in Section 14.8.
20.6 ELASTO-PLASTIC THEORY
Instrumentation of the tunnel under squeezing ground conditions encountered in the two
intra-thrust zones has helped to answer the following questions:
(i) What is the effect of tunnel depth on support pressure?
(ii) Which method is suitable to assess the support pressure?
(iii) What is the performance of the ﬂexible support system consisting of loose backﬁll
behind steel arches?
(iv) How to ensure stability of a tunnel opening?
314 Tunnelling in weak rocks
0
50
100
150
200
250
1185
1205
1225
1245
Heading
Bench
Time after excavation, days
Face advance, m
Pressure drop due to
bench excavation
1
2
3
4
Pressure cells at 1, 2, 3
1
2
3
4
30°
60°
Rib
0
50
100
150
200
250
Time after excavation, days
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Support pressure, kg/cm2
Fig. 20.12
Support pressure vs. time in red shales at Chhibro.
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
315
1 - 2
3 - 4
1
3
4
2
0
100
200
300
400
−10
0
10
20
30
Time after excavation, days
Radial tunnel closure, cm
Fig. 20.13
Radial tunnel closure vs. time in red shales at Chhibro.
20.6.1 Effect of tunnel depth on support pressure
According to the elasto-plastic theory, failure of the rock mass around an opening under
the inﬂuence of depth pressure forms a broken zone called “cofﬁn cover”. The failure
process is associated with volumetric expansion of the broken rock mass and manifests
itself in the form of squeezing into the opening (Labasse, 1949; Rabcewicz, 1964, 1965,
1969; Daemen, 1975). The “characteristic line” – or the “ground reaction curve” – concept
explains that the support pressure increases with depth, provided that the tunnel closures
are held constant. Further, large tunnel closures associated with the expansion of the
broken zone lead to reduced support pressures (see Chapter 19).
High tunnel closures and support pressures observed in the Subathu–Dagshai red
shales at a depth of 600 m at Chhibro, as compared to those observed at a depth of 280 m
at Kalawar (Table 20.5), were explained by Jethwa et al. (1977) with the help of the
elasto-plastic theory. They employed an empirical relation given by Komornik and David
(1969) to estimate the swelling pressure and considered that the support pressure was the
arithmetic sum of elasto-plastic (squeezing plus loosening) and swelling pressures. Later,
J.J.K. Daemen (personal communication, 1978) raised doubts about this approach, but
Table 20.5 Comparison of estimated and observed support pressures.
Estimated support pressure (kg/cm2)
After Barton et al. (1974)
Average value of observed
Radius of After Terzaghi
Average support
After Elasto- support pressure (kg/cm2)
Location
Type of
circular
(1946)
Classiﬁcation of parameters
Rock mass
pressure
plastic theory and period of observation
and depth rock mass
opening
Roof Wall *
RQD Jn Jr
Ja
Jw SRF
quality Q
Roof
Wall *
Roof Wall * Roof
Wall
Kalawar
Red shales
1.5 m
3.4
3.4
10–20 15 1.5 4.0 1.0 5–10
+ 0.025 – 0.10 3.7
3.7
5.11
5.11
3.07
1.72
γ = 2.73 gm/cc
(155 – Days)
280 m
Black clays
γ = 2.64 gm/cc 4.5 m
9.98
9.98
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
11.20 11.20
11.50
12.20
(719 – Days)
Chhibro
Red shales
4.4 m
17.20 17.20
10–20 15 1.5 4.0 1.0 10-20
± 0.0125–0.05 4.8
4.8
11.51 11.51
10.75
–
600 m
γ = 2.73 gm/cc
(257 – Days)
γ
= Unit weight of rock mass
∗
Assuming roof pressure = Wall pressure (without correction factor)
RQD = Rock quality designation
+ Corresponds to mild squeezing
Jn
= Joint set number
conditions at moderate depth
Jr
= Joint roughness number
± Corresponds to highly squeezing
Ja
= Joint alteration number
conditions at great depth
Jw
= Joint water reduction factor
– Not known
SRF
= Stress reduction factor
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
317
Singh (1978) emphasized the interaction between the swelling and squeezing pressure
and suggested that only the greater of the two should be considered. The average elasto-
plastic pressures, estimated according to the suggestions of Singh (1978), are close to the
observed values (Table 20.5). As such, the empirical approaches, developed to estimate
rock pressure for tunnel support design, must be amended to include the effect of tunnel
depth in order to obtain reliable results under squeezing rock conditions. The correction
factor for overburden f in Q-system (equation (5.7)) is now accepted.
20.6.2 Estimation of support pressure and support requirements
The limitations of the method of Terzaghi (1946) for estimating support requirements in
the Kalawar inspection gallery have been discussed earlier. The observed pressures were
signiﬁcantly less than the estimated values at a greater depth (Table 20.5). Moreover, the
ratio of observed support pressure at Chhibro (for the 9.0 m diameter tunnel) to that at
Kalawar (for the 3.0 m diameter tunnel) in red shales is about 3.6; this ratio for estimated
values rises to 5.0 (because the support pressure increases with the size of the opening in
Terzaghi’s approach), i.e., the pressures are overestimated for a large opening.
Table 20.5 also includes parameters of classiﬁcation of rock mass according to Barton
et al. (1974). A reasonable estimate of support pressure for squeezing conditions at mod-
erate depth is obtained by this approach. However, it leads to a less reliable assessment in
highly squeezing conditions associated with greater depths. Further, this approach tends
to overestimate the support pressure for openings of small size and underestimates it for
large openings, presumably because no consideration is given to the size of the opening
and magnitude of squeezing.
It is clear from the above discussions that the elasto-plastic theory (Daemen, 1975)
may be more reliable than the empirical approaches of Terzaghi (1946) and Barton et al.
(1974) for estimating the support pressures in highly squeezing conditions in the clays
within the intra-thrust zones.
20.6.3 Loose backﬁll with steel-arch supports
In a deep tunnel under squeezing rock conditions, the supports may attract huge loads
unless substantial tunnel closures are allowed. It would be very expensive, possibly
impracticable, to provide rigid supports under extreme conditions. Further, such a support
system does not make use of the intrinsic strength of the rock mass. Various practices
of tunnelling in highly squeezing conditions would fall into one of the following four
categories.
(i) Excessive deformations of steel arches leading to encroachment of the required
clear opening, dismantling of deformed supports, re-tunnelling and resetting
new supports, e.g., the Pandoh–Baggi tunnel of Beas–Sutlej link project in India
(Kochhar & Prem, 1973) and E1 Colegio tunnel in Columbia (ENR, 1966).
318 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(ii) Cracking of concrete lining, if placed before the opening attains equilibrium,
e.g., pressure tunnel of Giri hydroelectric project in India (Giri Hydel project,
personal communication, 1977) and Kamuii R.R. tunnel in Japan (Takibuchhi,
1970).
(iii) Increasing the degree of support until equilibrium is reached (New Austrian
Tunnelling Method (NATM), Rabcewicz, 1964, 1965, 1969).
(iv) Relieving support pressure with the help of yieldable steel arches.
Signiﬁcant tunnel closures are allowed in the above examples in order to reduce the
support pressures. Peck (1969) and Nussbaum (1973), while using NATM for constructing
the 12 m North Tauern tunnel through Talus in Austria, have recognized the need of
“tolerable yield,” i.e., allowing tunnel closures in order to reduce the support pressures.
The ﬁrst two methods described above, are time-consuming and wasteful, whereas the
last method is largely used in coal mines.
The sprayed concrete support system (shotcrete), popularly called NATM, absorbs
tunnel closures to a certain extent and has shown vast potential in moderate squeezing
conditions. However, its economical application under highly squeezing conditions is
yet to be established. On account of the larger thickness required, Mahar et al. (1975)
suggested that the shotcrete is not an economic support system to withstand high squeezing
pressures. Obviously, an ideal support system for such conditions would be the one which
can absorb large tunnel closures without undergoing undesirable deformations. Fig. 20.14
shows the general load-deformation characteristics of several common support systems
Deformation
Load
Steel liner (Pre-cast concrete)
Cast and sprayed concrete
Side ways
buckling
Packing, steel ribs
and lagging
Fig. 20.14
Load-deformation characteristics of some support system (Ward, 1978).
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
319
Table 20.6 Inﬂuence of type of backﬁll on support pressure.
No. of test
Period of
Support pressure (p)
section and
Type of observation
(kg/cm2)
p-loose/p-tight
Rock type
tunnel radius (r) backﬁll
(months)
Vertical Horizontal
Vertical Horizontal
Red shales
1(r = 1.5 m)
tight
5
3.07
1.72
–
–
Red shales
3(r = 4.5 m)
loose
5
0.80
0.40
0.27
0.23
Black clays 4(r = 1.5 m)
loose
25
3.20
2.70
0.28
0.22
Black clays 5(r = 4.5 m)
tight
25
11.50
12.20
–
–
(Ward, 1978). Steel-arch supports, which have substantial post-failure strength, may be
noted for their capacity to absorb the largest deformations. Their use with loose backﬁll
in a slightly over-excavated tunnel opening makes the system sufﬁciently ﬂexible and
may provide a solution to support problems in highly squeezing conditions. However, the
ﬁll material must be groutable in the case of pressure tunnel and its thickness should be
decided from the considerations of compressibility and desired tunnel closures.
The p-loose and p-tight indicate support pressure with “loose” and “tight” back-
ﬁll, respectively; tight backﬁll consisted of systematically packed PCC (precast cement
concrete) blocks behind steel arches; loose backﬁll consisted of 30 cm thick layer of tunnel
muck thrown manually around steel arches (Table 20.6).
Trials in the Chhibro–Khodri tunnel have shown that such a support system reduced
the support pressures to a considerable extent (Table 20.6; Fig. 20.15). This result agrees
with the observations of Spangler (1938) on conduits and Lane (1957) on Garrison dam
tunnels in clay–shales. It also agrees with the concept of “tolerable yield” applicable to
soft-ground tunnels (Peck, 1969).
20.6.4 Rate of tunnel closure
The monthly rate of tunnel closure (ur/r × 100) when plotted against time, indicates that
the opening stabilized in about three months in the red shales at Kalawar (Fig. 20.16a).
On the other hand, the stabilization time was about a year for the similar rock mass
at Chhibro (Fig. 20.16b). The delayed stabilization at Chhibro is considered due to the
absence of the invert supports. It is of interest to note here that the monthly rate of tunnel
closure at the time of stabilization in both the cases was 0.05–0.1 percent of the opening
size. It follows from the above that adequately strong temporary supports must be provided
soon after excavation for an early stabilization of the opening. Further, tunnel closures
must be measured to ensure that the temporary supports are adequate. Permanent supports
should be provided only after the monthly rate of tunnel closure has reached safe limits
of 2 mm per month.
320 Tunnelling in weak rocks
10
2
0
6
4
8
12
14
Roof
Wall
Loose
Backfill
(a)
}
Tight
Backfill
32
0
8
16
24
Support pressure, kg/cm2
Time after excavation, months
1
0
2
Wall
Roof
3
Loose
Backfill
Tight
Backfill
Tight
Backfill
(b)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Support pressure, kg/cm2
Time after excavation, months
Fig. 20.15
Effect of type of backﬁll on support pressure in (a) black clays; (b) red shales.
20.7 CONCLUSIONS
From the case history of the Chhibro–Khodri tunnel of the Yamuna hydroelectric scheme
and its instrumentation, the following conclusions are offered:
• Inadequate surface and sub-surface geological investigations have been responsi-
ble for wrong planning of the tunnel alignment. Consequently, the rate of tunnel
construction has been very slow due to unforeseen changes from good rock to highly
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
321
2
4
3
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1
Vertical           Kalawar red
Horizontal       shales
Vertical           Kalawar black
Horizontal       clay
Time after excavation, months
Rate of radial closures as percent of
tunnel radius per month, %
0.50
0.25
0
1.00
0.75
1.75
1.50
1.25
Rate of radial closures as percent of
tunnel radius per month, %
Time after excavation, months
(a) - At Kalawar
(b) - At Chhibro
Fig. 20.16
Rate of radial tunnel closure vs. time.
squeezing rock conditions. The decision to excavate three smaller tunnels in place
of a large tunnel has not proved wise.
• Tunnel closures must be considered while assessing the magnitude of tectonic slip
across an active fault having thick squeezing gouge. Under these conditions, the
stick-slip theory explains that the fault slip is likely to take place along any one
smooth plane. Therefore, it may be questionable to design a ﬂexible lining for an
active fault zone on the assumption that the total fault slip would be distributed
uniformly along the width of the fault gouge.
• Tunnel depth and the effect of opening size are not considered adequately in the
empirical approaches of Terzaghi (1946) and Barton et al. (1974). As such, these
methods (without correction factors) failed to provide reliable guidelines for sup-
port design under highly squeezing rock conditions. A deeper tunnel under these
conditions is likely to attract higher rock loads unless greater closures are allowed.
The elasto-plastic theory, which is based on the concept of tolerable yield, provided
a better assessment of rock pressure under these conditions.
• Stiffer supports were found to attract higher support pressures under squeezing rock
conditions. A ﬂexible support system, consisting of steel arches with loose backﬁll,
caused signiﬁcant reduction in support pressure.
• The heading supports underwent severe buckling and bending under the inﬂuence of
side pressure in squeezing rock conditions when the invert struts were not provided
and the bench excavation was unusually delayed. Under such conditions, the bench
must follow the heading closely to facilitate early erection of the invert supports.
This practice mobilizes the full capacity of the support to sustain side pressure.
If excavation of the bench is likely to be delayed, the heading supports must be
provided with temporary invert struts.
322 Tunnelling in weak rocks
• The monthly rate of radial closure at the time of stabilization was observed to
be in the range of 0.05–0.10 percent of the radius of the opening (2 mm/month).
Tunnel closures must be measured not only to ensure that the temporary supports
are adequate, but also to ﬁnd out when it is safe to provide permanent supports, i.e.,
concrete lining in the case of a pressure tunnel within squeezing ground.
Section 18.4.2 describes another interesting case history of two road tunnels within
the intra-thrust zone.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, P. N. and Gaur, V. K. (1971). Study of crustal deformation in India. Tectono-physics, 15,
287-296.
Auden, J. B. (1934). Geology of the Krol belt. Rec. Geol. Surv. India, IV 76.
Auden, J. B. (1942). Geological investigations of tunnel alignment for the Yamuna hydro-electric
scheme. Rec. Geol. Surv. India, II 77.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel supports. Rock Mech., 6(4), 189-236.
Brace, W. F. and Byerlee, J. D. (1967). Recent experimental studies of brittle fracture in rocks. Proc.
8th Symp. Rock Mech., Univ. Minnesota, 1966. Ed: C. Fairhurst, Failure and Breakage of
Rock, 58-81.
Daemen,
J. J. K. (1975).
Tunnel support loading caused by rock failure.
PhD thesis,
Univ. Minnesota.
E. N. R. (1966). (E1 Colegio Tunnel, Columbia). High-head hydro-readied despite slides, squeezing
rock, explosions. Eng. News Rec., Dec. 22, 1966, 33.
Jai Krishna, Arya, A. S., Agrawal, P. N., Chandra, B. and Singh, V. N. (1974). Final report on
investigations of the Krol–Nahan intra-thrust zone. Yamuna hydroelectric project, stage-II,
part II, School Res. Training Earthquake Engg., Univ. Roorkee, Rep., EQ-4, 16.
Jain, M. S., Andotra, B. S. and Sondhi, S. N. (1975). Note on the geological features of the
Chhibro-Khodri tunnel and occurrences of Subathu shales, Unpubl. Rep. Geol. Surv. India.
Jethwa, J. L. and Singh, B. (1973). Instrumentation for evaluation of rock loads in the intra-thrust
zone at Kalawar for head race tunnel of Yamuna hydroelectric scheme, stage-II, part-II.
Symp. Rock Mech. Tunnell. Probl., Kurukshetra Univ., India, Dec. 1973, 16-18.
Jethwa, J. L., Singh, B., Singh, Bhawani and Mithal, R. S. (1980). Inﬂuence of geology on tunnelling
conditions and deformational behaviour of supports in faulted zones – A case history of
Chibro-Khodri tunnel in India. Engineering Geology, 16, (3 & 4), 291-319.
Jethwa, J. L., Singh, Bhawani, Singh, B. and Mithal, R. S. (1977). Rock pressure on tunnel lining
in swelling and viscous rocks. Intern. Symp. Soil-Structure Interaction, Univ. of Roorkee,
India, Jan. 1977, 45-50, (Pub) M/s. Sarita Prakashan, Meerut, India.
Kochhar, D. N. and Prem, K. S. (1973). Tunnelling experience through poor rock strata. Symp. Rock
Mech. Tunnell. Probl., Kurukshetra Univ., India, Dec. 1973, 1, 103-112.
Case history of tunnel in squeezing ground
323
Komornik, A. and David, D. (1969). Prediction of swelling pressure of clays. ASCE, J. SMFE, 95,
209-225.
Krishnaswami, V. S. (1967). A geological review of the construction and post-construction problems
anticipated in the crossing of the Krol–Nahan Intra-Thrust zone by the Tons–Yamuna tunnel
of stage-II, phase-II. Yamuna hydel scheme, U.P., Unpubl. Rep., Geol. Surv. India.
Krishnaswami, V. S. and Jalote, S. P. (1968). A geological note on the explorations of the alternative
layouts for the Tons–Yamuna tunnel, Yamuna hydel scheme, stage-II, part-II. U.P., Unpubl.
Rep., Geol. Surv. India.
Labasse, H. (1949). Les Pressions de Terrains Autour des puits. Rev. Universalle Mines, 92, 78-88.
Lane, K. S. (1957). Effect of lining stiffness on tunnel loading. Proc. 4th Int. Conf. SMFE, 2:
223-227.
Mahar, J. W., Parker, H. W. and Wuellner, W. W. (1975). Report prepared against contract
No. DOT FR 30022 for Dept. of Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration,
Washington, D.C., 20590, Aug. 1975.
Mehta, P. N. (1962). Regional geology and seismicity of the Yamuna hydel project. Dehradun
district, U.P. Proc. 2nd Symp. Earthquake Eng., Univ. Roorkee, 1, 477-486.
Nussbaum, H. (1973). Recent development of new Austrian tunnelling method. ASCE J. Constr.
Div., July 1973, 115.
Peck, R. B. (1969). Deep excavations and tunnelling in soft ground. Proc. 7th Int. Conf. SMFE,
Mexico City, state of art Volume, 225.
Rabcewicz, L. V. (1964, 1965). The new Austrian tunnelling method, I, II, III. Water Power,
Nov.–Dec. 1964, Jan. 1965.
Rabcewicz, L. V. (1969). Stability of tunnels under rock load, I, II, III. Water Power, June: 225-234;
July: 266-273, Aug: 297-302.
Shome, S. K., Andotra, B. S. and Jain, M. S. (1973). Review of failure patterns in the stage-II
tunnels of the Yamuna hydroelectric scheme, Dehradun dist. Symp. Rock Mech. Tunnell.
Probl., Kurukshetra Univ., Dec. 1973, 1, 70-79.
Singh, Bhawani (1978). Analysis and design techniques for underground structures. Proc. Conf.
Geotech. Eng., State of Art Rep. I.I.T., Delhi, 2, 102-112.
Spangler, M. G. (1938). The structural design of ﬂexible pipe culverts. Public Roads, 18(12).
Takibuchhi, K. (1970). Earth pressure acting on steel arch supports and lining concrete in swelling
rocks. Proc. 2nd Congr. Int. Soc. Rock Mech., Belgrad, 2, 4-28.
Terzaghi, K.(1946). Rock defects and loads ontunnelsupports. RockTunnelling with Steel Supports.
Eds: R. V. Proctor and T. L. White, Commercial Shearing and Stamping Co., Youngstown,
Ohio, 15-99.
Ward, W. H. (1978). Ground supports for tunnels in weak rock (18th Rankine Lecture).
Geotechnique, June 1978, 135-171.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
21
Tunnels in seismic areas
“Winners don’t do different things. They do things differently.”
Shiv Khera
21.1 INTRODUCTION
A study of the published literature indicates that the tunnels and caverns in rock medium do
not suffer as much damage as the surface structures during major earthquakes (M ≤8.5),
particularly if they are located at a depth of more than 20 m and there is no fault zone in
the neighborhood.
The explanation of drastic damage to surface structures during shallow major earth-
quakes is that surface waves (called Rayleigh waves) have more energy than primary and
shear waves. The amplitude of Rayleigh waves decays exponentially with depth and it
becomes negligible at a depth of about 15–20 m below the ground level in rock masses
(just like surface waves in ocean).
A dynamic analysis of an underground structure is essential when it is meant
to accommodate human activities. Other situations requiring a dynamic analysis are
(Kumar & Singh, 1998),
• The underground structure may be located in the area of high seismic activities and
the active fault may be crossing it or may be very near to it,
• The underground structure is to be used for testing of weapons,
• The ammunition stored in the structure may explode,
• The blasting technique is used in the excavation,
• A power tunnel is shut down under emergency resulting in oscillations and transient
conditions due to effect of water hammer.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
326 Tunnelling in weak rocks
In the dynamic analysis of such structures, two situations may arise. In the ﬁrst case,
the source of the dynamic loading is located within the structure itself so that an analysis
for impact and over pressure is to be performed. In the second case, the source of dynamic
loading may be far away and the structure is subjected to loading due to the traveling
waves. This chapter is devoted to the second case.
21.2 RESPONSE OF AN UNDERGROUND STRUCTURE TO
DYNAMIC LOADING
When a dynamic disturbance strikes an underground structure, some deformations result.
These deformations may be decomposed in three components, namely, radial, axial
and tangential. The axial component may be further decomposed into the longitudinal
and transverse (wave) components. The radial deformation of the underground structure
is important when the source of the dynamic disturbance is located within the structure,
which is not covered in this chapter.
The longitudinal (axial) deformations are represented by alternating regions of com-
pressive and tensile strains that travel as a wave train along the tunnel axis. The transverse
(axial) component creates alternate regions of negative and positive curvatures prop-
agating along the tunnel. A tunnel lining that is stiff compared with the surrounding
soil responds as an elastic beam. For a positive bending associated with the transverse
(axial) deformations, the top of the lining is in compression while its bottom is in ten-
sion. The same is not true, however, for rock tunnels with ﬂexible or no lining at all.
In such cases, the tunnel in positive curvature experiences tensile strain on top and
compressive strain at bottom. This dynamic effect consisting of alternating cycles of
compressive and tensile strain superimpose on the existing static state of strain in the rock
and lining.
The tangential deformations result when waves propagate normal or nearly normal
to the tunnel axis. These may result into distortion of the tunnel cross section and may
lead to additional stress concentration. This effect is not severe as the tunnel diameter
is much less than half the wavelength. Another aspect associated with the tangential
deformational characteristic of the dynamic disturbance is that of ringing, i.e., entrapment
and circulation of dynamic wave energy around the tunnel (Owen et al., 1979). This is
not possible as the wavelength of the dynamic disturbance is much more than the tunnel
radius. In general, the seismic wavelengths are very large (25–500 m) compared to the
normal tunnel sizes.
Bickel et al. (1997) have analyzed maximum longitudinal strains in the concrete lining
from snaking and racking motions during earthquakes in the case of tunnels in the soil.
Software packages may also be used to check whether or not maximum strain is within
the elastic range. Experience suggests that there is no cause for worry for tunnel stability
because of earthquakes in rock masses below 20 m from ground surface, except in the
active fault zones.
Tunnels in seismic areas 327
21.3 OBSERVED RESPONSE
In the case of a nuclear waste repository, it may be possible to select a site, which is rel-
atively free of seismic disturbance threat. However, in the case of a metro or tunnels in a
hydroelectric power project no such choice is usually available. In such cases, a quantita-
tive assessment becomes essential. One of the major difﬁculties is that the earthquakes are
recorded on the ground surface which is used in the designing of surface structures. Rela-
tively much less is known about the variation of seismic disturbance intensity with depth.
Dowding and Rozen (1978) have compiled the seismic response of 71 tunnels.
Fig. 21.1, extracted from this study, shows that the tunnels are less susceptible to damage
No
Damage
Zone
Minor
Damage
Zone
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
S
S
S
P
No Damage
Mirror Damage due to
Shaking
Damage from Shaking
Near Portal
Shallow Cover
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
VII
VIII
IX
Modified Mercalli Intensity, MM
Calculated Peak Acceleration at Surface, g
Tunnel Number
Fig. 21.1
Calculated peak acceleration at the surface and associated tunnel damage (Dowding &
Rozen, 1978).
328 Tunnelling in weak rocks
than the surface structures. The peak acceleration at the surface of less than 0.2 g magni-
tude did no damage to the tunnels. The accelerations between 0.2 and 0.5 g did only minor
damage. The damage was found to be signiﬁcant only when the peak ground acceleration
exceeded 0.5 g. In such cases, most of the damage that occurred was located near portals.
One may say that the portals are essentially surface structures.
Several Japanese investigators measured earthquake motion simultaneously at the
ground surface and at depth. The ﬁndings of these studies may be summarized as follows.
Nasu (1931) determined the ratio of displacements due to earthquakes at the surface and
tunnels up to depths of 160 m. The geology consisted of lake deposit on the surface
and volcanic andesite underneath. The surface/depth displacement ratios were 4.2, 1.5
and 1.2 for periods of 0.3, 1.2 and 4 s, respectively. Kanai and Tanaka (1951) measured
acceleration at depth up to 600 m in copper mines in paleozoic rock. The ratio of maximum
surface displacement to that at the depth of 300 m was about 6:1. Iwasaki et al. (1977)
obtained acceleration records up to a depth of 150 m during a period of 5 years. The
borehole accelerometers were installed at four locations around the Tokyo bay. Three of
these sites were in sand and clay while the fourth was in siltstone. During the period of
measurement, 16 earthquakes with magnitudes ranging from 4.8 to 7.2 were recorded. The
analysisshowedthatthe maximum acceleration heavilydepended uponthe soilconditions.
The ratio of surface/depth accelerations are about 1.5 on a rocky ground, 1.5 to 3.0 in sandy
ground and 2.5 to 3.5 in clayey ground. Although, the acceleration magnitude at depth
was smaller, the frequency contents were similar.
The study of the Alaskan earthquake which was one of the largest earthquake of the
twentieth century (M = 8.5) showed that while the surface damage was extreme, the
underground structures escaped without any signiﬁcant damage (Eckel, 1970). Similar
results were reported by Cooke (1970) on the Peru earthquake of May 31, 1970. The
earthquake of 7.7 magnitude on Richter scale did no damage to 16 rail road tunnels of
combined length of 1740 m under small ground cover located in MM-VII and MM-VIII
intensity zones. Similarly, no damage was reported to the underground hydroelectric
power plant, three coal mines and two lead zinc mines located in MM-VII intensity zone.
The Himalayan experience may be added to the above. A large number of shrines
are located in the caves deep inside the Himalayas. Although, this is a seismically active
region and several big earthquakes have rocked this area, over the centuries nothing has
happened to these shrines. It is understood that the size of the natural caves, tunnels and
caverns is smaller than the quarter wavelength of seismic waves. Hence, openings are not
noticed by the seismic waves and so there is no resonance and damage of the openings.
21.4 CASE HISTORY OF 1991 UTTARKASHI EARTHQUAKE
21.4.1 Project description
The Yamuna Hydroelectric Scheme Stage II harnesses the hydropower potential of river
Tons which is a tributary of river Yamuna. The available head of 188 m is being utilized
in two stages. Stage I utilizes the head of about 124 m along the ﬁrst river loop between
Tunnels in seismic areas 329
Ichari and Chhibro to generate 240 MW of power. To avoid large scale excavation of steep
slopes, the powerhouse chamber is located underground. Its size is 18.2 m wide, 32.5 m
high and 113.2 m long. This cavern is excavated in a band of limestone of 193 × 217 m
horizontal extent. A major shear zone passes within 10 m of the lowest draft tube level in
the powerhouse area.
21.4.2 Seismic response
An earthquake of 6.3 magnitude occurred on 21 October 1991 which was centered near
Uttarkashi and about 100 km away from the project site. The earthquake devastated the
entire Uttarkashi area. The recorded damage in the Chhibro powerhouse cavern on account
of this earthquake is limited to minor cracks in the region closest to the shear fault zones.
The damage is described by Mitra and Singh (1995) as follows:
a) Out of the eight extensometers installed on the side walls of the powerhouse, only
two on the downstream wall adjacent to the control room (nearest to the underlying
shear fault zone) recorded any signiﬁcant rock deformation. These deformations
were of the order of 1 to 4 mm. Besides, a deep crack of 2 to 4 mm width formed
diagonally up to a length of 3.5 m between these two extensometers.
b) Horizontal hairline cracks were observed on each column of the control room and
the downstream side wall at heights of 0.5 to 2.5 m.
c) Two horizontal 1 mm wide cracks of lengths, about 5 m, were found in the portal
at the main entrance of the powerhouse adit.
d) Two vertical cracks of 0.5 and 4 mm width with a spacing of about 80 m were
observed inside the adit at a height of about one meter. But these cracks appeared
to have formed in the shotcrete lining.
e) The anchor plates supporting the pre-stressed rock anchors in the expansion cham-
ber adit appeared to have stretched slightly and may have caused the lining cracks.
There was no damage in the sections of powerhouse complex away (upto a distance
of width of opening B) from the shear/fault zone. An analysis by Mitra and Singh (1997)
shows that the dynamic support pressures are negligible compared to the long-term support
pressures in the roof of the chamber near the shear fault zone due to residual strains in the
nearby rock mass.
The above study shows that the seismographs should be installed inside a tunnel across
active faults to record seismic peak acceleration in the roof, walls and base.
21.4.3 Segmental concrete lining across active fault (Jethwa & Singh, 1980)
Krishna et al. (1974) suggested an innovative segmental lining for the tectonically active
intra-thrust zone along Chhibro–Khodri tunnel of Yamuna Hydroelectric Scheme to
withstand a total vertical dislocation of 0.5 m expected during the 100 years life of
the project (Agrawal & Gaur, 1997). Further, they considered that the slip would be
330 Tunnelling in weak rocks
distributed uniformly along the width of the intra-thrust zone. Based on the above assump-
tions, they proposed a “segmental lining” to cope with the tectonic slip (Fig. 20.6). It
consisted of circular segments of varying lengths connected together by ﬂexible joints.
Contrary to the above assumptions, tectonic slip in thick fault gouge may take place along
any one of the plane as suggested by Brace and Byerlee (1967) who explained the mech-
anism of earthquakes by the “strike–slip” phenomenon. However, the power tunnel with
segmental lining is working satisfactorily since 1980.
The sewer tunnel of Los Angeles passed through an active fault zone. It was decided
to design a 30 m long articulated concrete lining, surrounded by the back-packing of cast-
in-place cellular concrete, which may withstand 20 cm of lateral displacement along the
fault zone. The dynamic compressive stress in the lining was estimated as 0.13 MPa. This
proved practical and cost-effective (Bickel et al., 1997). Bolu tunnel is another educative
case history (Section 18.4.2).
21.5 PSEUDO-STATIC THEORY OF SEISMIC SUPPORT PRESSURE
A pseudo-static approach is proposed to estimate the support pressure under dynamic
conditions in the underground openings. Suppose the vertical peak acceleration is αv · g
in roof and horizontal peak acceleration is αh · g in the wall of the tunnel, where g is the
acceleration due to gravity (Fig. 21.2). It is reasonable to assume in the case of jointed rock
masses that the vibrating mass is the mass of rock wedge which is naturally formed by three
(1 +αV) W
W (1+ αV)
αhW
Fig. 21.2
Peak acceleration experienced by rock wedges during earthquakes.
Tunnels in seismic areas 331
critical rock joints. Pseudo-static analysis is quite popular in geotechnical engineering and
it assumes that the unit weight of rock mass (γ) is modiﬁed to (1 + αv) · γ. It follows
that the increase in the support pressure because of earthquake (pseismic) may be taken
approximately as follows.
In roof:
pseismic = (αv) . proof
(21.1)
= 0.25 proof
(Barton, 1984)
(21.2)
In walls:
pseismic = (αh) . pwall
(21.3)
= 0.25 pwall
(Barton, 1984)
(21.4)
where
αv = coefﬁcient of the vertical peak acceleration at roof = 0.25,
αh = coefﬁcient of the horizontal peak acceleration at walls = 0.25 and
γ = unit weight of the rock mass.
Another cause of seismic support pressure is continuous building up of the residual
strains around an opening with successive earthquakes, particularly near the faults, etc.
Nevertheless the hypothesis of Barton (1984) appears to be realistic in view of the fact
that tunnels have seldom failed during even major earthquakes. The design of support
system may be selected from the chart (Fig. 10.2) and Table 10.2 of Barton et al. (1974)
for the following seismic rock mass quality (see Chapter 10),
Qseismic = Q/(1 + αv)3
(21.5)
= Q/(1 + 0.25)3 = Q
2
(Barton, 1984)
(21.6)
Alternatively the software TM may be used considering the total support pressure of
proof + pseismic (see Appendix II). Seismic support pressure in the squeezing ground may
be assessed approximately as discussed in Section AI.4.
The dynamic increment in support pressure in rail tunnels may perhaps also be assumed
to be negligible and of the same order as that of earthquakes. However, where overburden
is less than 2B (where B is the width of the opening), the roof support pressure is taken
equal to the overburden pressure. This conservative practice is due to errors inherent in
the survey of hilly terrain. In case the shallow rail or road tunnels are excavated in the
seismic rocky areas, concrete lining is provided with contact grouting between concrete
lining and rock mass. Consolidation grouting of loosened rock mass should also be done
to prevent further loosening of the rock mass during earthquakes. Back grouting ensures
intimate contact between concrete lining and rock surface which may not allow bending
of the lining, and no bending stresses are likely to develop during earthquakes.
332 Tunnelling in weak rocks
21.6 SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR BLAST LOADING
It is being realized now that underground openings may provide safety against nuclear
or missile attacks. The depth of overburden is the most important factor. Rock engineers
are now approached to design support systems which are safe against blast loading. The
concept is same as for seismic loading, except that the peak acceleration may be of high
intensity (αv > 1, sometimes 5).
The experience of tunnelling or mining through rock burst prone areas may be relevant
here. Long resin bolts/anchors (without pre-tension) have been successfully used as they
are able to withstand vibrations of high intensity and arrest propagation of fractures in
the rock mass. The steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) is also a ductile material and
has high fracture toughness and high shearing resistance. The principle for transforming a
catastrophic brittle failure into the plastic failure is that the brittle rock mass is converted
into the ductile reinforced rock arch. The SFRS is also ductile obviously due to steel ﬁbers.
It may be mentioned here that the peak acceleration of blast waves do not attenuate
rapidly in hard rocks. The damping coefﬁcient of hard rocks is also low. As such the
coefﬁcient of peak acceleration (αv) is likely to be quite high in shallow openings. Engi-
neering judgment is the best guide here. Conservative approach is the need of design of
underground structures of strategic importance, as future weapons and atomic bombs are
going to be unimaginably disastrous in its lifetime.
The dynamic model tests show that rock wedge in the roof tends to slide down slightly
on shaking. Hence wedge theory of support pressure would perhaps be applicable under
heavy dynamic loading such as blast loading. Field research is needed in this area.
The dynamic support pressures are likely to be high according to equations (21.1) and
(21.3). Incaseαv > 1, therockwedgeatthebottomoftheopeningmayalsobedislodgedin
upward direction. Thus the required dynamic support pressure at the bottom of an opening
is estimated by assuming the unit weight of rock mass equal to (αv −1) · γ (Fig. 21.3),
pbottom = (αv −1)proof
(21.7)
Hence rock anchors and SFRS may also be needed at the bottom of the opening.
Perhaps it is not necessary to make bottom of the opening curved surface to reduce dynamic
tensile stresses. The software package UWEDGE and TM can be used conﬁdently to
design support system in the roof, walls and the bottom (Singh & Goel, 2002). The chart
(Fig. 10.2) of Grimstad and Barton (1993) may be used considering a down-graded rock
mass quality approximately by equation (21.5).
One may also keep in mind that the overburden of rock mass at portal of the tunnel
should be 5·B in the blast prone area, where B is the span of opening. Further the maximum
overburden over an opening should be much less than 350Q1/3 m where Jr/Ja < 0.5, this
will ensure non-squeezing condition in the openings. Yet a minimum of cover of 300 m
above underground opening should be ensured for safety against mega nuclear attacks
right above them. Needless to mention that the rock mass quality near portals is down
graded to Q/3 and it is Q/2 near intersection of openings (Barton et al., 1974). So additional
Tunnels in seismic areas 333
Blast
SFRS
(αV-1 )W
Resin Anchors
Rock Wedge
Thrown Upwards
Fig. 21.3
Support system for blast loading.
down grading of rock mass quality may be done using equation (21.5) near portals and
intersections of underground openings.
The designer should also check the peak particle velocity at the roof level to save the
support system from damage by shock waves. The peak particle velocity (v) is,
v = αv · g/2πf < 7.5 cm/s
(Dowding, 1993)
(21.8)
where f approximately is the frequency of the blast waves or inverse of time period of the
shock waves. Damage to the support system is unlikely to occur if the particle velocity
is less than 7.5 cm/s, which is the permissible peak particle velocity for structures on
or within rock masses. Damages if occurred are minor and localized due to blast shock
waves and are easily repairable. Further the design of concrete lining may be checked
by software FLAC3D considering realistic dynamic forces at the top of openings and
elasto-plastic behavior of nearby fault zones.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, P. N. and Gaur, V. K. (1997). Study of crustal deformation in India. Techtonophysics, 15,
287-296.
Barton, N., Lien, J. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel supports. Rock Mechanics, 6(4), 189-236.
Barton, N. (1984). Effects of rock mass deformation on tunnel performance in seismic regions.
Tunnel Technology and Surface Use, 4(3), 89-99.
334 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Bickel, J. O., Kuesel, T. R. and King, E. H. (1997). Tunnel Engineering Handbook. Chapman &
Hall Inc., New York and CBS Publishers, New Delhi, 2nd edition, Chapter 6, 544.
Brace, W. F. and Byerlee, J. D. (1967). Recent experimental studies of brittle fracture in rocks.
Proc. 8th Symp. Rock Mechancis, University of Minnesota, Ed: C. Fairhurst, 58-81.
Cooke, J. B. (1970). Peru Earthquake of 31 May, 1970, Supplementary Notes to EERC Report.
Earthquake Engineering Institute.
Dowding, C. H. (1993). Blast vibration monitoring for rock engineering. Comprehensive rock
engineering, 4, Chapter 5, 111-135.
Dowding, C. H. and Rozen, A. (1978). Damage to rock tunnels from earthquake shaking. Journal
of Geotechnical Engineering (ASCE), 104 (GT2), 175-191.
Eckel, E. B. (1970). The March 1964 Alaska Earthquake-Lessons and Conclusions, USGS
Professional Paper 546, US Government Ofﬁce, Washington.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating of the Q-system for NMT. Int. Symposium on Sprayed
Concrete - Modern use of wet mix sprayed concrete for underground support, Fagernes,
Ed: Kompen, Opsahl and Berg, Norwegian Concrete Association, Oslo.
Iwasaki, T., Wakabayashi, S. and Tatsuoka, F. (1977). Characteristics of underground seismic
motion at four sites around Tokyo bay. Proceedings of the Eight Joint Panel Conference
of the US Japan Cooperative Program in Natural Resources, NBS Special Bulletin, 477.
Jethwa, J. L. and Singh, Bhawani (1980). Inﬂuence of geology on tunnelling conditions and defor-
mational behaviour of supports in faulted zones - A case history of Chibro-Khodri Tunnel
in India. Engineering Geology, 16, 291-319.
Kanai, K. and Tanaka, T. (1951). Observations of the earthquake motion at different depths of earth,
Part I. Bulletin of Earthquake Research Institute, Tokyo, 29, 107.
Krishna, J., Arya, A. S. Agrawal, P. N., Chandra, B. and Singh, V. N. (1974). Final Report
on Investigations of the Krol-Nahan Intra Thrust Zone, Yamuna Hydroelectric Project,
Stage-II, Part-II. Earthquake Engineering Department, IIT Roorkee, Report EQ-4, 16.
Kumar, P. and Singh, Bhawani (1998). Dynamics of underground openings. Proc. 11th Symp. on
Earthquake Engineering, IIT Roorkee, 353-360.
Mitra, S. and Singh, Bhawani (1995). Long-term behaviour of a large cavern in seismically active
region of lesser Himalaya. Proc. Int. Conference on Rock Mechanics, Tokyo, Japan,
1295-1298.
Mitra, S. and Singh, B. (1997). Inﬂuence of geological features on long term behaviour of under-
ground powerhouse cavities in lower Himalayan region – a case study. Journal of Rock
Mechanics and Tunnelling Technology, 3(1), 23-76.
Nasu, N. (1931). Comparative studies of earthquake motion above ground and in a tunnel, Part I,
Bulletin of Earthquake Research Institute, Tokyo, 9, 454.
Owen, G.N., Scholl, R. E.and Brekke, T.L.(1979). Earthquake engineering of tunnels. Proceedings
of Rapid Excavation and Tunnelling Conference, Chapter 41, 709-721.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and
Tunnelling Hazards. A.A. Balkema (Swet & Zetlinger), Netherlands, 344.
22
Rock burst in tunnels
22.1 INTRODUCTION
Experience shows that deeper an opening is made in hard rocks, more vulnerable it
becomes to rock burst. The rock burst is deﬁned as any sudden and violent expulsion
of rock pieces from an apparently (temporarily) stable opening. The manifestation of
slabbing and release of microseismic energy may be the ﬁrst sign but suddenly several
thousands of tons of rocks may break out like an explosion releasing seismic energy of a
mild earthquake (approx. 4M). The loss of life is not difﬁcult to imagine. For example,
in a very deep mine, rock bursts may account for 50 percent of total fatalities.
As such a sequence of excavation or mining must be so designed that rock fails in a
controlled manner. At least no rock burst should occur near working face during working
hours for protection of workers. It may be noted that there is a signiﬁcant departure in the
philosophy of design from that of some surface structures (hill roads, bridges, etc) which
are allowed to fail catastrophically.
What is the best strategy of sequence of excavation which minimizes both fre-
quency and severity of rock bursts? The conventional philosophy of minimizing stress
concentration is too conservative and irrational in comparison to recent theories.
Is it necessary to make an opening without sharp corners for avoiding stress concen-
tration? The answer is negative. The fear of stress concentration among rock engineers
perhaps has found the way from structural and mechanical engineers who do not wish any
part of the structure to crack. In fact many roadways of rectangular shape have been suc-
cessfully used. In practice even circular openings are seldom excavated as truly circular,
yet the actual openings do remain stable in spite of unwanted notches.
The secret follows from the Grifﬁth theory that a notch and associated stress con-
centration is harmless if it does not cause a signiﬁcant release in the magnitude of strain
energy to cause a sustained fracture propagation in the rock masses.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
336 Tunnelling in weak rocks
22.2 CONDITIONS FOR ROCK BURST IN DEEP TUNNELS
Let us consider a simple case of stability of a rock pillar between two closely spaced
tunnels. The roof above the pillar may be characterized by a spring of stiffness K. If pillar
is a unit cube, its post-failure stiffness will be equal to K (Fig. 22.1).
Thus rock burst is likely to occur if roof stiffness (K) is less than the post-peak stiffness
of the rock mass Ef. This happens usually in a laboratory while testing rock samples in
(a) System of rock element and loading system
(b) Unstable failure K>Ef
(c) Stable failure K >Ef
XS
B
C
KX
A
σ
ε or δ
D
σ
A
K
1
ε
Rock Element
Top Rigid Surface
δ
δ′
δ′
Bottom Rigid Surface
O
σ
σt
K
1
Elastic
Energy
Released
by Spring
WR
σ
σf
Ef
Energy
Absorbed
by Rock Wa
δ
εf
Fig. 22.1
Conditions for slow or sudden failure of a rock element (1 × 1 × 1) compressed by a
loading system of stiffness K.
Rock burst in tunnels 337
not-too-stiff conventional testing machines. The stress applied by spring (or machine or
roof ) is more than the load carrying capacity of rock block after the peak failure as shown
in Fig. 22.1b (i.e., CD > BD). The kinetic energy of ﬂying rock mass is WR −Wa as shown
in Fig. 22.1a. Obviously this pillar is likely to be stable where K > Ef (Fig. 22.1c).
Another interesting example is of a deep tunnel around which a broken zone is devel-
oped (Fig. 22.2a). The stiffness of elastic zone (Ke) will be equal to 2G/b, where G is
the shear modulus of isotropic elastic rock mass and b is the radius of broken zone.
a
b
P
σθ
σθ
pb
2P-pb
Elastic Zone
Broken
Zone
σ
pb = Radial Stress to Initiate Failure
Limit of Destressing
σθ
2P-pb
P
P
r
(a)
a
W
(b)
Assumed Distribution
Assumed Distribution
of Tangential Stress
of Tangential Stress
Assumed Distribution
of Tangential Stress
Observed Distribution
Observed Distribution
of 
of σθ θ before and
before and
after Destressing
after Destressing
Observed Distribution
of σθ before and
after Destressing
(dotted)
Fig. 22.2
Energy released in a rock burst; W is the difference in energy released by elastic zone
and that absorbed by broken zone.
338 Tunnelling in weak rocks
In other words, the stiffness of elastic zone will decrease drastically with increasing
size of the broken zone. However, the post-failure stiffness (Kf) of the broken ring will
increase with its increasing thickness. The post-failure stiffness of the broken ring is
deﬁned as the loss in support capacity (pb) per unit radial deﬂection (ub). So the sever-
ity of rock burst will tend to be more for thicker broken zones as Ke < Kf (Jaeger &
Cook, 1969).
It would be interesting to derive an expression for a limiting broken zone assuming
uniform stress distribution released across the ring (Fig. 22.2a). According to Jaeger and
Cook (1969), the criterion of rock burst is as follows:

(b −a)Ef
b
 > 2G
(22.1)
Further, the strain energy released by the elastic zone is equal to We. The energy
absorbed by the broken zone is Wb. Thus, energy released as rock burst is equal to W or
We −Wb (Fig. 22.2b). This energy will be converted into kinetic energy of rock pieces
and energy of seismic waves. Simple calculations will show that it is likely to increase
rapidly with increasing size of the opening (Fig. 22.2b).
A design of tunnel support system based on the plastic theory (Fig. 22.2) may thus
turn out to be unsafe if the mode of failure of rock mass is not checked out. One should
know whether it is going to fail as rock burst or plastically. Rock burst is likely to take
place in most situations where rock mass shows class II behavior (Ef is negative) and is
overstressed.
22.3 CONCEPT OF STRAIN ENERGY RELEASE RATE
This concept is useful in understanding why a rock burst can occur. According to Grifﬁth
theory, if the strain energy released per unit area of new crack surface is more than
the surface energy of the new crack surface, a crack will propagate, otherwise not.
This principle may be applied in tunnel openings also. For example, if strain energy
released per unit surface area of excavation is more than a limiting value, rock burst
will occur. In other words, strain energy release rate as deﬁned above should be con-
trolled by a planned sequence of excavation that it is minimum and does not exceed a
limiting value.
The strain energy release rate is equal to half of the product of primitive stresses and
displacements at the boundary of new opening which is just excavated full face.
In reality, rock mass is a non-linear material with time-dependent characteristics.
So the concept of strain energy release rate requires generalization. Nevertheless, the
simple concept of strain energy release rate does give some idea about the problems of
rock bursts in openings within massive hard rock masses.
Rock burst in tunnels 339
22.4 SEISMIC ENERGY RELEASED IN A ROCK BURST
Evidently the center of seismic event leading to rock burst is the region of highest stress
concentration in the elastic zone. Seismic studies of Cook (1962) indicated that such
events occur generally not more than 30 meters from the face of an excavation (Jaeger &
Cook, 1969). Seismic events that end up in rock burst were only 5 percent of all events
recorded and the seismic energy of the order of 105 to 108 ft 1b. was released in bursts.
Otherwise in the remaining 95 percent of the cases, the energy released at the epicenter
of the violent failure and propagating towards the excavation is most probably absorbed
in the deformation of the previously fractured zone of rock mass. This zone in this manner
provides adequate cushion between the epicenter and the face of excavation.
Experience shows that rock masses which are fractured either naturally or artiﬁcially
are not prone to rock burst. This is explained by the relatively ductile behavior of jointed
rock masses. It is only the massive hard and brittle rocks (Q perhaps greater than 2) that
pose problem because of low value of E/Ef. Further, since a fault will render the masses
more ﬂexible as if it has reduced the elastic modulus, the chances of rock burst at the
intersection between the fault and the tunnel or roadway are increased.
Another important factor is the rate of excavation which cannot however be accounted
in the theory. Laboratory tests show that the ratio E/Ef increases with decreasing rate of
deformation. Thus a slower rate of excavation may cut down the frequency and severity
of rock bursts.
22.5 SEMI-EMPIRICAL CRITERION OF PREDICTING ROCK BURST
It is obvious that failure of rock mass will occur where tangential stress exceeds its biaxial
(plain strain) compressive strength. Singh et al. (1998) have suggested that the effective
conﬁning stress is nearly the average of minimum and intermediate principal stresses.
Thus the biaxial strength is given by equation (19.3) in Chapter 19.
In situ stresses should be measured in drifts in areas of high tectonic stresses to know
Po and σθ realistically. It will help in predicting rock burst conditions in massive rock
masses.
Kumar (2002) has studied the rock burst and squeezing rock conditions at NJPC head
race tunnel in Himalaya, India. The ﬁeld data is compiled in Table 22.1 for 15 tunnel
sections of 10 m diameter where overburden is more than 1000 m. No rock burst occurred
at lesser overburden. According to Barton et al. (1974), heavy rock burst was predicted
as σθ/qc was more than 1.0, where qc is the uniaxial compressive strength of rock mate-
rial (gneiss). Fortunately, values of σθ/q′
cmass are between 0.55 and 1.14, which predict
very mild rock burst conditions. Actually there were no heavy or moderate rock burst
conditions along the entire tunnel. Slabbing with cracking noise was observed after more
than one hour of blasting. According to site geologists, Pundhir et al. (2000), initially
cracking noise was heard which was followed by the spalling of 5–25 cm thick rock
Table 22.1 Comparison of Mohr’s and Singh’s criteria of strength of rock mass (Kumar, 2002).
Rock
Predicted
Rock
cover UCS
Q Parameters
φp
Po
σθ
qcmass q′
cmass σθ/
σθ/
rock
behavior
S.No. Chainage, m
(m)
(MPa) RQD
Jn
Jr
Ja
Jw
SRF
Q
(deg) (MPa) (MPa) (MPa) (MPa) q′
cmass q′
cmass
behavior
(observed)
1.
11435–11446
1430 50
70
6
2
2
1
2.5
4.7 45
38.6
77.2
31.6
124.8 2.4
0.62
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
2.
11446–11459
1420 32
60
6
2
2
1
2.5
4.0 37
38.3
76.7
30.0
87.9
2.6
0.87
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
3.
11459–11525
1420 50
67
6
2
2
1
2.5
4.5 45
38.3
76.7
31.1
123.7 2.5
0.62
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
4.
11621–11631
1320 32
55
9
1.5 2
1
2.5
1.8 37
35.6
71.3
23.1
77.0
3.1
0.93
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
5.
11634–11643
1300 50
70
6
1.5 2
1
2.5
3.5 45
35.1
70.2
28.7
113.4 2.4
0.62
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
6.
11643–11650
1300 60
60
6
1.5 3
1
2.5
2.0 45
35.1
70.2
23.8
108.6 2.9
0.65
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
7.
11656–11662
1300 55
55
6
1.5 3
1
2.5
1.8 45
35.1
70.2
23.1
107.9 3.0
0.65
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
8.
11662–11796
1300 50
65
6
1.5 2
1
2.5
3.3 45
35.1
70.2
28.0
112.7 2.5
0.62
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
9.
11860–11917
1230
50
67 6
1.5 3
1
2.5 2.2
45
33.2
66.4
24.7
104.9
2.7
0.63
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
10.
12044–12070
1180
42
70 6
2
2
1
2.5 4.7
55
31.9
63.7
31.6
175.9
2.0
0.36
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
11.
12070–12077
1180
34
60 6
1.5 3
1
2.5 2.0
30
31.9
63.7
23.8
55.7
2.7
1.14
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
12.
12087–12223
1180
42
67 6
1.5 2
1
2.5 3.4
45
31.9
63.7
28.3
105.2
2.3
0.61
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
13.
12223–12267
1100
42
75 4
2
2
1
2.5 7.5
45
29.7
59.4
37.0
108.7
1.6
0.55
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
14.
12273–12322
1090
50
70 4
3
3
1
2.5 7.0
45
29.4
58.9
36.2
107.2
1.6
0.55
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
15.
12359–12428
1060
50
75 6
1.5 2
1
2.5 3.8
45
28.6
57.2
29.4
98.5
1.9
0.58
Heavy burst
Mod. slabbing
with noise
Notations: Po = γH; σθ = 2γH; qcmass = 7γQ1/3 MPa; q′cmass = biaxial compressive strength from equation (19.3); Q = post-construction rock mass quality; φp = peak angle
of internal friction in degrees and H = height of overburden in meters.
342 Tunnelling in weak rocks
columns or slabs and rock falls. This is very mild rock burst condition. Another cause
of rock burst is the class II behavior of gneiss according to tests at IIT, Delhi, India
(i.e. axial strain tends to reduce in comparison to peak strain after failure, although lat-
eral strain keeps on increasing due to slabbing). Further, only the light supports have
been installed in the rock burst prone tunnel even under very high overburden of 1400 m.
These light supports are stable. It may also be noted from Table 22.1 that according to
Mohr’s criterion, σθ/qcmass is estimated to be in the range of 1.6 to 3.1 which implies that
moderate rock burst conditions should have occurred. Kumar (2002), therefore, made an
observation that Singh et al.’s (1998) criterion (equation 19.3) considering σθ/q′
cmass is a
better criterion than Mohr’s criterion for predicting the rock burst conditions in tunnels.
It is interesting to note that q′
cmass is much greater than uniaxial compressive strength
(UCS) of rock materials. However, q′
cmass would be less than biaxial strength of rock
material. Hence equation (19.3) appears to be valid. It is important to note that q′
cmass
(biaxial strength) is as high as four times or more of uniaxial rock mass strength (qcmass).
The peak angle of internal friction (φp) in Table 22.1 is found from the triaxial tests
on the rock cores. It is assumed to be nearly same for moderately jointed and unweath-
ered rock mass. This appears to be a valid hypothesis approximately for qc > 10 MPa as
micro reﬂects the macro. There is difference in the scale only. The φp is not affected
by the size effect. Table 29.1 offers more explanation considering non-linear effect in
Chapter 29.
It is important to know in advance, if possible, the location of rock burst or squeezing
conditions, as the strategy of support system are different in the two types of conditions.
Kumar (2002) could fortunately classify mode of failures according to values of joint
roughness number (Jr) and joint alteration number (Ja) as shown in Fig. 22.3. It is observed
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
High
Squeezing
Mild Squ.
Moderate squ.
Moderate Slabbing
with Noise (Rock
Burst)
σθ/q′cmass = 0.6 - 1.0                    2 - 3                 3 - 4        >4
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Joint Alteration Number (Ja)
Joint Roughness Number (Jr)
Fig. 22.3
Prediction of ground condition (Kumar, 2002).
Rock burst in tunnels 343
that mild rock burst occurred only where Jr/Ja exceeds 0.5. This observation conﬁrmed
the study of Singh and Goel (2002). If Jr/Ja is signiﬁcantly less than 0.50, squeezing
phenomenon was encountered in many tunnels in the Himalaya. Thus, a semi-empirical
criterion for mild rock burst in the tunnels is suggested as follows:
σθ
q′cmass
= 0.60 −1.0
(22.2)
and
Jr
Ja
> 0.50
(22.3)
The support pressure may be assessed from modiﬁed Barton’s criterion which is found
to be valid upto an overburden of 1430 m by Kumar (2002),
proof ∼= 0.2(Q)
−1/3
Jr
f MPa
(22.4)
where
f = correction factor for overburden,
= 1 + (H−320)/800 ≥1,
H = overburden above crown of tunnel in meters and
Q = post-construction rock mass quality.
The dynamic support pressure may be αvproof like equation (21.1) where αv · g is the
observed maximum acceleration of rock pieces. The αv may be as high as 0.35.
22.6 SUGGESTION FOR REDUCING SEVERITY OF ROCK BURSTS
Suppose a tunnel opening is supported by very stiff supports so that support pressure
develops to the extent of cover pressure, no rock burst will occur. But, this is a very costly
way of solving the problem.
Another way of reducing chances of rock burst is to make opening of small size. This
is because amount of strain energy released per unit area of excavation will be reduced
considerably.
Since stress concentration is responsible for initiation of cracking, it may help to
select a shape of excavation which gives minimum stress concentration. For example, an
elliptical opening is best suited in non-hydrostatic stress ﬁeld. Its ratio of span to height
should be equal to ratio of horizontal stress to vertical stress. In hydrostatic stress ﬁeld,
circular openings are better than square openings. As mentioned earlier, it may also help
to slow down the rate of excavation in the zone of stress concentration, as rocks will be
able to absorb more strain energy due to creep.
It may be recalled that the de-stressing technique has been used with some success
in mines. In tunnel opening, if rock is broken intentionally by blasting or drilling, etc. to
344 Tunnelling in weak rocks
radius, in excess of b, the stress concentration is pushed inside the rock mass (Fig. 22.2a).
Further the maximum tangential stress in elastic zone will be reduced below the in situ
strength. Consequently chances of rock burst are reduced. The data of Reax and Den
Khaus (Obert and Duvall, 1967) from South African mine supports the above hypothesis
only partially. The de-stressing of the overstressed rock behind the face of excavation
postponed the bursts from on-shift to off-shift period. Even then, in this way number
of fatalities had been cut down drastically. Further destressing holes in areas of stress
concentration are not effective.
Not only should the support system be designed to be safe, its safe mode of failure
should also be designed to be slow and ductile (Fairhurst, 1973).
The modern trend is to convert the brittle rock mass into a ductile rock mass by using
full-column grouted resin bolts. The plastic behavior of mild steel bars will increase the
overall fracture toughness of a rock mass. So the overstressed rock mass will tend to fail
slowly, as the propagation of fractures will be arrested by the reinforcing bars. The length
of the rock bars may be equal to the thickness of the broken zone (b −a). The capacity of
the reinforced rock arch should be equal to proof (equation (22.4)).
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. J. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Fairhurst, C. (1973). Personal communication with Bhawani Singh. University of Minnesota, USA.
Jaeger, J. C. and Cook, N. G. W. (1969). Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics. Methuen & Co. Ltd.,
London, Art.18.2, 513.
Kumar, N.(2002). RockMassCharacterisationandEvaluationofSupportsforTunnelsinHimalaya.
PhD thesis, W.R.D.T.C., IIT Roorkee, India, 295.
Obert, L. and Duvall, I.W. (1967). Rock Mechanics and the Design of Structures in Rock. John
Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, Chap. 19, 650.
Pundhir, G. S., Acharya, A. K. and Chadha, A. K. (2000). Tunnelling through rock cover of more
than 1000 m - a case study. Int. Conf. ‘Tunnelling Asia 2000’, Ed: S.P. Kaushish and
T. Ramamurthy, New Delhi, India, 235-240.
Singh, B. and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and Tunnelling
Hazards. A. A. Balkema Publishers, Chap. 22.
Singh, B., Goel, R. K., Mehrotra, V. K., Garg, S. K. and Allu, M. R. (1998). Effect of intermediate
principal stress on strength of anisotropic rock mass. J. Tunnelling and Underground Space
Technology, Pergamon, U.K. 13(1), 71-79.
23
Pressure tunnels
23.1 INTRODUCTION
The modern trend is construction of small dams with very long tunnels and shafts to
generate a high head of water for generation of electricity. Head race tunnels or pres-
sure tunnels are therefore used extensively in the hydroelectric projects. The water ﬂows
through pressure tunnel under internal pressure which depends upon the height of the dam.
The pressure tunnels are also employed as diversion tunnels to discharge ﬂoods during
construction of a dam. The water tunnels are also useful to carry drinking water from lakes
to cities. The tunnels are being excavated to discharge storm water from mega cities to
rivers after some treatment in modern times. Concrete lined canal tunnels are also being
made passing through hills. It may be mentioned that pressure tunnels of medium size
(B = 5 to 6 m) are most economical for generation of electricity.
Unlined pressure tunnels are provided within massive hard rock masses as it is self-
supporting (Section 5.7). Discharge will be less due to rough surfaces of excavations. The
permissible velocity of water in unlined tunnels is also less (<1 m/s).
Most pressure (power) tunnels are lined with concrete to reduce head loss due to
friction at the tunnel boundary. This reduces water loss due to seepage and also stabilizes
the unstable rock wedges. Plain cement concrete (PCC) lining has been used in many
long power tunnels in hydroelectric projects in U.P., India. No hoop reinforcement has
been provided though internal water pressure is quite high. These PCC linings have been
working satisfactorily since 1980 without any closure for repairs. It is heartening to know
that PCC lining has worked in squeezing rock conditions also. Millions of dollars and
construction time can be saved if unnecessary hoop reinforcement is eliminated in the
conventional design of power (pressure) tunnels. Reinforcement though increases the
tensile strength of the concrete, it hampers the construction of a good dense cement
concrete lining. Good and compact concrete capable of withstanding high velocities and
abrasion is desirable (see Section 24.8).
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
346 Tunnelling in weak rocks
23.2 MINIMUM OVERBURDEN ABOVE A PRESSURE TUNNEL
It must be ensured in a pressure tunnel that the minimum in situ principal stress is more than
the internal water pressure along the entire water tunnel. In other words, the overburden
of rock mass should be more than the internal water head. According to ﬁeld experience,
the errors of surveying are higher in mountainous terrain because of many difﬁculties.
As such, the depth of rock cover (H) cannot be estimated reliably. Re-surveying may be
recommended in critical areas where overburden is not adequate.
Fig. 23.1 shows the overburden (H) which is perpendicular distance between a safe
slope proﬁle and the pressure tunnel. The following criterion should be considered for
safety of the pressure tunnel,
pi < γ · H cos ψf
(23.1)
where
pi
= internal water pressure,
= γw Hw
ψf = stable slope angle of the hill,
Hw = maximum head of water considering the effect of water hammer,
H
= perpendicular distance between safe slope proﬁle and pressure tunnel (Fig. 23.1),
> three times the diameter of the tunnel (to absorb vibration energy due to the water
hammer during sudden closure of a pressure tunnel).
Safe Slope Angle
ψf
Rcrack
Ground Water Table
H
Ec, νc
Ed, ν
Fig. 23.1
Safe overburden above a pressure tunnel.
Pressure tunnels 347
23.3 SOLID CONCRETE LINING
Jaeger (1972) derived an expression for stresses in the solid plain concrete lining within
an isotropic, homogenous and elastic rock mass in plane stress condition. The solution
for plain strain situation will be more realistic. The modiﬁed expression for rock sharing
(reaction) pressure is given below (Kumar & Singh, 1990).
λ = pc
pi
=
2a2(1 −νc)

(1 + ν)/(1 + νc)

(Ec/Ed)
	
C2 −a2
+ (1 −2νc)C2 + a2
(23.2)
where
pi = maximum internal water pressure,
pc = support reaction pressure at the interface of lining and rock mass,
Ed = modulus of deformation of rock mass,
ν
= Poisson’s ratio of rock mass,
Ec = modulus of elasticity of concrete lining,
νc = Poisson’s ratio of concrete lining,
a
= internal radius of lining and
C = outer radius of lining.
Thetensilestresswithintheliningiscalculatedbytheelasticsolutionforthickcylinder.
It should be less than the permissible tensile stress of the concrete. Hence rich concrete
mix is used. A nominal reinforcement of 1.0 percent of volume of lining is provided to
stop shrinkage cracks.
23.4 CRACKED PLAIN CEMENT CONCRETE LINING
A PCC lining for a water power tunnel is likely to crack radially at number of places where
the hoop tensile stress exceeds its tensile strength (Fig. 23.1). In practice six construction
joints are provided while concreting. These joints are also likely to open up due to internal
water pressure. Further, cracks may also develop where the surrounding rock mass is poor.
These radial cracks will be distributed nearly uniformly along the circumference due to
good bond between concrete and rock mass.
Fig. 23.1 shows a crack pattern in a plain concrete lining. The actual number of cracks
and the width of cracks may be smaller than that predicted due to percolation of water
inside the rock mass through cracks. The number of cracks should be limited so that the
length of the segment is approximately more than three times the thickness of the lining
or about 1.75 m so that the segment is not eroded by the fast ﬂowing water.
The spacing of cracks is likely to be uniform along the entire lining due to a built-in
good bond between concrete and the rock mass. The spacing of cracks (S) is derived by
348 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Singh et al. (1988a,b) as follows:
S = ( ft + pi)(C −a)
pi
(23.3)
where ft is ultimate tensile strength of the concrete.
The average opening (u) of cracks is given approximately by the following
equation (23.4).
u = (1 + ν)(C −a)( ft + pi)
Ed
(23.4)
The lining is designed properly to ensure that the crack opening or width is within
safe limit (<3 mm) and length of segments is more than three times the thickness of the
lining or 1.75 m. This would ensure self-healing of the crack by precipitation of CaCo3
etc. within cracks and the cracked segments will not be washed away by the water ﬂowing
with high velocity. In order to minimize the cracking of the lining, it is recommended that
water pressure be applied to the tunnel lining slowly and not abruptly.
In case of PCC lining also, reinforcement must be provided in the lining (i) at the
tunnel intersections, (ii) at the enlargements, (iii) at inlet and outlet ends, (iv) in plug
areas, (v) in the areas where the power tunnel passes through a relatively poor rock mass
and (vi) where the overburden pressure due to rock cover is inadequate to counter-balance
the internal water pressure.
It may also be noted that the rock mass is saturated all around the lining as shown in
Fig. 23.1 after charging of the water conductor system. In argillaceous rocks, this satu-
ration reduces the modulus of deformation of the rock mass signiﬁcantly. Consequently,
high support pressures are developed on the lining after saturation of the rock masses
(equation (24.8)). The worst condition of design occurs when the power tunnel is empty.
Thus, the PCC lining must be able to support these unusually high support pressures as
well as the ground water pressure, which is nearly equal to the internal water pressure in
the tunnel. The elastic solution for thick cylinder should be used to calculate the maxi-
mum hoop (tangential) stress in compression within a lining, which should be less than
the permissible compressive strength of the concrete. This criterion gives the minimum
thickness of the PCC lining. The recommended factor of safety in hoop compression is
3.0 for PCC/RCC lining (Jethwa, 1981). To make PCC lining ductile, nominal reinforce-
ment of about 1 percent of volume of concrete is suggested so that mode of failure of
lining is ductile and slow due to unexpected rock loads. Nominal reinforcement will also
prevent shrinkage cracks in the concrete lining.
It may be recalled that temporary support system for a power tunnel is designed by
considering the existing ground water condition for rock mass quality Q. However, it is
the post-construction ground water condition around a power tunnel which will govern
the long-term support pressure even in non-swelling rock masses. Hence Jw in rock mass
quality Q should be taken corresponding to the internal water pressure of power tunnel.
There is no cause for anxiety as the extra long-term support pressure on the lining is
Pressure tunnels 349
negligible compared to the ground water pressure. Both pressures act simultaneously on
the concrete lining.
The design methodology for PCC lining was developed by Singh et al. (1988a & b).
Later Kumar and Singh (1990) proposed a design procedure for reinforced concrete lining
for water/power tunnels. The program LINING has been developed on the basis of this
research work (Singh & Goel, 2002). The program also calculates seepage loss through
lining using the analytical solution (Schleiss, 1988). Concrete lining tunnels are also being
used as canals. The seepage loss may be estimated by the expression developed by Swamee
and Kashyap (2001).
Indeed a water conductor is never charged instantly as assumed in the design. The
power tunnel is pressurized slowly. Thus, seepage takes place through construction joints
into the rock mass. The seepage pressure tries to counteract the internal water pressure on
the concrete lining. Consequently, the actual number of cracks are limited to construction
joints mostly. The actual crack opening may be much less than that predicted by theory.
As such, use of PCC lining may be encouraged in good and fair rock masses where
overburden is adequate.
Table 23.1 summarizes case histories of various pressure tunnels in the hydroelectric
projects in Himalaya, India, where PCC (M25) lining has been functioning successfully
since 1980. Further contact grouting and consolidation grouting has been done around all
these tunnels (see Section 28.11). It may be mentioned that Kopli tunnel failed because
of inadequate overburden of 31 m to sustain very high internal pressure of 1.6 MPa.
The modern practice is to build PVC waterstops across the construction joints between
segments of concrete lining (both PCC and RCC). Then joints are ﬁlled with bitumen.
It should be checked that PVC waterstops are able to withstand the high internal water
pressure. However, the construction of PVC waterstops requires skilled workers.
Gysel (2002) cited case histories where the water tunnels developed cavities around the
lining in anhydrite karst rocks due to dissolution and erosion by seepage within 6 months.
Anhydrite also created swelling pressure on the lining. The repair was done by adding
steel liner and grouting the cavities. The same problem may arise in water-soluble rocks
like salt and gypsum. It is, therefore, recommended that RCC lining should be provided
across the soluble rocks and consolidation grouting is done thoroughly.
23.5 STEEL LINER IN PENSTOCK
The steel liner is provided in the underground penstocks which connect the power tunnel
(head race tunnel, HRT) and the underground powerhouse cavity. The steel liner can
sustain very high velocities of ﬂow of water (1.6 to 9 m/s) and reduce the hoop tensile
stresses in the surrounding PCC lining. The computer program LINING helps in calculat-
ing thickness of the steel liner and the spacing of stiffeners. The worst condition for steel
liner is also the empty tunnel, as the seepage pressure of the order of the internal water
pressure may act upon the steel liner. As such the stiffeners are provided to prevent the
350 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 23.1 Details of PCC pressure tunnels for various projects in India (Singh et al., 1988).
S.No. Project
Shape
Diameter
in meters
(2a)
Lining
thickness
at crown
t (mm)
Water
pressure
(MPa)
Ed = Modulus of
(rock) deformation
(MPa)
Crack opening
(mm)
Crack
spacing
t = C −a
No. of
cracks
1.
Ram Ganga River
Project
Circular
9.0
750
0.45
850–3500
3.1–0.8
6.6t
9
2.
Maneri Bhali Hydel
Scheme Stage I
Circular but
excava-
tion of
horseshoe
shape
4.75
300–500
0.18–0.62
7500
0.1–0.25
(14.6–5)t
2–6
3.
Yamuna Hydroelectric
Scheme Stage II
(U.P.)
Circular
7.0
300–600
0.44–0.62
500–7000
2.1–0.3
(6.7–5)t
7–9
4.
Maneri Bhali Hydel
Scheme Stage II
Horseshoe
6.0
300–500
0.15–0.35
3000–10,000
3.2–0.17
(17.7–8.1)t
3–5
5.
Tehri Dam Project -
Head Race Tunnel
Horseshoe
11.0
375–900
0.4–0.6
500–3000
2.6–1.1
(7.3–5.2)t
10–14
6.
Tehri Dam Project -
Head Race Tunnel
Circular
8.0
600
0.2–1.2
800–7000
2.4–0.4
3.1t
17
7.
Kopli Hydel Project in
jointed granite and
gneiss
Circular
4.5
150–200
1.6
570–1500
1.3–0.70
2.6t
11
Pressure tunnels 351
steel liner from buckling (Timoshenko & Goodier, 1987). The steel liner is painted with
anti-corrosive paint like epoxy paint. However, the minimum thickness of the liner (ts) is
D/400; where D is the diameter of the penstock. This will provide adequate stiffness to
the liner which is required during its fabrication and handling.
It is assumed that concrete lining is cracked radially due to high internal pressure. There
is a gap of ∆c between steel liner and the concrete lining due to shrinkage of concrete,
thermal effect and rock creep. But rock is not cracked radially due to lack of hoop tensile
stresses. In this situation the reaction contact pressure (pc) at the concrete-rock periphery
is given by the following equation:
pc =
pi · a2
s(1 −ν2
s) −∆c · ts · Es
ts · Es · (1 + ν) ·
	
C/Ed
+ (1 −ν2c) · ts ·
	
Es/Ec
· C · Ln
	
C/a
+ C · (1 −ν2s) · as
(23.5)
where
ts
= thickness of steel liner,
Es = modulus of elasticity of steel,
νs = Poisson’s ratio of steel,
as = internal radius of the steel liner = D/2,
∆c = gap between steel liner and concrete lining and
pi = maximum internal pressure inside liner, considering the effect of water hammer
due to sudden closure of turbines.
Then hoop tensile stress in the steel liner is calculated. Adequate thickness of the liner
is provided so that tensile stress is less than safe tensile strength of welded steel. Factor of
safety of 1.7 is recommended. The liner should be anchored into the concrete lining. The
diameter of anchors is generally 25–40 mm and its length is 30–50 cm. Suitable spacing
should be adopted.
The thickness of the steel liner should be reduced within competent rocks naturally.
But thickness of the liner in poor rock mass should be continued upto a distance of diameter
(D = 2as) of penstock inside the adjoining competent rock. Thereafter, liner thickness
is reduced in steps of 5 mm till smaller thickness required for competent rock mass is
obtained. Where the liner emerges from the tunnel, it should be designed for maximum
internal pressure and due care should be taken of stresses in the tunnel.
Finally contact grouting between concrete lining and rock mass (and also between steel
liner and concrete lining) is executed at low pressure. This is followed by the consolidation
grouting of the surrounding ring of the rock mass under high pressure (Section 28.11).
Some experts recommend high grouting pressure to pre-stress the concrete lining. In view
of the authors, pre-stressing is not needed where PCC lining is feasible. Vaidya and Gupta
(1998) have reported failure of grout plugs in the steel liner due to the seepage pressure.
The repair was done successfully.
352 Tunnelling in weak rocks
23.6 HYDRAULIC FRACTURING NEAR JUNCTION OF PRESSURE
TUNNEL AND PENSTOCK
The following caution should be kept in mind.
It is observed by Barton (1986) that a rock joint opens near the junction of unlined
HRT and the steel lined penstock. The ground water table is very high above the HRT at
the time of full head, but it drops suddenly above the penstock due to the impervious steel
lining. Hence, consolidation of rock mass above the penstock may take place due to the
drastic reduction in seepage water pressure. Consequently, this leads to the development
of the horizontal tensile strain in the upstream adjoining rock mass around the HRT. Thus,
a rock joint opens at this junction within the ungrouted rock mass and this fracture may
propagate upto the top of the hill in some cases. This phenomenon of fracturing underlines
the need for extensive consolidation and contact grouting of rock mass near this junction,
specially in the case of unlined HRT.
The problem at junction is further complicated due to square shape of steel lining
which cannot bear high outside water pressure. The building of steel liners of the two
penstocks of the Pong Dam Project after reservoir ﬁlling may be due to the above reasons.
This damage was repaired successfully (Oberoi & Gupta, 2000).
REFERENCES
Barton, N. (1986). Deformation phenomenon in jointed rocks. Geotechnique, 36(2), 147-163.
Gysel, M. (2002). Anhydrite dissolution phenomena: Three case histories of anhydrite karst caused
by water tunnel operation. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, 35(1), 1-21.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressures in tunnels through squeezing ground in lower
Himalayas. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India, 272.
Jaeger, Charles (1972). Rock Mechanics and Engineering. Cambridge University Press, U.K., 417.
Kumar, Prabhat and Singh, Bhawani (1990). Design of reinforced concrete lining in pressure
tunnels considering thermal effects and jointed rock mass. Tunnelling and Underground
Space Technology, 5(1/2), 91-101.
Oberoi, R. R. and Gupta, G. D. (2000). Tunnelling at Pong dam - a case study. Int. Conf. Tunnelling
Asia - 2000, N. Delhi, Ed: S. P. Kaushish and T. Ramamurthy, Sponsored by CBIP and
ITA, 377-385.
Schleiss, A. J. (1988). Design of reinforced concrete - lined pressure tunnels. Proc. Conf. Tunnels
and Water, Madrid, 12-15 June, 1127-1133.
Singh, Bhawani, Nayak, G. C., Kumar, R. and Chandra, G. (1988a). Design criteria for plain
concrete lining in power tunnels. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 3(2),
201-208.
Singh, Bhawani, Nayak, G. C., and Kumar, R. (1988b). Design criteria for plain concrete lining
in power and water tunnels. Int. Symp. Underground Engineering, New Delhi, India,
Ed: B. Singh, 1, 281-289.
Pressure tunnels 353
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and
Tunnelling Hazard. A.A. Balkema (Swets & Zetlinger), The Netherlands, 380.
Swamee, P. K. and Kashyap, D. (2001). Design of minimum seepage - Loss in non polygonal canal
sections. J. on Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, ASCE, 127(2), 113-117.
Vaidya, D. K. and Gupta, A. R. (1998). Grout plug failure in the pressure shaft of Bhabha Project.
Int. Conf. Hydro Power Development in Himalayas, Ed: V.D. Choubey, Oxford & IBH
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 435-444.
Timoskenko, S. P. and Goodier, J. N. (1987). Theory of Elasticity. Mc Graw Hill, 567.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
24
Shafts
24.1 INTRODUCTION
Shafts refer to a vertical or near vertical excavation in rocks. But, some shafts are inclined
depending upon its function. Shafts are used in tunnelling works. In general, shafts have
the following functions.
(i) Tunnel shafts provide vertical access to the level of a tunnel or cavern for its
construction. Tunnel shafts provide additional working faces for rapid excavation
of tunnels.
(ii) Mining shafts for access of workers up to the mine face.
(iii) Surge shafts for absorbing excess energy of water hammer near penstocks in the
hydroelectric projects.
(iv) Transformer shaft carries electrical cables from powerhouse to the transmission
lines on the ground.
(v) Bunker shafts to connect underground tunnels for protection against atomic wars.
(vi) Ventilation shafts along the long tunnels and mines.
Tunnel shafts can be a temporary shaft which is used only for construction. Other
shafts are permanent shafts with permanent support system.
The shaft should be located on ground having sufﬁcient vacant area. The vacant
space on the ground surface is required (i) for providing space for temporary buildings,
(ii) to dispose off muck from the shaft and (iii) to discharge seepage water from inside
the shaft, etc.
The depth of shaft varies with its purpose. Some shafts are very deep (H > 1000 m).
With depth, the excavation and the supporting problem also increases. While excavating
the shaft, management of ground water may also sometimes pose construction prob-
lems. Unexpectedly large inﬂows can occur while passing through water bearing strata.
The pump should be of sufﬁcient capacity to pump out maximum anticipated inﬂow
of seepage.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
356 Tunnelling in weak rocks
24.2 SHAPES OF SHAFT
The shape depends upon the function of shafts. Commonly three shapes are used.
1. Circular shaft – It is popular in civil engineering projects. It is used in mines also.
It is a structurally stable section in weak rocks.
2. Rectangular shaft – It is used in mines generally.
3. Elliptical shaft – It is not used frequently.
Fig. 24.1 shows various shapes of shafts along with temporary and permanent support
systems. Rock bolts or anchors are treated as temporary support system. In modern times,
shotcrete may be considered as permanent support system. The minimum safe clear dis-
tance between vertical shafts may be taken as 1.5B in non-squeezing ground and 3B in
the squeezing ground, where B is the diameter of the shaft.
(a) Circular shaft
(b) Rectangular shaft
(c) Elliptical shaft
Fig. 24.1
Shapes of shafts in rock masses.
Shafts
357
24.3 SELF-SUPPORTING SHAFT
Barton et al. (1974) obtained the following correlation for self-supporting shafts of
diameter or width (B),
B = 2 ESR Q0.4
w meters
(24.1)
It may be emphasized that Qw is the actual rock mass quality for the walls in the case
of shafts. The excavation support ratio (ESR) is as follows:
(i) Circular section
– 2.5
(ii) Rectangular or square section – 2.0
General requirements for permanently unsupported shafts are,
Jn < 9, Jr > 1.0, Ja < 1.0, Jw = 1.0, SRF < 2.5
Shafts up to 10 m depth generally do not require any supports. If depth of shaft H is
less than 350 Q1/3 meters, non-squeezing ground condition is expected, same as in the case
of tunnels. Fig. 24.2 presents the no-support size for the vertical shafts for any Q value
directly. Thus, stability problems (or wedge failures, etc.) may be encountered only in
poor to very poor rock qualities. It should be realized that Qw is the actual rock mass
quality for walls which can be altered signiﬁcantly by stress conditions and deformations
while excavating deep shafts (Kaiser & McCreath, 1994).
24.4 SUPPORT PRESSURES ON THE WALL OF SHAFT
The empirical theory of Barton et al. (1974) and its improvements suggested by
Singh et al. (1992) is recommended for estimation of long-term support pressure (pwall)
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
0.1
1.0
10
Diameter (m)
Exceptionally Poor
Extremely Poor
Very Poor
Poor
Fair
Typical Shafts and Raises
No Support Limit
Rock Mass Quality Q
Fig. 24.2
No-support limit for vertical excavations adopted for wall conditions from Barton
et al. (1974).
358 Tunnelling in weak rocks
on the walls of a shaft as follows:
pwall = 0.2
Jr
	
Qw
−1/3 f · f ′ MPa
(24.2)
where
Jr = joint roughness coefﬁcient,
f = correction factor for depth of shaft (H),
= 1 + (H −320)/800 ≥1.0,
(24.3)
f ′ = correction factor for closure of wall of shaft in the squeezing rock-wall
conditions and
= 1.0 for non-squeezing grounds (H < 350 Q1/3 meters).
It is interesting to learn that pwall is independent of width B and depth of the shaft
less than 320 m (equation (24.3)). The rock mass quality in walls (Qw) is obtained after
multiplying Q by a factor which depends upon the rock mass quality Q given below,
Range of Q
Qw
> 10
5 Q
0.1–10
2.5 Q
< 0.1
1.0 Q
Fig. 24.3 presents variation of wall support pressure with the rock mass quality directly
(Kaiser & McCreath, 1994), for H < 320 m in non-squeezing grounds.
Inthecaseofsqueezinggroundconditionsunderhighoverburden(H > 350Q1/3 meters
and Jr/Ja < 0.5), the wall support pressure depends signiﬁcantly on the wall closures. The
correction factor f ′ for tunnels may also be adopted for shafts, as shown in Fig. 5.4b. It has
been observed that pwall decreases rapidly with increasing wall closures up to 4 percent of
the diameter or width of the shaft. Therefore, stiff lining is not the solution for supporting
shafts in the squeezing grounds like in the tunnels.
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
0.1
1.0
10
Diameter (m)
Exceptionally Poor
Extremely Poor
Very Poor
Poor
Fair
No Support Limit
Rock Mass Quality Q
0.3MPa
0.2MPa
0.6MPa
Expected Support
Pressure 1.2MPa
Fig. 24.3
Guide to estimate support pressures in vertical bored excavations (Golder Associates,
1976).
Shafts
359
There may be slabbing of rock walls in the deep shaft in the over-stressed condi-
tion in good rocks where H ≫350Q1/3 meter but Jr/Ja > 0.50. Thus, in deep shafts
(H > 1000 m), mild or moderate rock burst may take place. The wall support pressure
is still governed by equation (24.2) with f ′ = 1. The ideal choice of support is full-
column grouted rock bolts or un-tensioned resin anchors with SFRS. This will improve
the ductility of reinforced rock arch. Thus, grouted rock anchors will tend to arrest the
propagation of fractures, as cracks will not be able to open up due to effective rock
reinforcement.
It has been experienced and which is logical also that the damage to rock mass due
to blasting is less in shafts than in the roof of tunnels. Thus, overbreaks are of lesser
magnitude in vertical shafts than in roof of tunnels in the same rock. Hence, blasting is
done easily by vertical holes at the bottom of a shaft.
Shear zone in shafts does not create much problem as in tunnels. Needless to mention
that proper average of Q values in shear zone and surrounding rock should be taken as
mentioned in Section 28.7. Further, supporting water-charged strata is not much problem,
as seepage water is collected at the bottom and pumped out of the shaft. Steel ribs may
buckle in section of plastic gouge in a thick shear zone (>2 m) in a large shaft (>6 m
diameter) even at shallow depths (<50 m) due to the squeezing of plastic clayey gouge.
The buckling is found to stop after about a month. The buckled ribs should be replaced
before concreting. In case the shaft is being excavated through the shear zone containing
groutable material like river bed material, it is advisable to grout the area around the shaft
before taking up the excavation. The grouting will help in increasing the stand-up time of
the loose material and thereby reduce the excavation and supporting problems.
In case a shaft is bored by a machine, the support requirement would be much less.
This is due to reduction in the damage to rock walls.
24.5 DESIGN OF SUPPORT SYSTEM
Chart of Grimstad and Barton (1993) in Fig. 10.2 should be used to recommend support
system for rock mass quality in walls (Qw). In hard rocks, rock bolts and/or anchors may
be enough. Dip of boltholes should be 10◦downward as in slopes. It will retain grout by
force of gravity. Then anchors are pushed inside these holes. Weld mesh (6 mm diameter
steel bars welded at center to center spacing of about 15 cm) should be tied in between
the bolts to prevent rock falls in the shaft, if shotcrete is not used. Spot-bolting should be
discouraged, as it does not form a structural system, except in a massive hard rock.
The length of pre-tensioned rock bolts is found as
l = 2 + (0.15B/ESR)
(24.4)
The length of rock anchors is determined as follows:
l = 0.35B/ESR
(24.5)
360 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The thickness of shotcrete (tsc) may be obtained by the following criterion:
tsc = pwall · 0.6B
2 · qsc
(24.6)
where
0.6B = distancebetweenplanesofmaximumshearstressesintheshotcrete,
qsc
= shear strength of shotcrete,
= 3 MPa for conventional shotcrete and
= 5.5 MPa for steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS).
In modern times, shotcrete lining may be considered permanent support system. It is
heartening to know that the thickness of concrete lining for permanent support system in
mine shafts up to 4000 m depth is only 40 cm. The software package TM may also be used
to design complete support system of rock bolts and shotcrete for complex geological
conditions (Appendix II). Section 28.10.5 describes the use of steel ribs for supporting
wide shafts.
The supports in the shaft and in the tunnel at the intersection of shaft with tunnel shall
be designed after obtaining the Q value with modiﬁed Jn rating for intersections of two
openings. In case of an unsupported tunnel, for long-term stability, as a rule of thumb,
it is recommended that on either side of the shaft in the tunnel, the rock bolts (length
and spacing of bolt as per the tunnel width) and 25 mm thick shotcrete support should be
provided upto a distance equal to the diameter of the shaft. Similarly in the shaft, the rock
bolt and shotcrete support system should be provided upto a distance equal to the width
of the self-supporting tunnel.
24.6 SURGE SHAFT
The surge shafts are made above head race tunnel (HRT) to release energy of water
hammer, when penstocks are shut down in a hydroelectric project. There is internal water
pressure inside the surge shaft due to the effect of the water hammer when penstock is
closed suddenly. There appears to be no harm if the concrete or shotcrete lining is cracked
due to high hoop tensile stresses. The philosophy is the same as for the pressure tunnels
(Chapter 23). However, the worst condition occurs when the shaft is empty and ground
water pressure acts from outside on this lining. The required thickness of lining (tc) works
out to be approximately as follows.
tc = B · (pw + ps)
2 · fc
(24.7)
where
ps = support pressure due to post-construction saturation,
pw = ground water pressure,
≈internal water pressure,
fc = permissible compressive stress in the concrete and
B = span of opening of the shaft.
Shafts
361
It is assumed that there is contact grouting of good quality between rock mass and con-
crete lining. So, no bending stresses will tend to develop inside the lining. It may be noted
here that a good bond between rock and lining is the secret of success. Also, the contact
grouting prevents damage of the concrete due to the vibrations from nearby blasting.
In water sensitive argillaceous rocks, the support pressure may increase after seepage
of water into the rock masses as follows (Verman, 1993),
ps =

1 −Esat
Ed

· γH −pw
(24.8)
where
Esat = modulus of deformation of rock mass after saturation,
Ed
= modulus of deformation of rock mass at natural moisture content,
γH = Overburden pressure at the point of consideration = horizontal in situ
stress and
pw = internal water pressure.
There may be construction difﬁculties in the excavation of shaft. Hill slope is cut or
anchored for its stability so that a safe site is developed for excavation of (surge) shaft.
In some projects, a pilot shaft of smaller diameter is made up to the level of HRT. Then
full face of the surge shaft is excavated by drilling and blasting method. The muck falls
down through pilot shaft inside the HRT. Then muck is transported out by the rail line.
Of course manual shaft drilling should not be done from its bottom above a tunnel. Fatal
accidents have taken place.
24.7 EXCAVATION
Excavation of shaft is usually done by drill and blast method in civil engineering projects.
The tunnel shafts are generally less than 50 m deep. So machine boring is ruled out.
Deeper shafts in hard rocks may be bored by machine. The drilling is done by hand-held
drills to make vertical blast holes. The blasting system is designed for ease of drilling and
minimizing overbreaks. The pyramid cut is used in circular shafts. The V-cut is preferred
for excavating rectangular shafts (Jenny, 1982). After blast cycle is over, muck is taken
up by cranes with bucket. The muck is dumped from the bucket on the ground or on the
hopper. Prior to installation of support system, the loose rock pieces should be scaled
down. In case ground water is seeping downwards, it should be pumped out by a pump
of adequate capacity. Manual shaft drilling shall be avoided for safety in rainy season,
as shear zone may be charged with rain water temporarily.
Recently, shafts are bored upwards from a tunnel to the ground level using a raise
boring machine. The raise boring has been executed successfully in the hydroelectric
projects for the following shafts of small diameter (Singh, 1993).
(i) Pressure shaft,
(ii) Spillway shaft,
362 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(iii) Surge chamber,
(iv) Main inlet valve gallery relief,
(v) Draft tube valve gallery relief,
(vi) Ventilation and
(vii) Machine hall mucking, etc.
Singh (1993) has presented details of machines for raise boring and shaft sinking
and their practical utility.
24.8 SELF-COMPACTING CONCRETE (KAUSHIK & KUMAR, 2004)
Normal cement concrete depends heavily on its degree of compaction for its performance,
viz. strength and durability. In some locations, when either the thickness of the structural
element is very small or congested reinforcement makes it difﬁcult to facilitate proper
compaction through internal vibrators, etc., the concrete may not be able to last for its
designed life. Such situations are frequently encountered in the ﬁeld, say in case of tunnel
and shaft construction. In some situations, the concrete may be subjected to a humid
environment (or sometimes, alternate wetting and drying conditions); resulting in rapid
deterioration of the insufﬁciently compacted (porous) concrete.
Rheo-plastic concrete requiring very little vibration to get compacted can be advan-
tageously used in such situations. Also, self-compacting concrete (SCC) was developed
in Japan in late 80s. In tunnel construction and rehabilitation works, SCC has started
gaining acceptance. In one notable project “Trans-Kawasaki Route” in Japan, a tunnel
structure “Daishi-junction” is included, where SCC has been used with MMST method of
construction. This tunnel has been constructed by connecting unit tunnels of steel segment
construction through joint members and then ﬁlling with SCC to unify them into a large
section tunnel. A tunnel rehabilitation project in Zurich, Switzerland in 2001 employed
a concrete volume of 7000 cubic meters with SCC to get durable concrete in sections
ranging from 10 to 6 cm thickness.
In SCC, full compaction of concrete is attained with its self-weight only. Such concrete
ﬁlls spaces between the reinforcing bars and formwork completely without any vibration.
The concrete is made up of usual ordinary Portland cement and normal coarse aggregates
and sand. However, it needs a higher powder content, so either ﬂyash, ground granulated
blast furnace slag or limestone powder may be used as powder material. Super-plasticizer
is required to get high ﬂowability of concrete. For this polycarboxylate-ether-based super-
plasticizers have been observed to work better than either naphthalene based or melamine
based ones. The use of zero energy admixtures facilitates early hydration and stripping
of formwork may be resorted to 8 h. To control segregation at high ﬂowability, viscos-
ity modifying agents (VMA) are used. VMA addition makes the concrete mix stable.
The aggregates remain suspended in the viscous mix or mortar. SCC mixes are cohesive
due to the large powder content.
Shafts
363
Flyash is available widely and is an economical material. SCC mixes can be produced
at site having a 28 day compressive strength in the range of 40–60 MPa. Due to ﬂyash
addition, the ﬂexural strength of such concretes is generally 10 to 25 percent higher
than the normal concrete with similar compressive strength. However, compatibility of
the particular brand of cement with the super-plasticizer proposed to be used, needs to
be established ﬁrst. The concrete needs to be cured in a similar fashion as the normal
concrete, but here, moist curing in the initial period is crucial for initiating the pozzolanic
reaction of the ﬂyash. Finishing of SCC is smooth and the permeability of the SCC is
lower than the normal concrete of similar grades.
Thus use of SCC may result in better concrete practices in tunnel linings, shafts and
related applications where the thickness is small and proper compaction of conventional
concrete may be a nightmare.
A typical SCC mixture would be approximately as follows:
• Cement
–
400 kg/m3
• Flyash
–
200 kg/m3
• Fine aggregate (sand)
–
800 kg/m3
• Viscosity modifying agent
–
3 to 6 kg/m3
• Coarse aggregate
–
700 kg/m3
• Super-plasticizer
–
8 to 10 kg/m3
• Water
–
180 kg/m3
REFERENCES
Barton, N. R., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the
design of tunnel support. Rock Machines, 6, 189-239.
Golder Associates and Mc Laren, J. F. (1976). Tunnelling technology - An appraisal of the state-
of-the-art for application to transit systems. Ministry of transportation and communications
of Ontario, R&D Division.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating of the Q-system for NMT, Int. Symposium on Sprayed
Concrete - Modern Use of Wet Mix Sprayed Concrete for Underground Support, Fagernes,
Eds: Kompen, Opsahl and Berg, Norwegian Concrete Association, Oslo.
Jenny, Robert J. (1982). Shafts, Tunnel Engineering Handbook. Ed: John O. Bickel and T. R. Kussel,
Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., Chapter 9.
Kaiser, P. K. and McCreath, D. R. (1994). Rock machines consideration for drilled or
bored excavations in hard rock. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 9(4),
425-437.
Kaushik, S. K. and Kumar, P. (2004). Self-compacting concrete: An emerging material for tunnel
linings. J. of Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling Technology, 10(1), 79-80.
364 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Singh, Bhawani, Jethwa, J. L., Dube, A. K. and Singh, B. (1992). Correlation between observed
support pressure and rock mass quality. J. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology,
Pergamon, 7(1), 59-74.
Singh, Jagman (1993). Heavy Construction - Planning, Equipment and Methods. Oxford & IPH
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., Chapter 6, 1084.
Verman, M. K. (1993). Rock mass-tunnel support interaction analysis. PhD thesis, Department of
Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee India, 267.
25
Half tunnels
25.1 INTRODUCTION
Half tunnels are excavated as overhangs of hard rock slopes along the hill roads with one
wall on the hill side and no wall on the valley side. These half tunnels have been existing
since 1980, in spite of no support of the roof in the middle and higher Himalaya. Half
tunnels, which are excavated as overhangs of hill slopes are superior to the conventional
full tunnels or open road excavations, because they involve very less cost and time.
However, due to lack of focus and their uncommon occurrence, the domain of half tunnel
remained by and large unexplored. A photograph of half tunnel in Fig. 25.1 shows how
exactly it looks like.
In addition to the economy of construction, half tunnels are attraction to tourists
and help in the preservation of ecosystem due to minimum disturbance to the slopes.
Anbalagan et al. (2003) have reported a detailed study which is summarized here.
25.2 APPLICATION OF ROCK MASS CLASSIFICATION
The rocks exposed at different sites have been studied and individual rock parameters
are evaluated. The descriptions and corresponding ratings of the parameters and the ﬁnal
Q value for all the half tunnels are given in Tables 25.1A and 25.1B. The Q values for the
rocks of the half tunnel vary from 18 to 38 indicating that the rocks fall under the category
of good rock (Barton et al., 1974).
Similarly, the rocks are also studied for evaluating the parameters related to rock mass
rating (RMR) (Bieniawski, 1989). The description and the corresponding rating of the
individual parameters as well as the RMRbasic, i.e., RMR without adjustment for joint
orientation, of rocks of half tunnels are given in Tables 25.2A and 25.2B. The RMRbasic
values for half tunnels vary from 74 to 87 indicating that the rocks fall under the categories
of good to very good rocks. The shear strength parameters were estimated according to the
RMRbasic. These parameters were used in the stability analysis of the rock wedge if any.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
366 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Fig. 25.1
Photograph of a half tunnel (Anbalagan et al., 2003).
The rock mass quality Q values have been plotted against span of the half tunnels on a
log–log graph (Fig. 25.2). On the basis of the analysis of upper bound limit, the following
relation is obtained between Q and span Bht (in meters) of half tunnels.
Bht = 1.7 Q0.4
(25.1)
This relation is comparable with the one given by Barton et al. (1974) between Q and
maximum unsupported span (B) for ESR = 1.
B = 2 × Q0.4
(25.2)
25.3 WEDGE ANALYSIS
Fig. 25.3 shows a typical rock wedge above half tunnels. The stability of half tunnels has
been checked through wedge analysis. The analyses have been done both with the help
of the computer program UWEDGE (Singh & Goel, 2002), considering the slope face as
artiﬁcial frictionless joint and stereographically through Markland Test. Half tunnels M1,
M2 and M3, where only one joint set was observed, were not analyzed by the program
because the cases with number of joint sets less than two are automatically considered
Half tunnels 367
Table 25.1A
Descriptions, ratings of parameters and Q values of half tunnels in massive granite gneiss rocks (Anbalagan et al., 2003).
Half tunnel no.
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
RQD
Description
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Rating
95
95
98
98
98
98
95
Jn
Description
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
Rating
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
Jr
Description
Irregular
Irregular
Rough
Rough
Irregular
Rough
Irregular
Rating
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Ja
Description
Unaltered
Unaltered
Stained
Unaltered
Stained
Unaltered
Stained
Rating
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Jw
Description
Minor
Minor
Minor
Dry
Minor
Dry
Minor
inﬂow
inﬂow
inﬂow
inﬂow
inﬂow
Rating
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
SRF
Description
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
Rating
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
Q Value
18
19
19
20
20
20
19
368 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 25.1B
Descriptions, ratings of parameters and Q values of half tunnels (Anbalagan et al., 2003).
P1
P2
Half Tunnel No.
K1
K2
K3
M1
M2
M3
Massive foliated
Rock type
Massive foliated micaceous quartzite
Massive white quartzite
slaty phyllite
RQD
Description
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Good
Good
Rating
92
95
95
88
95
92
85
82
Jn
Description
2 + Random
2 + Random
2 + Random
1 + Random
1 + Random
1 + Random
2 sets
2 sets
Rating
6
6
6
3
3
3
4
4
Jr
Description
Rough
Rough
Irregular
Rough
Rough
Irregular
Irregular
Irregular
Rating
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Ja
Description
Unaltered
Unaltered
Unaltered
Unaltered
Stained
Unaltered
Stained
Stained
Rating
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Jw
Description
Minor
Dry
Dry
Dry
Dry
Dry
Minor
Minor
inﬂow
inﬂow
inﬂow
Rating
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
SRF
Description
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
stress
Rating
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
Q Value
18
19
19
35
38
37
25
24
Half tunnels 369
Table 25.2A
Descriptions, ratings of parameters and RMR values of half tunnels in massive granite gneiss (Anbalagan et al., 2003).
Half tunnel no.
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
UCS
MPa
127
127
127
127
127
127
127
Rating
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
RQD
%
92
95
95
98
98
98
95
Rating
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
Spacing of
disc.
Description
280 mm
300 mm
300 mm
280 mm
310 mm
300 mm
280 mm
Rating
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
Condition
of disc.
Description
Slightly rough
surfaces,
sep. <1 mm
Very rough
surfaces,
tight
Slightly rough
surfaces,
sep. <1 mm
Slightly rough
surfaces,
sep. <1 mm
Very rough
surfaces,
tight
Slightly rough
surfaces,
sep. <1 mm
Slightly rough
surfaces,
sep. <1 mm
Rating
25
30
25
25
30
25
25
Ground water
condition
Description
Damp
Damp
Damp
Dry
Damp
Dry
Damp
Rating
10
10
10
15
10
15
10
RMRbasic
77
82
77
82
82
87
77
Note: “disc.” stands for discontinuity and “sep.” means separation.
370 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 25.2B
Descriptions, ratings of parameters and RMR values of half tunnels.
Half tunnel no.
K1
K2
K3
M1
M2
M3
P1
P2
UCS
MPa
205
205
205
212
212
212
151
151
Rating
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
12
RQD
%
92
95
95
88
95
91
85
82
Rating
20
20
20
17
20
20
17
17
Spacing of disc
Description
250 mm
270 mm
250 mm
300 mm
280 mm
300 mm
250 mm
250 mm
Rating
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
Condition of
disc.
Description
Slightly
rough
surfaces,
sep. < 1 mm
Slightly
rough
surfaces,
sep. < 1 mm
Slightly
rough
surfaces,
sep. < 1 mm
Very rough
surface,
no
spacing
Very rough
surface,
tight
Very rough
surface,
tight
Slightly
rough
surfaces,
sep. < 1 mm
Slightly
rough
surfaces,
sep. < 1 mm
Rating
25
25
25
30
30
30
25
25
Ground water
condition
Description
Damp
Dry
Dry
Dry
Dry
Dry
Damp
Damp
Rating
10
15
15
15
15
15
10
10
RMRbasic
77
82
82
84
87
87
74
74
Half tunnels 371
10.00
100.00
1.00
10.00
100.00
Rock mass quality (Q)
Bht (m)
Bht = 1.7 Q0.4
B = 2 Q0.4
Fig. 25.2
Plot of rock mass quality Q vs span of half tunnel Bht.
Hard rock
Line of intersection
of 2 joint sets
Hill slope
Bht
Fig. 25.3
Half tunnel along hill roads in hard rocks.
372 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 25.3 Factors of safety for half tunnels based on wedge analysis.
Half
tunnel no.
K1
K2
K3
P1
P2
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
Factor of
safety
25.8
23.0
29.8
9.44
62.0
8.65
7.73
3.72
4.55
3.25
3.12
3.25
stable wedges. The factors of safety of the wedge analysis for the half tunnels are shown
in Table 25.3. The values range from 3 to 62.
25.4 STRESS DISTRIBUTION AROUND HALF TUNNEL
Results of the ﬁnite element analysis indicate the presence of compressive horizontal
(normal) stress in the ﬂoor of the half tunnel. Magnitude of the horizontal (normal) stress
increases along the ﬂoor of the half tunnel face towards the side wall. Horizontal stresses
near the slope-ﬂoor junction vary from 0.01 to 0.06 MPa (compressive) for various cases.
It varies between 0.31 to 0.93 MPa (compressive) near the wall-ﬂoor junction. On the
roof, the horizontal (normal) stress decreases towards the crown and becomes tensile
near the crown. On the roof, its magnitude varies from 0.06 to 0.47 MPa (compressive)
near the roof-wall junction and it varies from 0.01 to 0.06 MPa (tensile) near the crown.
On the wall the horizontal (normal) stress decreases towards the roof. It varies from 0.18
to 0.46 MPa (compressive) near the ﬂoor junction and it varies between 0.05 and 0.30 MPa
(compressive) near the roof junction.
The maximum vertical tensile stress is observed near the crown of half tunnel about
0.4 m above the roof surface. Its variation ranges from 0.026 to 0.13 MPa for various cases.
The variation of maximum tensile stress with span is shown in Fig. 25.4. Its magnitude is
1.1γBht to 1.5γBht, where Bht is half tunnel span. The value decreases with the ﬂattening
of the slope. The tensile stresses have also been observed at the junction of the ﬂoor and
the slope face. However, it becomes insigniﬁcant with the ﬂattening of the slopes. The
maximum tensile stress in the roof is much less than the tensile strength of discontinuities
(equation (8.21)). Therefore, it may be concluded that construction of half tunnels in hard
and steep slopes is safe provided the detailed study of discontinuity conﬁrm their stability.
Also at the time of construction if any loose blocks are met with, they should be scaled
down or spot-bolted.
These half tunnels had saved ecological disturbance because near vertical cut slopes
would be very costly and ecologically unsound. Looking at the deﬁnite beneﬁts that the
half tunnels promise, exhaustive efforts should be made to plan them in narrow valleys
with steep slopes characterized by massive and hard rocks.
Half tunnels 373
0
2
4
6
0
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
400
500
700
600
Slope
Roof Span (Bht), m
Maximum σy (Tensile), MPa
Fig. 25.4
Variation of maximum vertical tensile stress in roof with slope and span.
REFERENCES
Anbalagan, R., Singh, B. and Bhargava, P. (2003). Half tunnels along hills roads of Himalaya - An
innovative approach. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 18, 411-419.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, 6, 189-236.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1989). Engineering Rock Mass Classiﬁcation. John Wiley & Sons.
Singh, B. and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and Tunnelling
Hazards. A. A. Balkema (Swets & Zeitlinger), The Netherlands, 344.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
26
Contractual risk sharing
“Engineers have to take a calculated risk, persons become wiser after an accident. If they
were really wise, it was their duty to point out mistakes in the design to engineers.”
Karl Terzaghi
26.1 THE RISK
Risk is a basic element of life. Life without risk is inconceivable and undesirable. If all
risks were eliminated, the construction industry would cease to evolve. With the hope of
greater proﬁt, the contractor develops a new method accepting the risk that the method
may not result in loss of anticipated proﬁt. Without this element of risk he would lack
the initiative and the incentive to select new techniques or execute them. The owner also
assumes some risk when sponsoring a project, which may result in nullifying the projected
beneﬁts. It is well known, No risk! No gain!
While many risks in construction are inevitable, not all. Careful, thorough and detailed
planning and engineering analysis will identify most of them and ways can be devised
for avoiding some (the known) and lessening the trauma from those that are expected but
cannot be foreseen clearly enough to avoid completely (the unknowns, the inherent uncer-
tainties). The greatest need for sharing of risks is for occurrences that are not expected.
The execution of these plans through the construction phase must be directed towards
decisive action that will meet the planned objectives including the management of uncer-
tainties and the risks. Contingency plans and the methods for managing risks must be kept
up-to-date and revised to meet the actual situations/hazards which arise, in consultation
with all contractors.
Earlier, risks in tunnelling were smaller and lesser and could be more easily classiﬁed
and borne or handled by the various participants in a more equitable manner. But today’s
huge complex and imbalanced risks cannot be borne solely by one of the partners. Hence,
means for allocating and sharing these risks should be evolved for the common good of
the project construction organizations and its beneﬁciaries. The actual size and probability
of the risk involving cost, time, credibility, reputation and ability to perform are unknown
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
376 Tunnelling in weak rocks
but real. The existence and impact of these risks should be appreciated and means of
mutual beneﬁt found. Most risks are evaluated, minimized or eliminated and the cost of
doing this should be compared with an assessment of the original risk.
In too many instances the scramble to avoid risks by throwing them back and forth
has made the construction scene a battleﬁeld for lawyers, rather than an opportunity to
accomplish useful and lasting works. The interests of the construction industry would be
well served if more attention were directed to create a construction team composed of
owners, engineers, contractors, geologists and insurers, each contributing their special
expertise to solve common problems in the underground construction and each sharing
risks related to their capabilities (Kuesel, 1979).
Contributions have been made by many countries towards the object of deﬁning the
sources of risk in a contract and in establishing how best, in the interest of the com-
mon good, these are shared among the parties concerned. The latter, sharing of risks,
which builds upon practice in the UK and largely accepted in Austria and other European
countries has a number of essential features, the most important of which are:
(i) Generally attribute acceptance of risk to the party best able to control its inci-
dence (contractor) or, for minor risk, to make reasonable provision for its cost,
(ii) Provide appropriate encouragement to use methods of construction that show
best prospects, in the available knowledge at any time, of an economic result,
(iii) Provide appropriate ﬂexibility for change in construction methods to follow
the range of variation in ground and other conditions foreseeable by a knowl-
edgeable engineer and
(iv) Simple and equitable arrangements for disposal of disputes.
The US National Committee on Tunnelling Technology has given recommendations
on better contracting for underground construction which include:
(i) Sharing of risks and their costs between the owner and the contractor. The risks
are both construction risks and ﬁnancial,
(ii) Handling of claims are required to be expedited,
(iii) Innovation in construction should be stimulated,
(iv) The award of work to the qualiﬁed contractor should be assured and
(v) Cost savings by other means should be realized (NAS, 1976).
The need for better management and better contracting in underground construction
in US has been elaborated by Tillman (1981). Contracting practices for tunnelling have
been discussed in fair detail by Bhat (1986). Muirwood and Sauer (1981) describe (i) the
managerial principles for economic tunnelling resulting in a cheaper, faster and more
reliable project to the owner; (ii) greater scope for the ingenuity of the engineer and
(iii) the contractor with greater conﬁdence for a fair return for his skill and resources.
Contracting practices in European countries and USA are compared by Ribakoff
(1981). He concluded that a successful contract for both owner and contractor is
Contractual risk sharing
377
the product of a marriage between good contracting practices and good management
organization.
Samelson and Borcherding (1980) examined several barriers to productivity described
by foremen from ﬁve different construction sites as:
(i) waiting for decisions,
(ii) waiting for materials and tools and
(iii) rework.
In Japan (Paulson & Akit, 1980), decisions are made by consensus approach. Though
it takes time to achieve consensus; but once achieved it assures total commitment to the
successful outcome of the decision, and implementation is almost assured. It is hearten-
ing to know that some corporations act like parents to their workers and their beloved
children. May God prosper their love!
The International Tunnelling Association (ITA) Working Group on Contractual Shar-
ing of Risks, in cooperation with the International Federation of Consulting Engineers
(FIDIC) is preparing a standard contract for tunnelling work. The assessment of risk
and its sharing in tunnelling has been brought out by Duddeck (1987). He discussed three
categories of risks – functional, structural and contractual – and how they relate speciﬁcally
to the design and construction of underground openings. He stressed for an urgent need
for improved methods of risk assessment because the causes of functional and structural
failures are complex and often interrelated. He proposed a number of recommendations
concerning risk assessment.
Equitable sharing of risks means that the party bearing a greater part of the risk should
be entitled to a greater share of the beneﬁts or proﬁts and the other parties should have no
objection to it. If the sharing of risks is not equitable then there would be an imbalance
between the risks actually borne and the proﬁts made by the parties which may lead to
disputes or litigation and consequently to delays and a higher project cost.
By including a clause covering adjustment in unit price for unknown conditions, the
contractor is not tempted to escalate his item rates to cover the risk of adverse underground
conditions. Full disclosure of all subsurface data available with the owner/department to
the tenderers/bidders may lead to lower contract cost.
Disclaimer clauses relieving the owner of responsibility for the accuracy of the
underground data furnished should be deleted. If the disclaimer clauses cannot be elim-
inated completely from a contract at least their number should be reduced to minimize
malpractices. The absence of “changed conditions” provision in a contract will induce
the contractor to put a contingency amount in his bid. So incorporation of this clause
is beneﬁcial to the owner (Ribakoff, 1981). ITA recommends that a changed condition
clause be incorporated in all tunnelling contracts.
Departments should seek bids only from contractors having rigorous technical and
ﬁnancial pre-qualiﬁcation. It has now been realized that pre-qualiﬁcation of bidders is
as much a part of the construction as selecting a suitable contractor. The practice of
378 Tunnelling in weak rocks
calling pre-qualiﬁcation tenders by prospective bidders is being adopted in new projects.
Authority to settle claims, commensurate with the scope of the project, should be delegated
to both the representatives of the owner and of the contractors in the ﬁeld. The decision
of whether to use wrap-up insurance should remain with the owner.
A few sub-clauses under changed conditions clause as described below are suggested
for the inclusion in tender/contract documents, of tunnelling contracts globally if they
have not been considered by the owner.
“(a) The Contractor shall promptly, and before such conditions are disturbed, notify the
engineer-in-charge in writing of: (i) subsurface or latent physical conditions at the site
differing materially from those indicated in the contract, or (ii) unknown physical condi-
tions at site, of an unusual nature, differing materially from those ordinarily encountered
and generally recognised as inherent in work of the character provided for in this contract.
The engineer-in-charge shall promptly investigate the conditions, and if he ﬁnds that such
conditions do materially so differ and cause an increase or decrease in the contractor’s
cost of, or the time required for, performance of any part of the work under this contract,
whether or not changed as a result of such conditions; an equitable adjustment shall be
made and the contract modiﬁed in writing accordingly.”
“(b) No claim of the contractor under this clause shall be allowed unless the contractor has
given the notice required in (a) above, provided, however, the time prescribed therefore
may be extended by the government or the agency executing the contract.”
“(c) No claim by the contractor for an equitable adjustment hereunder shall be allowed
if asserted after ﬁnal payment under this contract.”
The Norwegian practice of risk sharing in tunnelling contracts has proved successful,
in that 80 percent of their proposed 2600 km of tunnels have been driven with equivalent
time risk sharing built into the contracts. No disputes with relevance to changed ground
conditions have been reported in the period after the risk sharing provisions were accepted
in their contracts (Kleivan & Aas, 1987).
Sharing of risks in tunnelling contracts and management of risks have been discussed
by Badarinath et al. (1988, 1989). A survey of opinions of tunnelling experts in Himalayan
projects indicated a low priority to sharing of risks whereas the ITA has realized its
importance and brought out recommendations on sharing of risks. Crisis decision analysis
is encouraged at the project site.
Risk is deﬁned as “the possibility of loss, injury, disadvantage or destruction.” That is,
risk is an adverse chance. It is necessary to have information as to how the problems
arise and with whom, what is the nature of the risks and how to alleviate them. Risks
which are either undeﬁned or unrecognized prior to the award of a contract cause much
grief later. Owners or government departments should realize that a fair contract with
equitable sharing of the risks according to the ability to assess and manage them would
lead to earlier completion dates at lesser costs. The current contracting practices lead
many tunnelling projects to wind up with tremendous increases in estimated cost, ﬁnancial
disasters, disputesandlitigation. Thesituationisaggravatedbytheenergycrisis, economic
Contractual risk sharing
379
uncertainty, crisis of terrorism and shortage of materials and equipment. At the same time,
if our industries are to develop their maximum technological potential, we must employ
contracting practices which will encourage development.
Risks in underground construction are related to a number of factors listed below:
1. Acts of God
28. Information
2. Accidents
29. Insurance
3. Acceleration or suspension of work
30. Investigation
4. Agencies involved
31. Labor
5. Allocation principles of risks
32. Materials
6. Costs
33. Management
7. Construction and construction failure
34. Managerial competence
8. Contract
35. Physical risks
9. Contractor/owner inherent
36. Political and social
10. Changed conditions
37. Public disorder
11. Defective design/work
38. Planning and scheduling
12. Decisions
39. Pilot works
13. Delays
40. Quantity variations
14. Data
41. Related to capability of individuals
15. Disclosures of information
42. Regulations
16. Disclaimers
43. Reimbursements
17. Design of supports
44. Resolving problems
18. Deductions
45. Responsibilities
19. Economic disasters
46. Site access
20. Environmental
47. Subsurface conditions
21. Evaluation
48. Subcontractor failure
22. Escalation
49. Shared risks
23. Equipment
50. Sociological problems
24. Funding and ﬁnancial failure
51. Support systems
25. Groundwater
52. Third party delays
26. Inﬂation
53. Union strife, and
27. Innovation
54. Water problems
26.2 MANAGEMENT OF RISK
Timely release of funds by the governments/departments would serve as a morale booster
for the contractor. Delay in running payments to the contractor affects the workmen
which certainly tell upon their efﬁciency. This is specially true in the dishonest poor
societies. Total commitment of executives increases the conﬁdence of contractors and
reduces accidents. If payment to the contractor is made quickly, tunnelling will be faster
naturally, due to quick reinvestment.
380 Tunnelling in weak rocks
The subject of risk involves responsibility, liability and accountability. The basic
principle of risk relationships is that the party taking the risk (contractor) should assume
the liability and either suffer consequences or reap the beneﬁts therefrom, depending
on the outcome of the endeavor (Egbert, 1981). An instrumentation program to probe
strata in advance of tunnelling in poor rocks and to study the adequacy of supports would
result in safety and economy.
Team spirit is very much lacking in poor countries in the government departments,
because of lack of mixing of top executives among junior staff and workers and a rigid
hierarchy. Very few top ofﬁcers associate themselves with the subordinates and their
problems. The spirit of mutual trust and beneﬁt is very important in the risk management.
In long tunnels, a number of contracts should be awarded for different reaches and
lengths of tunnels to introduce an element of fair competition and encourage better per-
formance. Another factor – energy management has nowadays become quite important
in view of the monopoly of oil rich nations. Moreover, these days top security should be
provided to all engineers and contractors against terrorists.
Fig. 26.1 represents the risks and risk sharing in tunnelling contracts. The risks in tun-
nelling contracts are related to the 19 factors recommended by the ITA. The risks inherent
in these factors should be shared equitably between the contractor, owner, engineer,
geologist and the insurer.
The engineers should be bold and try to take risk of new technologies (of interna-
tionally reputed corporations). The contract should include (i) clause for compensation to
contractor for an unexpected geological conditions or surprises, (ii) clause on innovations
by contractors and engineers on the basis of mutual agreements, (iii) clauses for ﬁrst and
second contingency plans for the preparedness and (iv) penalty for delays in construction.
Obviously, contract is not a licence for injustice to any party. Injustice done should be
corrected soon. The principle of crisis management is that one should not panic and one
should not spread panic. The right persons at right places contribute to success of projects
(according to Dr. V.M. Sharma).
The experience is that number of disputes increased rapidly, as the number of clauses
increased in a contract beyond a certain limiting number according to Prof. J.J.K. Daemen.
Therewasincreaseinlawsaftereveryundergrounddisasterbutitwascounter-productive.
A judicious liberty is essential for increasing efﬁciency of an organisation.
Our organising ability is increasing automatically and cyclically with time due to the
law of negative bioentropy (Singh & Gupta, 2003). Conﬂicts are beneﬁcial in increasing
our inner strength.
Fig. 26.2 is a conceptual model of risk sharing. The clauses or provisions in a tender/
contract document will either beneﬁt or adversely affect the interests of the persons
involved in any underground construction, namely, contractor, owner, engineer, geologist
and insurer. The parties (involved) share the risks inherent in underground construc-
tion in different proportions. For equitable sharing of risks, the party taking the greater
portion of the risk/s should be entitled to a greater share of the beneﬁts or proﬁts due
to increased costs. If the proﬁts to a party are not commensurate with the amount of
Contractual risk sharing
381
Changed condition Clauses
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
K
J
I
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
Full Disclosure of available subsurface information
Elimination of disclaimers
Pre-qualification of contractors
Contract variations in price
Disputes
Ground support
Ground characterization
Tendering and award of contracts
Mobilization of payments
Measurement problems in rock
Performance bonds
Coordinated insurance programme
Engineer’s role during construction
Right-of-way and permits
Provision of plant, equipment, services and
materials by the owner
Alternative tenders
Protection of project surrounds
Measurement problems related to water
Risks shared by parties to the contract:  Contractors, Owner, Engineer, Geologist and Insurer
Fig. 26.1
Risks and risk sharing in tunnelling contracts (ITA, 1988).
382 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Tender/Contract
clauses or provisions
Profit to
contractor
Loss to
contractor
Low Project
cost to owner
High project
cost to owner
Equitable
sharing of
risks
Low project
cost due to
engineer’s
action
High project
cost due to
engineer’s
action
Inequitable
sharing of
risks
Low project
cost due to
geologist’s
predictions
High project
cost due to
geologist’s
predictions
Compensation
paid by
insurer
Compensation
not paid by
insurer
Fig. 26.2
Conceptual model of risk sharing (Badrinath, 1991).
risk taken by it, it will be inequitable sharing of risks. Badrinath (1991) has developed
an expert system considering the ﬁve parties mentioned above. This software reveals
whether a tunnelling contract has the risks of the project justly and fairly shared between
the owner, engineer, contractor, insurer and the geologist responsible for execution of the
project. This expert system may be used to educate construction engineers and managers
to improve the contract documents for mutual beneﬁt of all concerned. Mutual beneﬁt and
trust may decrease the heavy size of contract for tunnelling these days.
Fig. 26.3 shows the relation between risk sharing and contract types. The types of
contracts could be turnkey, lump sum with ﬁxed price, lump sum with price escalation,
measurement of items, target amount and cost reimbursement contracts. Each of these
types has the risks shared between the owner and the contractor complementary to each
other (Kuesel, 1979). Another type of modern contract is BOT (build, operate and transfer
to owner).
The features of minimizing project cost (Sutcliffe, 1972) are shown in Fig. 26.4.
The total cost of the tunnel is a function of the economic factors and risk sharing. If the
Contractual risk sharing
383
Type of Contract
Turnkey
Lump Sum, Fixed Price
Lump Sum Price Escalation
Target
Cost Reimbursement
100%
0%
Owner’s Risk
0%
Contractor’s Risk
100%
Norwegian
Practice
Projects Cost
Fig. 26.3
Risk sharing and contract types (Kuesel, 1979; Barton et al., 1992).
Equitable
Inequitable
Excessive qualification
by contractor
Excessive powers
of owner
Risk sharing by owner
Qualification by contractor
2–7%
10–20%
90%
High
Low
Excessive shielding
of contractor from
risk
f (Economic factors,
risk sharing)
All Figures as Example Only
Increasing
fraction of
project cost
Contract
condition
Investigation
costs
Geological
uncertainty
Total cost
of project
Minimum possible cost
Fig. 26.4
Features of minimizing project cost (Sutcliffe, 1972).
investigations are thorough, the geological uncertainty is reduced as a result of the inves-
tigations, risks are shared by the owner and the contractor equitably and if the contractor
is qualiﬁed then the project cost can be minimized.
In the court of law, denial of contract is not valid without detailed reasoning. Fur-
ther, engineers owe contractors and sub-contractors an independent professional duty of
384 Tunnelling in weak rocks
care in the preparation of plans and speciﬁcations (ASCE, Civil Engineering, Vol. 73,
No. 12, 2003).
26.2.1 Risk management tools – fault tree analysis
Fault tree analysis can be used to analyze a single or combined causal connection
(relation) that precedes a negative event. Fault tree analysis is utilized either with or
without quantifying probabilities for events. By using this tool, complex problems with
many interacting events can be structured (Fig. 26.5). For further reading, refer Sturk
(1998) and Ang and Tang (1984).
In tunnelling, the best approach is a strategic approach for management of risk and
reduction of cost and time overruns, specially in the complex geological conditions.
So tunnel design is basically a decision analysis problem of uncertainty management.
26.2.2 Recommendations of international tunnelling association
(Eskesen et al., 2004)
(i) Tunnel failures have been the result of various reasons, such as insufﬁcient
site investigation, inadequate evaluation of risk at the planning stage, project
understafﬁng, and mistakes during construction and operation phases.
(ii) Provision may also be made for revised risk management plan and time schedule
as agreed between the parties when initial plan fails.
Failure of sub-sea
tunnel Project
Technical failure
Economical failure
Total collapse,
sea water fills
tunnel
Excavation does
not work
Too small
income
Too high cost
Investigation
misleading
Difficult rock
conditions
Insufficient
investigations
Too small
rock cover
Or gate
Or gate
And gate
6.64×10−3
6.5 ×10−4
6.0 ×10−3
1.5 ×10−4
5.0 ×10−4
1.0 ×10−3
5.0 ×10−3
5.0×10−2
1.0 ×10−2
5.0×10−3
3.0 ×10−2
Fig. 26.5
Example of a fault tree with “and gates” and “or gates” and evaluated probabilities for
an under-sea tunnel (Eskesen et al., 2004).
Contractual risk sharing
385
(iii) Due regard should be taken for common clauses for hazardous events such as,
(a) Complexity and maturity of the applied technology,
(b) Adverse unexpected ground and groundwater conditions (or geological
surprises),
(c) Subsidence on ground surface damaging structures and foundations,
(d) Technical and/or managerial incompetence (Chapter 27),
(e) Human factors and/or human errors,
(f ) Lack of sufﬁcient communication and coordination between internal and
external interfaces (workers) and
(g) Combinations of several unwanted events that individually are not neces-
sarily critical.
(iv) It should be stated in the tender documents that the contractor is responsible
for effective risk management, regardless of the extent and details of the risk
information deriving from the owner.
(v) The types of risk covered in contract are as follows.
(a) Risk to the health and safety of workers and third party people, including
personal injury and, in the extreme, loss of life;
(b) Risk to third party property, specially normal buildings, cultural heritage
buildings and infrastructure;
(c) Risks to the environment including pollution and damage to ﬂora and fauna;
(d) Risk to employer (owner) in delay to completion; and
(e) Risk of ﬁnancial loss to the employer (owner).
(vi) Risk mitigation measures should be identiﬁed as long as the costs of the
measures are not disproportionate with risk reduction obtained.
(vii) Tenderer may be allowed to modify his bid (technically and ﬁnancially) after
opening of tenders.
(viii) The tender offering lowest cost, on the basis of sum of bid price + risk cost +
upgradation of technology of ﬁrm and other costs (cost of delay + cost of
litigation + cost of side effects, etc.), may be accepted by the owner from
among a pre-selected list of pre-qualiﬁed ﬁrms.
(ix) Information and training should be given as necessary to all personnel
throughout the duration of a tunnelling project.
26.3 CONSTRUCTION PLANNING AND RISK
Owners should eliminate the known risk rather than try to transfer it. An active pre-contract
construction planning would eliminate construction hurdles before they become sources
of construction delays and disputes. This aspect is better done by the owner who has more
time and is in a better negotiating position. By allocating the risk of negotiating all con-
struction permits to the contractor, the owner would convert risk into a certainty rendering
the negotiations to be more hurried, less effective and more costly than if he himself had
386 Tunnelling in weak rocks
done the homework before calling tenders. Vagueness in tender statements leads to all
kinds of disputes. ITA Working Group on Health and Safety in Work had published
“Guidelines for Good Tunnelling Practice” in November 1985. Tunnel engineers may
ﬁnd it useful practice.
26.4 TIME AND COST ESTIMATES
Usually the long tunnel projects take 5–10 years in complex geological conditions from
the start of conceptual design till delivery of the scheme to the owners. A casual observer
may consider it too long a period, but they are in most cases quite short accounting
for the complexities of the project. In early optimistic days of the project, the owner
must make estimates of time and cost stretching over many years, but actually based
on little solid information. The early estimates are publicized and become frozen. Any
subsequent changes even though based on more accurate data available later are suspect
in the public eye and result in a loss of reputation of the engineer and his profession. The
time of completion is affected by confusion in risk assessment. There is penalty clause
for delay in completion of projects and reward for early completion of the same. Owners
assess penalties for late completion, but contractors inﬂate their bids for unreasonable
schedules and ﬁght back through the courts for extra payments, much to the detriment
of the owner. Thus, sufﬁcient time should be allotted for the long tunnelling projects,
after careful thought and based on the construction times of similar completed projects.
While imposing a penalty on the contractor for late completion the opposite should be
included, that is, payment of a bonus for early completion at a still higher rate to serve
as an incentive. Delays and costs due to the owner’s decision and approval processes and
for his changeover on which the owner himself may have little control, should be allowed
in the contract. Means for providing necessary reimbursement and time and for reducing
or eliminating costly standby time should be found. The cost of prevention of loss and
risk is far more than the cost of loss. The contractor should recognize them and provide
measures for equitable risk sharing without including such risk factors into his bid.
The owner should work out the cost of time which is revenue earned per day on com-
pletion of the project. The ﬁnancial incentives to the contractor for an early completion of
tunnel should be proportional to the cost of time. The rules should not be rigid, but ﬂexible
and should be humanitarian. Failure is not a punishable offence. Justice should be to the
satisfaction of all (Mahatma Gandhi). Let us work for glory of God within us.
“Better risk management leads to better rate of tunnelling.”
REFERENCES
Ang, A. H.-S. and Tang, W. H. (1984). Probability Concepts in Engineering Planning and Design.
Decision, Risk and Reliability. Vol. II., Wiley, New York.
Contractual risk sharing
387
Badrinath, H. S., Verma, M. and Singh, B. (1988). Effect of management conditions in planning
tunnel construction. CBIP, International Symposium on Tunnelling for Water Resources
and Power Projects, New Delhi, 53-57.
Badrinath, H. S., Verma, M. and Singh, B. (1989). Learning and experience curves as a manage-
ment tool in tunnel construction. Proc. National Seminar on Productivity in Construction
Industry, MITS Gwalior, India, 82-98.
Badrinath, H. S. (1991). Development of expert system for contractual risk sharing in tunnel
construction. W.R.D.T.C., IIT Roorkee, India, 183.
Barton, N., Grimstad, E., Aas, A. Opsahl, O. A., Bakken, A., Pederson and Johansen, E. D. (1992).
Norwegian method of tunnelling. World Tunnelling, June and August 1992, UK.
Bhat, H. S. (1986). Contracting practices for tunnelling. Workshop on Rock Mechanics Problems
of Tunnelling and Mine Roadways, Srinagar, 6.4.0-6.4.14.
Duddeck, H. (1987). Risk assessment and risk sharing in tunnelling. Tunnelling and Underground
Space Technology, 2(3), 315-317.
Egbert, J. S. (1981). Construction management of Washington metro. Proc. RETC, 2, 1612-1626.
Eskesen, S. D., Tengborg, P., Kampmann, J. and Veicherts, T. H. (2004). Guidelines for tunnelling
risk management: international tunnelling association, Working Group No. 2. Tunnelling
and Underground Space Technology, 19, 217-237.
Klevian, E. and Aas, G. (1987). Norwegian practice of risk sharing in tunnelling contracts,
underground hydropower plants. Proc. Int. Conf. Hydropower, Oslo, Norway, 1, 65-73.
Kuesel, T. R. (1979). Allocation of risks. Proc. RETC, 2, 1713-1724.
Muirwood, A. M. and Sauer, G. (1981). Efﬁcacy and Equity of the Management of Large
Underground Projects. Proc. RETC, 2, 1032-1044.
NAS (1976). Recommendations on Better Contracting for Underground Construction. National
Research Council. Washington, DC, 151.
Paulson, B. C. and Akit (1980). Construction Management in Japan. ASCE, JOCD, 106(Co3),
281-296.
Ribakoff, S. (1981). European vs US Construction Contracting Practices. Proc. RETC, 2,
1575-1583.
Samelson, N. M. and Borcherding, J. D. (1980). Motivating Foremen on Large Construction
Projects. ASCE, JOCD, 106(CO1), 29-36.
Singh, Bhawani and Gupta, I. (2003). Wonderful law of negative entropy of healthy beings –
applications. Conference on Materials Components and Applications, Kalinga Institute of
Industrial Technology, Bhubneshwar.
Sturk, R. (1998). Engineering Geological Information – Its value and Impact on Tunnelling.
Doctoral thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
Sutcliffe, H. (1972). Owner-Engineer-Contractor-Relationship in Tunnelling-an engineer’s point of
view. Proc. RETC. 1, 815-828.
Tillman, E. A. (1981). Better Contracting and Better Management for Major Underground
Construction Projects. Proc. RETC. 2, 1563-1574.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
27
Rate of tunnelling
“Most human beings experience a certain amount of fear when confronted with change.
The level varies from moderate dislike to intense hatred. One of the few things stronger
than fear of change is love of money. Structure the change so that it provides a potential
for proﬁt and the change will happen.”
“At some point in time the urgings of pundits, the theories of scientists and the
calculations of engineers has to be translated into something that the miner can use to
drive tunnel better, faster and cheaper. We shall call this change.”
Excerpts of the report prepared by Baker, Robert, F. et al.
27.1 INTRODUCTION
Excavation of tunnels are affected by many uncertainties. The probable time for comple-
tion of tunnelling projects has been grossly underestimated in many cases. This is because
proper evaluation of the factors that affect the rate of tunnel excavation is not made.
The factors which affect tunnel excavation may be enumerated as:
(i) variation in ground/job conditions and geological problems encountered,
(ii) quality of management and managerial problems and
(iii) various types of breakdown or hold ups.
The ﬁrst of these is very important, because for different types of ground conditions,
the rate of tunnel driving is different. For example, the tunnelling rate is lower in poor
ground conditions. Moreover, depending upon the ground conditions, different methods
of excavation are adopted for optimum advance per round, so that the excavated rock
could be supported within the bridge action period or the stand-up time. Frequent changes
in ground conditions seriously affect the tunnelling rate because not only the support but
also the excavation method needs to be changed. This is perhaps a major reason why the
use of TBMs has not picked up for tunnelling in the Himalaya.
The second factor affects the rate of tunnelling differently due to different management
conditions even in the same type of ground condition. The past experience has been that
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
390 Tunnelling in weak rocks
poor management condition affected tunnelling rate more adversely than poor rock mass
condition.
The third factor pertains to the breakdowns or hold ups during various operations in
tunnelling cycle. These hold ups cause delays which are random in nature. Based on the
data collected from many projects, Chauhan (1982) proposed a classiﬁcation for realistic
assessment of rate of tunnelling presented in the following sections.
27.2 CLASSIFICATION OF GROUND/JOB CONDITIONS FOR RATE OF
TUNNELLING
The rate of tunnelling is seriously affected by the ground conditions. The factors, under
the ground condition, affecting the rate of tunnelling are (Terzaghi, 1946; Bieniawski,
1973, 1974; Barton et al., 1974).
(i) Geology, such as, type of rock, RQD, joint system, dip and strike of strata,
presence of major fault or thrust zones and their frequencies and type and rock
mass properties,
(ii) Method of excavation including blast pattern and drilling arrangement,
(iii) Type of support system and its capacity,
(iv) Inﬂow of water,
(v) Presence of inﬂammable gases,
(vi) Size and shape of tunnel,
(vii) Constructionaditswhetherhorizontalorinclined, theirgradesizeandlengthand
(viii) High temperature in very deep tunnels (H > 1000 m).
On the basis of the above factors affecting the rate of tunnelling, the ground conditions
are classiﬁed into three categories – good, fair and poor (Table 27.1). It means that for
the good ground conditions the rate of tunnelling will be higher and for the poor ground
conditions the rate of tunnelling will be lower. The job/ground conditions in Table 27.1
are presented in order of their weightage to the rate of tunnelling.
27.3 CLASSIFICATION OF MANAGEMENT CONDITIONS FOR RATE OF
TUNNELLING
The rate of tunnelling may vary in the same ground condition depending upon management
quality. The factors affecting management conditions are:
(i) Overall job planning, including selection of equipment and decision-making
process,
(ii) Training of personnel,
(iii) Equipment availability including parts and preventive maintenance,
Rate of tunnelling
391
Table 27.1 Classiﬁcation of ground/job condition (Chauhan, 1982).
Job conditions
S. No.
Parameter
Good
Fair
Poor
1.
Geologic structure
Hard, intact,
massive stratiﬁed
or schistose,
moderately
jointed, blocky
and seamy
Very blocky and
seamy squeezing
at moderate
depth
Completely crushed,
swelling and
squeezing at great
depth
2.(a)
Point load strength
index
>2 MPa
1–2 MPa
Index cannot be
determined but is
usually less than
1 MPa
(b)
Uniaxial
compressive
strength
>44 MPa
22–44 MPa
<22 MPa
3.
Contact zones
Fair to good or poor
to good rocks
Good to fair or poor
to fair rocks
Good to poor or fair to
poor rocks
4.
Rock quality
designation
(RQD)
60–100 %
25–60 %
<25%
5.(a)
Joint formation
Moderately jointed
to massive
Closely jointed
Very closely jointed
(b)
Joint spacing
>0.2 m
0.05–0.2 m
<0.05 m
6.(a)
Joint orientation
Very favorable,
favorable and
fair
Unfavorable
Very unfavorable
(b)
Strike of tunnel
axis and dip with
respect to tunnel
driving
(i) Perpendicular
20 to 90◦along
dip, 45 to 90◦
against dip
(i) Perpendicular
20 to 45◦
against dip
(i) Parallel 45 to 90◦
(ii) Parallel 20
to 45◦
(ii) Irrespective of
strike 0 to 20◦
–
7.
Inﬂammable gases
Not present
Not present
May be present
8.
Water inﬂow
None to slight
Moderate
Heavy
9.
Normal drilling
depth/round
>2.5 m
1.2 m–2.5 m
<1.2 m
10.
Bridge action
period
>36 h
8–36 h
<8 h
Note: The geologist’s predictions based on investigation data and laboratory and site tests include information
on parameters at S. Nos. 1 to 6. This information is considered adequate for classifying the job conditions
approximately.
392 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(iv) Operating supervision,
(v) Incentives to workmen,
(vi) Co-ordination,
(vii) Punctuality of staff,
(viii) Environmental conditions and
(ix) Rapport and communication at all levels.
These factors affect the rate of tunnelling both individually and collectively. Each
factor is assigned a weighted rating (Table 27.2). The maximum rating possible in each
subgroup has also been assigned out of 100 in Table 27.2 that represents ideal conditions.
At a particular site the rating of all the factors is added to obtain a collective classiﬁcation
rating for management condition. Using this rating, the management condition has been
classiﬁed into good, fair and poor as shown in Table 27.3. The proposed classiﬁcation
system for management is valid for tunnels longer than 500 m, which are excavated by
conventional drilling and blasting method.
It may be noted that the rate of tunnelling can be easily improved by improving the
management condition which is manageable unlike the ground conditions which cannot be
changed. So, it is necessary to pay at least equal, if not more, attention to the management
condition than to the ground condition. Hence, there is an urgent need for management
consultancy for improving the tunnelling rate.
The key to success of tunnel engineers is evolution of a ﬂexible method of construction
of support system. On-spot strengthening of support system is done by spraying additional
layers of shotcrete/SFRS or using long rock bolts in the unexpectedly poor geological
conditions. This is a sound strategy of management in tunnelling within the complex
geological situations. Affection is the key to success in the management. Young engineers
love challenging works. There should be no hesitation in throwing challenges to young
engineers. Otherwise these young engineers may loose interest in routine management.
27.4 COMBINED EFFECT OF GROUND AND MANAGEMENT
CONDITIONS ON RATE OF TUNNELLING
A combined classiﬁcation system for ground conditions and management conditions has
been developed by Chauhan (1982). Each of the three ground conditions has been divided
into three management conditions and thus nine categories have been obtained considering
both ground and management conditions. The ﬁeld data of six tunnelling projects in the
Indian Himalayas have been divided into these nine categories for studying the combined
effect. Each category has three performance parameters which are:
(i) Actual working time (AWT),
(ii) Breakdown time (BDT) and
(iii) Advance per round (APR).
Table 27.2 Ratings for management factors for long tunnels (Chauhan, 1982).
Remarks for improvement in management
S. No.
Subgroup
Item
Maximum rating for
condition
Item
Subgroup
1.
Overall job
planning
i) Selection of construction plant and
equipment including estimation of optimal
size and number of machines required for
achieving ideal progress.
7
ii) Adoption of correct drilling pattern and use
of proper electric delays.
6
iii) Estimation and deployment of requisite
number of workmen and supervisors for
ideal progress.
5
iv) Judicious selection of construction method,
adits, location of portals, etc.
4
Horizontal adits sloping at the rate of 7%
towards portal to be preferred to inclined
adits or vertical shafts.
v) Use of twin rail track
2
vi) Timely shifting of California switch at
the heading
2
26
2.
Training of
personnel
i) Skill of drilling crew in the correct holding,
alignment and thrust application on drilling
machines
4
Proper control of drilling and blasting will
ensure high percentage of advance from the
given drilling depth and also good
fragmentation of rock which facilitates
mucking operation.
ii) Skill of muck loader operator
4
Continued
Table 27.2—Continued
Remarks for improvement in management
S. No.
Subgroup
Item
Maximum rating for
condition
Item
Subgroup
iii) Skill of crew in support erection
3
A skilled crew should not take more than 1/2 h
for erection of one set of steel rib support.
iv) Skill of blastman
2
v) Skill of other crews
2
15
3.
Equipment
availability and
preventive
maintenance
Time lost in tunnelling cycle due to breakdowns
of equipment including derailments, etc.
i) upto 1 h.
12–15
ii) 1–2 h.
9–11
iii) 2–3 h.
6–8
iv) >3 h.
0–5
15
4.
Operation
supervision
i) Supervision of drilling and blasting
(effectiveness depends on location, depth
and inclination of drill holes, proper
tamping and use of blasting delays)
7
Improper drilling may result in producing:
i) unequal depth of holes which results in
lesser advance per meter of drilling
depth and
ii) wrong alignment of hole which may
lead to :
a) overbreak due to wrong inclination of
periphery holes and
b) secondary blasting due to wrong
inclination of other than periphery holes
Item
Subgroup
Improper tamping of blast hole charge and
wrong use of blasting delays result in
improper blasting effects.
ii) Supervision of muck loading/hauling
system
3
Especially in rail haulage system in which rapid feeding
of mine cars to loading machine at the heading is
essential for increasing productivity of loader.
iii) Supervision of rib erection, blocking and
packing
3
iv) Other items of supervision such as scaling,
layout, etc.
2
15
5.
Incentive to
workmen
i) Progress bonus
5
Deﬁne the datum monthly progress as that value which
delineates good and fair management conditions for
a particular job conditions. Introduce bonus slabs for
every additional 5 m progress and distribute the total
monthly bonus thus earned amongst the workmen on
the basis of their importance, skill and number of
days worked during the month. The amount for each
slab should be so ﬁxed that these are progressive and
each worker should get about 50% of his monthly
salary as progress bonus, if ideal monthly progress
is achieved.
ii) Incentive bonus
2
This should be given for certain difﬁcult and
hazardous manual operations like rib
erection/shear zone treatment, etc.
Continued
Table 27.2—Continued
Remarks for improvement in management
S. No.
Subgroup
Item
Maximum rating for
condition
Item
Subgroup
iii) Performance bonus
1
This should be given to the entire tunnel crew
equally if the quarterly progress target
is achieved.
iv) Achievement bonus
1
9
It is to be given for completion of whole project
on schedule. It should be given to the whole
construction crew and may be equal to one
year’s interest on capital cost.
6.
Co-ordination
i) Co-ordination of activities of various crews
inside the tunnel.
5
Co-ordination between designers and construction
engineers should be given top priority.
Designers should be boldly innovative.
ii) Use of CPM for overall perspective and
control of the whole job.
4
9
Safety saves money. Contingency and emergency
plans should be ready before tunnelling.
7.
Environmental
conditions and
housekeeping
Proper lighting, dewatering, ventilation, provision
of safety wear to workmen and general job
cleanliness.
4
4
8.
Punctuality of
staff
i) Prompt shift change-over at the heading
4
ii) Loss of upto 1/3 h in shift change-over
3
iii) Loss of more than 1/3 h in shift change-over
0–2
4
9.
Rapport and
communication
Commitment, good rapport and communication
at all levels of working including top
management and government level including
human relations.
3
3
Team spirit is the key to success in underground
construction. The contractors have to be made
to succeed.
Rate of tunnelling
397
Table 27.3 Rating for different management conditions (Chauhan, 1982).
S. No.
Management condition
Rating
1.
Good
80–100
2.
Fair
51–79
3.
Poor
≤50
Table 27.4 Ground and management factors (Chauhan, 1982).
Ground conditions
Management conditions
Good
Fair
Poor
Good
0.78
0.60
0.44
Fair
0.53
0.32
0.18
Poor
0.30
0.21
0.13
A matrix of job and management factors has been developed from the data for
evaluating tunnel advance rate as given in Table 27.4.
Ground and management factors in the matrix are deﬁned as a ratio of actual monthly
progress to achievable monthly progress under corresponding set of ground and man-
agement conditions. Knowing the achievable production for a tunnelling project, these
factors could hopefully yield values of expected production under different management
and geological conditions on the project.
Thus, in squeezing ground conditions, the rate of tunnelling would be only 13 per-
cent of the theoretical rate for poor management condition. Past experience suggests that
management tends to relax in good tunnelling conditions and becomes alert and active in
poor rock conditions.
Further studies are needed to update Table 27.2 to 27.4 for modern tunnelling
technology. Trends are expected to be similar.
Management of world bank-funded projects is an ideal example. They appoint inter-
national experts on rock mechanics on their hydroelectric projects. In major state-funded
projects, international experts on rock mechanics should be appointed as the Board of
Consultants, as in the past. The international experts help to achieve self-reliance.
27.5 TUNNEL MANAGEMENT (SINGH, 1993)
The management is the topmost art, demanding strength of character, intelligence and
experience. Deﬁciencies in management are, therefore, difﬁcult to remove. Experience
is not what happens to you, it is what you do with what happens to you. Everyone is
potentially a high performer and motivation comes from top. What gloriﬁes self-respect
automatically improves one’s efﬁciency. Often interference by the manager mars the ini-
tiative of the young engineers. Feedback is essential to improve performance, just like
398 Tunnelling in weak rocks
feedback is very important for the stability of the governing system in electronics. Efﬁ-
cient clear communication of orders to concerned workers and their feedback is essential
for success of management. Computer network and cell phones are used now-a-days for
better informal rapport at a project site. The modern management is committed to visi-
ble management. The defeatist attitude should be defeated. The leader should have the
willpower to complete the vast project. There should be respect for individual in the orga-
nization. Happier the individual, more successful he will be. If you want to be happy for
whole life, love your work.
Tunnel construction is a complex, challenging and hazardous profession. It demands
certainly a high skill in the leadership, technology and communication. On the spot
decisions are needed in a crisis during tunnelling. Mutual respect between government
engineers and contractors is need of the time. That is what privatization stands for.
Usually bad news does not travel upwards to the executive management. Basic ingredient
in management is trust. Quality consciousness should be the culture of a construction
agency. Is quality work possible in government due to lack of creative freedom? Work of
good quality is possible in fact by framing proper speciﬁcations in a contract document.
Contractor’s point of view is that payments should be made early for quick reinvestment.
Unfortunately, construction industries are unorganized at present in many countries. With
increasing trend for global organization, efﬁciency will go upwards in the future. No two
construction jobs are alike. It is, therefore, very difﬁcult to evolve a system (of stock-
piles of materials, ﬂeet of tunnelling machines, etc.) for a new project site. Construction
problems vary so much from job to job that they defy tenders, machines and known
methods. Then a contractor uses ingenuity to design tools and techniques that will lead
to success in tunnelling. Machines may be used for various other purposes with slight
modiﬁcations, beyond imagination. Excellent companies are really close to their cus-
tomer (engineers) and pay them high regards. Their survival depends upon the engineer’s
satisfaction.
Critical path analysis, if properly applied and used, can be a great help to any construc-
tion agency, specially in a tunnelling job. Use of software for critical path analysis for cost
control is most effective and economical. Then co-ordination among workers becomes
easy. Naturally a management organization becomes more efﬁcient during crisis. Cost
consciousness must permeate all ranks of engineers and workers. Organization set-up is
the back-bone of a long tunnelling project.
The completion of a hydroproject is delayed by the completion of long length of
tunnels in weak and complex geological conditions. So, the idea of substantial bonus for
early completion is becoming more widespread.
27.6 POOR TENDER SPECIFICATIONS
Tendering for tunnelling projects remains speculation, since actual ground conditions
encountered during construction often do not match the conditions shown in the tender
Rate of tunnelling
399
speciﬁcations, particularly in the Himalayas, young mountains and complex geologi-
cal environment. The practice of adopting payment rates according to actual ground
condition does not exist. Insufﬁcient geological, hydrogeological and geo-technical inves-
tigations and poor estimates, etc. invariably lead to owner–contractor conﬂicts, delay in
projects, arbitration and escalation of project cost, generally by three times. Following
are some of the main reasons attributed to this poor tunnelling scenario in developing
nations.
(i) Inadequate geological investigations and absence of rock mechanics apprecia-
tion before inviting a tender bid, resulting in major geological surprises during
execution.
(ii) Lack of proper planning, sketchy and incompetent preparation of designs at
pre-tender stage.
(iii) Unrealistic projection of cost estimates and cost beneﬁt ratio and completion
schedules at initial stages.
(iv) Inadequate infrastructure facilities at site.
(v) Unrealistic and unfair contract conditions and poor proﬁt margins leading to
major disputes and delays in dispute resolution.
(vi) Lack of motivation and commitment on the part of owners, especially
government departments and public sector agencies.
(vii) Lack of speciﬁc provisions in the tender document itself with regard to modern
technology.
(viii) Lack of teamwork between the owner, the contractor, the geologist and the rock
mechanics expert.
(ix) Risk sharing between contractor and owner is generally not fair.
(x) Lack of indigenous construction technology in developing nations.
It is important here to emphasize that though sufﬁcient expertise is available in the
world in the tunnelling technology, the administration seldom takes advantage of the
intellectual resources in the right perspective at the right time.
27.7 CONTRACTING PRACTICE
On some occasions, it is the inexperience or incompetence of the contractor that has
delayed a project. Sometimes lack of strategy, weak project team and inadequate attention
from the top management also result in delays and slippage. In some cases, contractors
are found ill-equipped and starved of cash, besides lacking in professionalism. Just to
grab the project deal, they compromise on rates. Finding very low proﬁts when the work
starts, they raise unreasonable claims and disputes to improve proﬁt margin which results
in disputes followed by arbitration, delays and time and cost over-runs in some developing
countries.
400 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Following measures are suggested to avoid delays in project schedules and cost
escalation due to contractors.
(i) In the pre-bid meeting, an objective evaluation of potential contractors should
be made and inefﬁcient contractors should be eliminated at this stage itself.
(ii) Award of contract should be granted to a group of contractors, each expert in
speciﬁcactivitieslikedesign, tunnellingmachines, construction, rockmechanics,
geology, etc. By this process, the project authorities will have the beneﬁt of the
services of a team of competent contractors.
(iii) Contractors should induct trained and experienced staff and should under-
take technology upgradation programmes on continuous basis. They should
take active assistance during project commissioning from technical experts of
R&D organizations. This will equip them to handle major geological surprises,
substantiate their claims and economize their routine operations.
27.8 QUALITY MANAGEMENT BY INTERNATIONAL TUNNELLING
ASSOCIATION
Oggeri and Ova (2004) have suggested the following principles of quality management
for tunnelling.
(i) Quality in tunnelling means knowledge. Knowledge is necessary to answer
correctly to the requirement of the design. Knowledge is necessary to “learn”
and “copy” better what previous designers have done.
(ii) Experience, good contracts, professionalism, self-responsibility and simple
rules are the basis to reach the objectives of design and perform properly.
(iii) Successful planning is the key to a successful project.
(iv) Transfer of information both upwards and downwards in an organization, in a
format understood by all, is the key issue.
(v) There is direct, linear relation between project quality and project cost.
(vi) Design a strategy of tunnelling in all possible ground conditions at a project.
(vii) Tunnelling projects are well suited for “on-the-job training,” since large projects
use state-of-the-art technology. Engineers should participate in the international
tunnelling conferences and meet the specialists and report their difﬁculties.
(viii) If a process is innovative, a testing program prior to the productions should be
conducted.
(ix) All along the project a co-ordination of activities is necessary in order to
achieve signiﬁcant results for: (a) technical features, (b) economical results,
(c) contractual agreements, (d) environmental effects and (e) safety standards.
(x) Correct choice is essential for the type of contract, conditions of contract,
ﬁnancing and procurement procedures for equipment.
Rate of tunnelling
401
(xi) Knowledge is transferred not only between parties during project phases, but
also to parties after completion of a project, including the universities and other
technical organizations.
An integrated approach of tunnelling is need of the time.
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel supports. Rock Mech., Springer-Verlag, 6(4), 189-236.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1973). Engineering classiﬁcation of jointed rock masses. Trans. S. Afr. Inst. Civil
Engrs., 15, 335-342.
Bieniawski, Z. T. (1974). Geomechanics classiﬁcation of rock masses and its application in
tunnelling. Proc. 3rd Int. Cong. Rock Mech., ISRM, Denver, VIIA, 27-32.
Chauhan, R. L. (1982). A simulation study of tunnel excavation. PhD thesis, University of Roorkee,
now IIT Roorkee, India.
Oggeri, C. and Ova, G. (2004). Quality in tunnelling. Tunnelling & Underground Space Technology,
19, 239-272.
Singh, Jagman (1993). Heavy Construction Planning, Equipment and Methods. Oxford and IBH
Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1084.
Terzaghi, K. (1946). Rock Defects and Load on Tunnel Supports - Introduction to Rock Tunnelling
with Steel Supports. Ed: R. V. Proctor, and T. L. White, Commercial Shearing and Stamping
Co., Youngstown, Ohio, USA, 278.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
28
Integrated method of tunnelling
“Excellence is not an act but a habit.”
Aristotle
28.1 INTRODUCTION
Tunnelling is an art practiced by all engineers, geologists, planners and people. Failures
should be regarded as challenges and opportunities for generating new knowledge and
thereby increasing self-reliance in the tunnelling. The key to success is team spirit and
love for rocks and nature.
The most challenging construction problem is the squeezing ground condition which
is encountered in weak rock masses under high rock cover. Special treatment is necessary
to support shear zones in the tunnels.
The philosophy of design of any underground excavation should be to utilize the rock
mass itself as the principal structural materials, creating as little disturbance as possible
during the excavation process and adding as little as possible in the way of shotcrete
or steel supports. The extent to which this design aim can be met depends upon the
geological conditions which exist at site and the extent to which the designer is aware of
these conditions.
There are many difﬁcult geological conditions and extraordinary geological occur-
rences (EGO) such as intra-thrust zones, very wide shear zones, geothermal zones of high
temperature, cold/hot water springs, water charged rock masses, intrusions, etc. These are
very difﬁcult to forecast. Innovative methods of tunnelling will have to be invented and
experts must be consulted.
In view of the difﬁculties in forecasting geological formations along deep and long tun-
nels particularly in complex geological environment, the suggested strategy of tunnelling
is such that tunnelling could be done smoothly in usually all ground conditions. Authors
recommend strongly, the adoption of the steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) to cope
up with even squeezing ground conditions. The use of steel ribs should be restricted to
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
404 Tunnelling in weak rocks
highly squeezing or swelling rock conditions only. This integrated method of tunnelling
is accepted by Bureau of Indian Standards, India.
28.2 PROBE HOLES
Long tunnels, sometimes pass through the complex geological conditions particularly in
case of deep tunnel. Geological predictions in deep tunnel are hard to make on the basis
of surface observations. If the site conditions require, probe drill holes of about 75 mm
diam. may be made at the face of the tunnel for about 20 m length. This probe hole will
give reliable geological and geotechnical informations in advance of tunnelling. It will
also help in suggesting the strategy of tunnelling.
28.3 EFFECT OF SEISMICITY
A tunnel in a seismic area, is likely to be affected near the portals and in neighborhood of
faults and thrust. The effect is observed to be upto a distance along tunnel within ±B on
both sides of the faults/thrusts, where ±B is span/size of the opening. The design support
pressure in the affected length of the tunnel may be taken as 1.25 times of the ultimate
support pressure.
28.4 TUNNEL INSTRUMENTATION
Instrumentation of tunnel openings should be done where squeezing ground condition
is expected. The survival rate of tunnel instruments is generally as low as 30 percent,
therefore many sections of the tunnel should be instrumented so that enough instruments
survive and reliable data is obtained. The post-monitoring of support system in squeezing
ground should also be carried out until support system has stabilized with time. In cases
of squeezing ground conditions, observed vertical and horizontal tunnel closures should
be less than 4 percent of tunnel width and height, respectively and rate of deformation is
less than 2–3mm/month before concrete lining is built.
Instrumentation may also be done at other locations as per need of the site conditions.
It should be kept in mind that the psychology of construction engineers is such that they
resist every effort, which reduces the momentum of enthusiasm of construction.
The displacements are measured by multipoint borehole extensometers. Extra long
rock anchors may have to be installed where rate of displacement is not decreasing rapidly.
The support pressures are determined by load cells and pressure cells. The tunnel closure
is obtained by tape extensometers. Displacements across cracks in shotcrete and rock
Integrated method of tunnelling
405
mass are monitored by 3D crackmeter. Grouting of cracks may be done after movements
across cracks have stabilized. It is also essential to monitor the rate of seepage with the
help of “V” notch at the end of the tunnel. If seepage is observed to increase with time,
there is every danger of failure and ﬂooding of tunnel within water-charged rock mass
(crushed quartzite/sandstone/hard rocks, dolomite, shear zones, faults, etc.). Sometimes
wide faults (>10 m) are met during tunnelling. They require attention of experts. In case
of soft ground or soil like gouge within wide faults, the tunnel lining should be designed
using design method of ITA (Duddeck and Erdmann, 1985). Chapter 14 discusses details
of instrumentation.
28.5 SELECTION OF TYPE OF SUPPORT SYSTEM
Before taking up the design of supports, the rock load and pressure likely to act on the
supports shall be estimated. The determination of rock load is complex problem. This
complexity is due to the inherent difﬁculty of predicting the primary stress conditions
in the rock mass (prior to excavation) and also due to the fact that the magnitude of
the secondary pressure developing after the excavation of the cavity depends on a large
number of variables, such as size and shape of cavity, depth of cover, strike and dip of
rock formation in relation to alignment of tunnel, method of excavation, period of time
elapsing before rock is supported and the rigidity of support. These pressures may not
develop immediately after excavation but may take a long period due to the adjustment
of displacements in the rock mass with time.
In major tunnels it is recommended that as excavation proceeds, load cell measure-
ments and diametrical change measurements are carried out, so that rock loads may be
correctly estimated. In the absence of any data of instrumentation, rock load or support
pressure may be estimated by Q-system (see Chapter 5).
As the tunnels generally pass through different types of rock formations, it may be
necessary to workout alternative cross sections of the tunnel depicting other acceptable
types of support systems. These types may be selected to match the various methods of
attack that may have to be employed to get through the various kinds of rock formations
likely to be encountered. “A” and “B” lines shall be shown on these sections.
The support system shall be strong enough to carry the ultimate loads. For a reinforced
concrete lining, it is economical to consider the (steel ribs) supports as an integral part
of the permanent lining. Temporary support system must be installed within the stand-up
time for safety of workmen but not too early.
The aim, in a nut shell, is to construct an inherently stable and robust yet ductile
structural system (reinforced rock arch or ring and SFRS) to support a wide variety
of ground conditions and weak zones, keeping in mind basic tunnel mechanics and the
inherent uncertainities in the exploration, testing and behavior of geological materials.
406 Tunnelling in weak rocks
28.6 STEEL FIBER REINFORCED SHOTCRETE
The steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete is either alone or in combination with rock bolts,
specially in large openings, provides a good and fast solution for both initial and perma-
nent rock support. Being ductile, it can absorb considerable deformation before failure.
The SFRS can withstand bending stresses, caused by faults.
There are two beneﬁts of excellent bond between shotcrete lining and surface of
opening in rocks, as follows:
• Support pressures are reduced effectively even in squeezing grounds and
• Bending stresses are not found to occur in the shotcrete lining due to bonding.
As such it fails generally in shear only.
Controlled blasting should be used preferably. The advantage of ﬁber reinforced
shotcrete is that a smaller thickness of shotcrete is needed, in comparison to that of con-
ventional shotcrete (Fig. 28.1). Fiber reinforced shotcrete is required, specially in rock
conditions where support pressure is high. Use of ﬁber-reinforced shotcrete along with the
resin anchors is also recommended for controlling rock burst conditions because of high
fracture toughness of shotcrete due to specially long steel ﬁbers (Fig. 28.1b). This can
also be used effectively in highly squeezing ground conditions. It ensures better bond
with rock surface. With wire mesh, voids and pockets might form behind the mesh thus
causing a poor bond and formation of water seepage channels as indicated in Fig. 28.1a
in the case of normal shotcreting.
The major drawback of normal shotcrete is that it is rather weak in tensile, ﬂexural and
impact resistance strength. These mechanical properties are improved by the addition of
ROCK
ROCK
Plain Shotcrete
Wiremesh Pinned
to Rock
Steel Fibre
Reinforced
Shotcrete (SFRS)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 28.1
Difference in application of shotcrete with (a) wire mesh and (b) steel ﬁber.
Integrated method of tunnelling
407
25mm
0.45mm
0.53mm
28mm
0.50mm
Fig. 28.2
Typical ﬁbers used in shotcrete work.
steel ﬁbers. Steel ﬁbers are commonly made into various shapes to increase their bonding
intimacy withthe shotcrete. It is foundthatthe hookedends type of steel ﬁbersbehave more
favorably than other types of steel ﬁbers in ﬂexural strength and toughness. Accelerators
play a key role to meet the requirements of early strength.
Steel ﬁbers make up between 0.5 and 2 percent of the total volume of the mix (1.5 to
6 percent by weight). Shotcrete mixes with ﬁber contents greater than 2 percent are
difﬁcult to prepare and shoot.
The steel ﬁbers are manufactured by cutting cold drawn wires. Some of the important
parameters of steel ﬁbers are:
• Geometrical shape – as shown in Fig. 28.2. Length of the ﬁbers may be 20 to 40 mm.
Recommended sizes of the ﬁbers are 25 to 35mm × 0.40 mm diameter,
• Aspect Ratio (length/equivalent diameter) – 60 to 75,
• Ultimate tensile strength > 1000 MPa,
• Shear strength of SFRS (long-term) – 8 to10 MPa.
28.6.1 Shotcrete ingredients
Shotcrete ingredients in ﬁber reinforced shotcrete are:
a) Cement,
b) Micro silica fumes (8–15 percent by mass of cement) for improving pumpability
and strength and to reduce rebound,
c) Aggregate,
d) Water,
e) Hydration control agent (wet mix),
f) Super plasticizers (3–6 l/m3) for slump increase and improvement in strength,
g) Accelerators (2–5 percent by mass of cement),
h) Curing agent,
i) Steel ﬁbers.
Shotcrete ingredients and properties are listed in Table 28.1.
408 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 28.1 Typical steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete mix.
Mean aggregate size
6.35 mm
Mean aggregate size
10 mm
S.No. Material
Quantity, kg/m3
Quantity, kg/m3
1.
Cement
446–558
>445
2.
Blended sand 6.35 mm
maximum size
1483–1679
697–880
3.
10 mm aggregate
–
700–875
4.
Steel ﬁber
39–157
39–150
5.
Accelerator
Varies
Varies
6.
Water/cement (by
weight)
0.40–0.45
0.40–0.45
Advantages of SFRS over shotcrete reinforced with welded mesh are as follows:
(i) Eliminates weld mesh resulting upto 5 percent savings in a typical cycle time.
Every hour of shotcreting needs at least 3 h for mesh ﬁxing.
(ii) SFRS allows fast shotcreting for quick supports, thus gives safer working
conditions even within small stand-up time.
(iii) Ensures better bond with rock surface. With mesh, voids and pockets might
form behind the mesh thus causing a poor bond and formation of water seepage
channels as indicated in Fig. 28.1a.
(iv) Economical because of
a) Reduction of about 50 percent in shotcrete thickness
b) Less shotcrete consumption due to consistent thickness of SFRS layer.
Key to successful SFRS construction is the use of a well trained and experienced
shotcrete application crew. Pre-construction and post-construction testing of shotcrete
shall be done for quality assurance. Proper equipment should be used to avoid bunching
of steel ﬁbers and to ensure homogeneous mixing of ﬁbers in the shotcrete.
To increase the stand-up time, for a full front tunnel proﬁle in poor rock quality (or
squeezing rock conditions), spiling dowels are provided as shown in Fig. 28.3.
To stabilize the broken zone in squeezing ground conditions more than one layers of
SFRS is provided as shown in Fig. 28.4. The ﬂoor heaving problem in highly squeezing
ground conditions can easily be solved by bolting the ﬂoor. Cutting the ﬂoor to maintain
proper ground level is of no use, since heaving will redevelop. A minimum center to center
spacing of tunnels of width B may be 6B for minimum interaction (Barton, 2002).
Integrated method of tunnelling
409
Spiling
Rock Bolts
SFRS
Fig. 28.3
Arrangement of spiling dowel with the advancement of tunnel face.
Broken Zone
Compaction
Zone
Elastic Zone
SFRS Layers
Fig. 28.4
Stabilization of broken zone in squeezing ground condition.
410 Tunnelling in weak rocks
28.6.2 Capacity of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
It is assumed that the ﬁber reinforced shotcrete is intimately in contact with the rock mass
and having the tendency to fail by shearing.
Capacity of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete is given by
pfsc = 2 · qfsc · tfsc
Ffsc · B
(28.1)
where
qfsc
= shear strength of steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
(550 t/m2 or 0.20 × UCS of SFRS),
tfsc
= thickness of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (m),
B
= size of opening (m),
B · Ffsc = distance between vertical planes of maximum shear stress in
the SFRS (m) (Fig. AII.1a),
Ffsc
= 0.6 ± 0.05 and
pfsc
= support capacity of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete lining (t/m2).
The thickness of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete lining may be estimated by substituting
ultimate support pressure (proof) in equation (28.1) in place of pfsc. Additional layers of
shotcrete should be sprayed to arrest tunnel closure if needed.
28.6.3 Drainage provision in shotcrete in transport tunnels within
water-charged rock mass
Strips of about 50 cm width should not be shotcreted for free seepage of ground water,
otherwise shotcrete is likely to crack due to building up of seepage pressure behind
shotcrete in heavily charged formations (Zhidao, 1988). Drainage holes should be pro-
vided for proper drainage. The catch drain should have adequate capacity to carry seepage
water or ﬂood.
Very often one may observe that the seepage of water is concentrated to only one or
just a few, often tubular openings in ﬁssures and joints. It can be worthwhile to install
temporary drainage pipes in such areas before applying the shotcrete. These pipes can
be plugged when the shotcrete has gained sufﬁcient strength. Further swellex (inﬂated
tubular) bolts are preferred in water-charged rock masses. Cement grout bolts are not
feasible here as grout will be washed out. Resin grout may not also be reliable. It may be
mentioned that the seals used in the concrete lining for preventing seepage in the road/rail
tunnels may not withstand heavy water pressure.
The pressure tunnels are grouted generally all round its periphery so that the ring
of grouted rock mass is able to withstand heavy ground water pressure. Polyurethane
should be used as a grout in rock joints under water as it swells 26 times and cements the
rock mass.
Integrated method of tunnelling
411
28.7 TREATMENT OF SHEAR ZONE (BHASIN ET AL., 1995)
The mean Q-value may be determined, taking into consideration the breadth of weak/
shear zone. The following formula may be employed in calculating the weighted mean
Q-values from the Q-value for shear zone and surrounding rock mass (Fig. 28.5).
log Qm = b · log Qwz + log Qsr
b + 1
(28.2)
where
Qm = mean value of rock mass quality Q for ﬁnding the support pressure,
Qwz = Q value of the weak zone/shear zone,
Qsr = Q value of the surrounding rock and
b
= breadth of the weak zone in meter.
Similarly, weighted mean value of Jrm may be obtained after replacing log Q by
appropriate value of joint roughness number in equation (28.2). In the same way, weighted
mean of joint alteration number Jam may be calculated (Samadhiya, 1998).
The strike direction (θ) and thickness of weak zone (b) in relation to the tunnel axis
is important for the stability of the tunnel and therefore the following correction factors
(Table 28.2) have been suggested for the value of b in the above equation (28.2).
Rock Bolt
Not Needed in
SFRS
Wire
Mesh
Shotcrete
Shear Zone
Fig. 28.5
Typical treatment of a narrow shear zone.
412 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Table 28.2 Correction factors for thickness of weak zone (b).
Strike direction (θ) to the
tunnel axis
“b” to be replaced by
90◦–45◦
b
45◦–20◦
2b
10◦–20◦
3b
<10◦
4b
Special bolting system is required for supporting the weak shear zone, Fig. 28.5 shows
a typical treatment of a thinner shear zone which is thicker than 50 cm. First, the gouge
is cleaned out to the desired extent. Secondly, the rock bolts are installed across the
shear zone and connected with the chain wire mesh. Finally, this “dental” excavation is
back-ﬁlled with shotcrete or steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete. In wide shear zone (>1 m),
reinforcement has to be placed before shotcreting so that the reinforced shotcrete lining
can withstand the heavy support pressure.
28.8 SHOTCRETE
28.8.1 General
Shotcrete for tunnel supports may be used as a thin skin type reinforcement or used in com-
binations with rock bolts, wire mesh and other more conventional tunnel reinforcements.
Details are given below:
(i) All loose rock pieces shall be scaled out and the rock surface shall be washed
by water-jet before applying shotcrete.
(ii) Shotcrete is forced into open joints, ﬁssures, seams and irregularities in the
rock surface and in this way serves the same binding function as mortar in
a stone wall.
(iii) Initially a 25 mm thick shotcrete is sprayed immediately after the excavation.
(iv) Shotcrete hinders water seepage from joints and seams in the rock and thereby
prevents piping of joint ﬁling materials and air and water deterioration of
the rock.
(v) Shotcrete’s adhesion to the rock surface and its own shear strength provide
a considerable resistance to the fall of loose rock blocks from the roof of a
tunnel.
(vi) A thicker shotcrete layer (150 to 250 mm) provides structural support, either as
a closed ring or as an arch type member.
Integrated method of tunnelling
413
(vii) The sound of hammer on shotcrete may indicate the hollow air gaps behind the
weld mesh (Fig. 28.1a).
28.8.2 Mix
Shotcrete is a mixture of cement, sand and aggregate. The proportion of cement to aggre-
gate in shotcrete may be normally 1:3 or 1:4, the aggregate being a mixture of sand and
about 20 percent aggregate varying from 5 to 20 mm. The dry mixture of shotcrete shall
be applied under pressure of about 3.5 kg/cm2 by means of a nozzle through a concrete
gun. To this nozzle, water shall also be added under pressure through a separate pipe.
A special quick setting agent shall be added to the dry mixture to reduce time to less than
3 min only.
28.8.3 Thickness
The thickness of shotcrete required depends upon the type of rock, the extent of stratiﬁca-
tion and/or joints, blockiness and also the size of the tunnel. The thickness may normally
range from 50 to 150 mm and whether it should be used plain or with wire mesh anchored
to rock will depend upon the actual site conditions in each case (see Fig. 10.2).
28.8.4 Support capacity of shotcrete in roof
It is assumed that, shotcrete is intimately in contact with the rock mass and has the tendency
to fail by shearing alone. Capacity of shotcrete (psc) is given by:
psc = 2 · qsc · tsc
Fsc · B
(28.3)
where
qsc
= shear strength of shotcrete (300 t/m2 in most of the cases
or 0.20 × UCS of shotcrete),
tsc
= thickness of shotcrete (m),
B
= size of opening (m),
B · Fsc = horizontal distance between vertical planes of maximum
shear stress in the shotcrete (m) (see Fig. AII.1a),
Fsc
= 0.6 ± 0.05 and
psc
= support capacity of shotcrete lining (t/m2).
The thickness of shotcrete may be estimated by substituting ultimate support pressure
(proof) for psc in equation (28.3). Additional layers of shotcrete should be sprayed to arrest
the rate of tunnel closures where needed.
414 Tunnelling in weak rocks
28.9 ROCK/ROOF BOLTS
28.9.1 General
Roof bolts are the active type of support and improve the inherent strength of the rock
mass which acts as the reinforced rock arch whereas, the conventional steel rib supports
are the passive supports and supports the loosened rock mass externally. All rock bolts
should be grouted very carefully in its full length. There are many types of rock bolts and
anchors which may also be used on the basis of past experience and economy. The rock
bolts may preferably be made out of thermomechanically treated (TMT) reinforcing steel
bars. More details are given in Chapter 12.
28.9.2 Types of roof bolts
28.9.2.1 Wedge and slot bolt
These consist of mild steel rod, threaded at one end, the other being split into two halves
for about 125 mm length. A wedge made from 20 mm square steel and about 150 mm long
shall be inserted into the slot and then the bolt with wedge driven into the hole which will
make the split end to expand and ﬁt tight into the hole forming the anchorage. Therefore, a
10 mm plate washer of size 200 × 200 mm shall be placed and the nut tightened (Fig. 28.6).
The efﬁciency of the splitting of the bolt by the wedge depends on the strata at the end of
Wedge
Bolt
Fig. 28.6
Wedge and slot bolt.
Integrated method of tunnelling
415
the hole being strong enough to prevent penetration by the wedge end, and on the accuracy
of the hole drilled for the bolt. The diameter of such bolts may be 25 or 30 mm. Wedge
and slot bolts are not effective in soft rocks.
28.9.2.2 Wedge and sleeve bolt
This generally consists of a 20 mm diameter rod at one end which is a cold-rolled threaded
portion. The other end of the rod is shaped to form a solid wedge forged integrally with
the bolt and over this wedge a loose split sleeve of 33 mm external diameter is ﬁtted
(Fig. 28.7). The anchorage is provided in this case by placing the bolt in the hole and
pulling it downwards while holding the sleeve by a thrust tube. Split by the wedge head of
the bolt, the sleeve expands until it grips the sides of the tube. Special hydraulic equipment
is needed to pull the bolts.
Note: All rock bolts should be grouted very carefully to its full length.
28.9.2.3 Perfo bolts
This method of bolting consists of inserting into a hole, a perforated cylindrical metal tube
which has been previously ﬁlled with cement mortar and then pushing a plain or ridged
bolt. This forces part of the mortar through the perforations in the tube and into intimate
contact with the sides of the borehole thus cementing the bolt, the tube and the rock into
one homogeneous whole (Fig. 28.8). The relation between the diameter of the borehole
and the diameter of perfo sleeve and bolts is given in Table 28.3.
Wedge
Sleeve
Bolt
Fig. 28.7
Wedge and sleeve bolt.
416 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Perforated Tube
Bolt
Space for
Mortar
Fig. 28.8
Perfo bolt.
Table 28.3 Diameter of perfo sleeve and bolts.
Diameter of
borehole (mm)
Diameter of perfo
sleeve (mm)
Diameter of bolts (mm)
(1)
(2)
(3)
40
36
30
38
31
25
31
27
18
Notes: (i) The bolts and anchors should be checked for their straightness within
±1 mm. (ii) Pull-out tests should be done on 5 percent of bolts and anchors to
check their capacity (Pbolt). (iii) The cement : sand mortar should contain adequate
expanding agent to avoid shrinkage cracks along the interface of boltholes and
rock mass.
28.9.2.4 Swellex Bolts
These rock bolts are effective in weak rock masses charged with water.
28.9.3 Design
Immediately after a tunnel has been advanced by a length t (Fig. 12.13), the rock in this
section expands and settles slightly developing a double arch effect. In the longitudinal
direction of the tunnel, the arch rests on the still untouched rock at the front and on the
already supported portion at the back (see arrows in Fig. 12.13). The second arch effect,
perpendicular to the axis of the tunnel is given by the form of the roof, which is usually an
arch in tunnels. The period to which this combined arch will stand without support depends
on the geological conditions, the length t and the radius of the tunnel roof. But in most
cases, even in badly disintegrated rock, it will be possible to maintain this natural arch
for some time, at least a couple of hours. If the natural arch is not supported immediately
after mucking, it will continue to sink down slowly until it disintegrates.
The portion that is liable (Fig. 12.13) to fall is generally parabolic in cross section
having a depth t/2 though the loosening process will never go as deep as this, if the
movement is stopped by timely support. Nevertheless, it is recommended that the bolts
should not be made shorter than t that is twice the depth of the presumed maximum
loosening. The natural surrounding rock of the cavity is in this way transformed into a
protective arch. Its thickness is given by the length of the bolts l which should be bigger
Integrated method of tunnelling
417
than t, also l > B/4 to B/3, as the arch also should have a certain relation to the width of
tunnel (B).
The rock requires a pre-stress by bolting and the bolts should follow the static princi-
ples of pre-stressing in reinforced concrete as much as possible. As it is not possible
to place bolts in the way of stress bars at the lower side of a beam, they should at
least be given an oblique position in order to take the place of bent-up bars and stirrups
(Fig. 12.12).
With an arch instead of a beam, the shear forces will be greatly reduced by the vault
effectbuteveninarchshapedroofs, shearforcesmaybecausedbyjointsystems, especially
by system of parallel layers like sedimentary formations, schist, etc. Hence the bolts
should not only be made to exert a strong pre-stress to the rock but also should be set in
a direction which suits best to the static demands of the geological conditions as shown
in Fig. 12.12.
Just as a static member of reinforced concrete has to be pre-stressed before receiving
the load, the rock also may be pre-stressed by bolting before the load develops. This means
that the space t in Fig. 12.13 shall be bolted immediately after blasting and at the same
time again as the next round is being drilled. The spacing between bolts/anchors should
be less than half the length of bolts/anchors. The pre-tension of the ungrouted bolts is lost
after blasting, so rock bolts shall be pre-tensioned again.
28.9.4 Capacity of Rock Bolts/Anchors
The capacity of reinforced rock (pbolt) arch is given by (see Fig. 28.17):
pbolt = 2 · qcrm · l′
Fs · B
(28.4)
where
qcrm
= minimum uniaxial compressive strength of reinforced rock mass (joint will be
criitically oriented somewhere along the arch or tunnel axis),
=

Pbolt
S2
bolt
−u
 1 + sin φj
1 −sin φj

≥0
(28.5)
tan φj = Jr
Ja
(28.6)
u
= seepage pressure in the rock mass (t/m2),
Pbolt
= tension in bolt or anchor capacity (t),
Sbolt
= center to center spacing of bolts/anchors (m),
l′
= effective thickness of reinforced arch,
= lbolt −FAL/2 −Sbolt/2 + Srock (no shotcrete),
(28.7)
= lbolt −FAL/2 −Sbolt/4 + Srock (in case of shotcrete),
(28.8)
≤lbolt −FAL/2,
418 Tunnelling in weak rocks
FAL = ﬁxed anchor length (m) of anchors to develop pull-out capacity of Pbolt,
= 100 × diameter of anchor bars,
= <1 m in case of mechanically anchored bolts,
Srock = average spacing of fractures in rock (m),
lbolt = length of bolt or anchor (m),
B
= size of opening (m),
Fs
= mobilization factor of bolt/anchor,
= 3.25 · p0.10
roof (for mechanically anchored and pre-tensioned bolts),
(28.9)
= 9.5 · p−0.35
roof
(for full-column-grouted anchors) and
(28.10)
proof = ultimate support pressure in roof (t/m2).
The spacing and length of bolts should be so chosen that the estimated capacity of rock
bolts/anchors (pbolt) is equal to ultimate support pressure (proof) or any desired value.
Full-column-grouted bolts are more efﬁcient in poor rock conditions according to
equation (28.10) than ungrouted pre-tensioned bolts. For permanent supports, all bolts
should be grouted.
28.10 STEEL RIBS
Rock tunnel support systems of steel may be generally classiﬁed into the following
principal types:
(a) Continuous ribs (Fig. 28.9A),
(b) Rib and post (Fig. 28.9B),
(c) Rib and wall plate (Fig. 28.9C),
(d) Rib, wall plate and post (Fig. 28.9D),
(e) Full circle rib (Fig. 28.9E) and
(f) Yielding arch steel rib with socketed joints.
Invert struts may be used in addition, with types (a) to (d) where mild side pressures
are encountered (Fig. 28.9F) or squeezing ground is met, when shotcrete lining begins to
fail again and again, despite addition of its extra layers.
28.10.1 Selection of the type of system
28.10.1.1 General
When choosing the type of support system, the following factors may be considered.
(a) Method of attack,
(b) Rock characteristics, its behavior and development of rock load and
(c) Size and shape of the tunnel cross section.
Integrated method of tunnelling
419
C. Rib and Wall Plate
D. Rib, Wall Plate and Post
E. Full Circle Rib
F. Continuous Rib with Invert Strut
A. Continuous Rib
B. Rib and Post
Fig. 28.9
Types of steel support system.
28.10.2 Selection of supports with reference to surrounding strata and
shape of tunnel
28.10.2.1 Continuous ribs
This type can be erected more rapidly than the other types and is generally recommended
for use in rocks whose bridge action period is long enough to permit the removal of
gases and mucking. Invert strut may be used in addition where mild side pressures are
encountered (Fig. 28.9F) and squeezing ground is met.
28.10.2.2 Rib and post
This type is generally recommended for use in tunnels whose roof joins the side walls at
an angle instead of a smooth curve. It may also be used in large tunnels, such as double-
track rail road or two-lane highway tunnels, to keep the size of the rib segments within
handling and transporting limitations. Invert strut may be used in addition where mild
side pressures are encountered (Fig. 28.9F) and squeezing ground is met.
28.10.2.3 Rib and wall plate
This type is generally recommended for use in tunnels with large cross sections with
high straight sides through good rock or in large circular tunnels, where it is possible to
support the wall plate by pins and where the strata below the wall plate does not require
support. This type of support may also be used for tunnelling through spalling rock,
420 Tunnelling in weak rocks
provided spalling occurs only in the roof. However, in many cases it is extremely difﬁcult
to establish adequate support for the wall plate at any point above the ﬂoor-line due to the
irregularity of the overbreak. Please ensure that wall plate does not cause bearing capacity
failures of the side wall in the case of very wide openings.
28.10.2.4 Rib, wall plate and post
This type of support permits post spacing to be different from the rib spacing and is
generally recommended for use in tunnels with high vertical sides. Invert strut may be
used in addition, where mild side pressures are encountered (Fig. 28.9F) and squeezing
ground is met.
28.10.2.5 Full circle rib
This type is recommended for use in tunnels in squeezing, swelling and crushed, or
any rock that imposes considerable side pressure. The advantage of steel ribs is that the
excavation by forepoling is easily done by pushing steel bars into the tunnel face and
welding their opposite ends to the steel ribs (to support weak rocks before blasting).
28.10.3 Spacing of ribs
Spacing of ribs is given by:
Srib =
Prib
proof · B
(28.11)
where
Prib = steel rib capacity (T),
Srib
= spacing of ribs (m),
B
= size of opening (m) and
proof = ultimate support pressure in roof (t/m2).
The support capacity of steel ribs (Prib) should be so chosen that the minimum clear
spacingbetweenribsinpoorrockconditionis10 cmbetweenﬂangesormore. AppendixIII
may be referred for the selection of steel rib capacity.
28.10.4 Selection of steel rib supports
All the types of supports mentioned above are suitable for the full face method of attack
for rock where required bridge action period for providing supports is available. Detailed
guidelines are suggetsed in Table 13.2.
Rib and wall plate or rib wall plate and post are suitable for heading and bench method.
The rib, wall plate and post type may be supplemented by truss panels or crown bars,
which are accessories developed to handle heavy loads that come quickly by supporting
the intervening ribs while the bench is shot out.
Integrated method of tunnelling
421
Main Support for Tunnel
used as a Support for Drift
Support for Drift to be Removed
and Reused after the Construction
of Tunnel Support
Fig. 28.10
Side drift method.
Where it becomes necessary to drive ﬁrst the top heading only due to bad roof con-
ditions, the rib and wall plate type of support is generally recommended for use in the
heading, and post may or may not be used when the bench is taken out depending on rock
conditions.
Where for driving a large size tunnel in poor rock conditions, the side drift method
is used, the rib, wall plate and post type of supports are recommended; the wall plate,
however, being ﬂat. The posts and wall plates are erected in the drift which is driven ahead
at each side at subgrade (Fig. 28.10).
Where extreme conditions are encountered, however, breakups to the crown may be
made, leaving a central core. Temporary posts may be quickly placed between the core
and the roof at dangerous spots, and crown bars may be slid forward to quickly catch up
the roof. The roof ribs should then be placed on the wall plates and securely blocked to
take the roof load, after which the temporary posts may be removed.
The side drifts themselves usually need support which should be removed just prior
to shooting out the core of the main tunnel and re-used ahead. The support system used
for the drifts is hybrid. The outer side consists of the posts and wall plates which later
becomes a part of the support for the main tunnel, whereas the inner side is a continuous
rib (Fig. 28.10).
28.10.5 Type of support for shafts
For shafts, usually the full circle rib or segmental ribs are recommended depending upon
the slope and rock conditions. In vertical shafts, ribs may be hung from top by hanger
rods and blocked and packed. The spacing of hanger rods may be worked out as in the
422 Tunnelling in weak rocks
case of tie rods keeping in view that they shall be strong enough to support the weight
of ribs.
28.10.6 Components of tunnel supports
Design of various components of tunnel supports shall be done in accordance with existing
national codes of practice.
28.10.6.1 Ribs
Ribs may be made of structural beams. H-beams or wide ﬂange beams may be preferred
to I-beams, as the wider ﬂanges provide more surface for blocking and lagging, and the
section has greater resistance against twisting. Channel sections are not recommended as
their unsymmetrical section is prone to twisting, and their ﬂanges are narrow. In small
tunnels, however, channel bent about their minor axis may be used under small rock loads.
When choosing the proﬁles with different rock loads, it is advisable to select beams of
equal depth.
28.10.6.2 Posts
The spacing between the posts may be normally equal to that of the ribs. However, by
inserting a wall plate between the ribs and the posts, the spacing of the posts can be made
independent of ribs. The posts may be made of H-section. The depth of these should
normally be the same as that of the ribs, though in many cases they may be of lighter
sections as long as no side pressure is present.
28.10.6.3 Invert struts
Where the wall pressures are present and tunnel section has not been converted to a full
circle, it is necessary to prevent the inward movement of the rib or posts feet and in such
cases, invert struts should be provided at tunnel subgrade. They should be so attached to
the vertical members that they receive the horizontal pressure. They may be curved to
form an inverted arch where there is an upthrust from the ﬂoor.
28.10.6.4 Wall plates
The following three types of wall plates are commonly used:
(a) Double beam,
(b) Single beam and
(c) Flat wall plate.
The double and single beam wall plates which are intended to resist bending in vertical
planes are recommended for use to transmit the loads from the ribs on to block or posts
Integrated method of tunnelling
423
with a spacing different from that of the ribs. Flat wall plates merely serve as an erection
expedient and a convenient surface for horizontal blocking. Their resistance to bending in
vertical planes being very small, whenever ﬂat wall plates are used, a post shall be placed
under each rib.
Double beam wall plates may be made of two I-beams placed side by side, webs
vertical with about a 100 mm space between ﬂanges to give access to the clamping bolt
and admit concrete (Fig. 28.11). The beams should be spaced by vertical diaphragms
welded under each rib seat. Ribs and posts should be clamped by toggle plates and bolts,
thus avoiding the time required for matching the boltholes. This method of attachment
also permits variable spacing of either or both the ribs and the posts. This type of beam
provides a broad surface of contact for blocking and to engage ribs and posts. Its box
section makes it stable with respect to rolling and twisting.
Single beam wall plates may be H-beams, with webs vertical. To enable them to
transmit vertical loads from rib to post, they may be reinforced at each rib seat with
vertical T-shaped plates, if necessary (Fig. 28.12). Attachment of ribs and posts may be
made by bolting through the ﬂanges.
Fig. 28.11
Double beam wall plate.
Fig. 28.12
Single beam wall plate.
424 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Flat wall plates may be I-beams or wide ﬂange beams used with their webs horizontal.
They function merely as a cap for the posts and a sill for erecting roof ribs. The web should
be punched with vent holes also to pass reinforcing rods if the concrete is reinforced.
28.10.6.5 Crown bars
Crown bars may be built up of double channels as shown in Fig. 28.13 or may be H-beams
or square timber beams. They are located parallel to the axis of the tunnel either resting
on the outer ﬂanges of the ribs already erected or attached to the ribs in hangers. Crown
bars are an accessory, a construction expedient intended to carry loads till the rib sets are
erected and the rock loads permanently transferred to them. They have one of the two
functions to perform (i) to support the roof immediately after ventilation and thereby gain
time for the installation of ribs; and (ii) to support the roof or roof ribs over the bench shot
thereby relieving or supplementing the wall plates.
28.10.6.6 Truss panels
These are accessories for use with the combination of rib and post types of support, for
the heading and bench or top-heading methods of attack and heavy roof loads. Their
purpose is to form, in combination with the ribs, a truss to span the gap produced by the
bench shot.
The truss panels may be attached to the inside face of the ribs for a distance of one or
more ribs ahead of the bench shot as shown in Fig. 28.14 and should be left there until posts
are installed, at which time they should be removed and sent up ahead. Attachment may
be by means of only two bolts at each rib. The truss thus formed may even be designed to
carry the roof over two bench shots making it more convenient to get in the post.
When truss panels are used, no wall plate is required although the ﬂat wall plate may
be used to keep the lower ends of the ribs lined up laterally if it is difﬁcult to block the
Crown Bar
Rib
Fig. 28.13
Crown bar.
Integrated method of tunnelling
425
Truss Panel
Fig. 28.14
Truss panel.
individual ribs against the rock. The truss panels eliminate the need for wall plate for
drifts.
28.10.6.7 Bracing
Longitudinal bracing serves to increase the resistance of ribs and posts to buckling about
their minor axis and to prevent a displacement of these set members during blasting.
If the space between the ribs or post is bridged by lagging which is ﬁrmly attached to the
webs, no such bracing is required. The most common types of bracing which is known as
the rods and collar braces are shown in Fig. 28.15. The braces may, however, be placed
as most convenient.
Tie rods usually may be of 15 to 20 mm diameter, with thread and two nuts on each
end. The length shall be at least 100 mm more than the spacing of the ribs. The spacing
of the rods may be kept such that the slenderness ratio l/r for ribs is not greater than 60,
where l is the spacing of the rods, and r is the least radius of gyration of the ribs. Collar
braces may be usually pieces of timber, 75 × 100 mm, 100 × 150 mm, 150 × 150 mm
or any conventional size. Holes in pairs shall be provided in the web of ribs and posts
for the tie rods. Collar braces should be set in the line between ribs, tie rods inserted
and the nuts tightened. Wooden collar braces should be removed before placing ﬁnal
lining.
Spreaders which are additional braces may be angles, channels, or I-beams with a clip
angle or plate either bolted or welded on each end to the ribs. These are left in the concrete.
In tunnels having steep slopes, tie rods may be replaced by spreaders.
28.10.6.8 Blocking
It is generally done by using timber pieces tightly wedged between the rock and the rib.
426 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Collar Brace
Tie Rod
Rib Support
Fig. 28.15
Collar brace and tie rod.
28.10.6.9 Lagging
It performs one or more of the following functions:
a) To provide protection from falling rock or spalls;
b) To receive and transfer loads to the rib sets;
c) To provide a convenient surface against which to block in case it is not convenient
to block directly against the rib, because of irregular overbreak;
d) To provide a surface against which to place back packing;
e) To serve as an outside form for concrete lining, if concrete is not to be poured
against the rocks and
f) To divert water, and to prevent leaching and honeycombing of concrete.
Lagging may be made either of steel, precast concrete or timber. Steel laggings may
be made out of channels, beams, beams and plates and liner plates. Liner plates, which
are pressed steel panels may also be used with or without ribs depending upon the rock
conditions. It is recommended that use of timber in underground work should be mini-
mized as far as practicable, since timber once ﬁxed can be rarely removed safely and likely
to deteriorate and prove a source of weakness. Total prohibition of timber is, however,
not practicable.
The spacing of lags should be closest at the crown, increasing down to spring line.
On the side only an occasional lag should be used, if necessary. Close lagging should be
employed where rock conditions make it necessary.
Integrated method of tunnelling
427
28.10.6.10 Packing
The function and type of packing depends on the rock condition. In dry tunnels through
jointed rock, packing is only used to ﬁll large cavities produced by excessive overbreak.
In broken, crushed or decomposed rock it serves to transfer the rock load to the lags,
thereby acting as a substitute for excessive blocking. In squeezing rock it provides con-
tinuous contact through the laggings with the rib sets. In jointed water-bearing rock it has
primarily the function of a drain.
Dry pack, which usually consists of tunnel spoil (hard) shoveled or hand packed into
the space between the lagging and the rock, is recommended for use only where excessive
rock loads are not likely to develop. It may be placed simultaneously with the erection of
the lagging. Starting at the lowest point, a few lags may be placed and tunnel spoil (hard
rock) shoveled in behind. This procedure may be carried upto the crown at which point it
is necessary to pack endwise.
Concrete packing
It is recommended for use where considerable rock loads are antici-
pated. However, its use is not recommended in case the tunnel supports are designed as
yielding supports. Concrete packing may be M10 concrete. It may be placed by manual
labor or by pneumatic placer to the possible extent. Where excessive loads are anticipated,
concrete packing should start from the inner ﬂanges of the steel support so as to embed the
whole steel supports in concrete. In such cases, it is recommended that precast concrete
may be used as additional lagging between two adjacent ribs so as to serve the purpose of
form work.
Pea gravel packing
Pea gravel packing by blowing of gravel is recommended in shield-
driven tunnels to ﬁll the annular space around the lining left by the advancing tail of the
shield. Gravel should be blown through the grout holes provided in the liner segments as
the shield is shoved forward.
Note: Pea gravel packing is considered highly desirable kind of packing for most purposes
but it has not been practiced so far in rock tunnels.
28.10.6.11 Grouting
Grouting to ﬁll any space outside the concrete lining may be usually done after the main
concrete lining is in place. But there are occasions where it is desirable to do grouting
at low pressure soon after concrete packing. When the main concrete lining is likely
to be delayed considerably it is desirable to do grouting at low pressure after concrete
packing.
28.10.7 Factors determining spacing and layout of supports
The strength and spacing of rib system should be determined by the rock load. For a given
rock load and cross section of tunnel, the spacing between the ribs and whether the ribs
428 Tunnelling in weak rocks
shall be in two or more pieces shall be worked out. The spacing of the ribs should be so
chosen that the sum of the cost of ribs and lagging is minimum. For preliminary designs
in ordinary rocks, the depth or rib section may be taken as 60 to 75 mm for every 3 m of
bore diameter with ribs spaced at about 1.2 m for moderate loads, 0.6 to 1.0 m for heavy
loads and 1.6 m for very light loads. Equation (28.11) is recommended for this purpose.
For junctions, plugs and control chamber, etc. supports should be designed to suit
special features of the work and its construction procedures. Wooden or concrete blocks
of suitable size and thickness may be provided, if necessary, in the bottom portion to
provide adequate bearing area to the rib.
In tunnels, where supports are not to be used as reinforcement, they may be installed
plumb (vertical) or perpendicular to the axis of the tunnel depending on tunnel slope and
as found convenient. However, where supports are to be used as reinforcement in pressure
tunnels, they may be installed at right angles to the tunnel axis, if practicable.
For speed of erection of supports it is essential to:
(a) design a support system with the minimum number of individual members,
consistent with construction convenience;
(b) design the joints with utmost simplicity and absolute minimum number of
bolts and
(c) fabricate the members with simple bolt and wrench clearances. Time consuming
close ﬁts shall be avoided.
28.10.8 Design
28.10.8.1 Stresses
Permissible stress in steel shall be in accordance with the code of practice in a nation.
However, if the ribs are bent cold, the maximum permissible ﬁber stress in steel should
be 165 MPa (= 0.66 × yield strength).
Note: The yield strength of steel ribs and steel structures is 250 MPa. The yield strength of
(TMT) rock bolts and reinforcement bars in the concrete is 415 MPa. The yield strength
of thin steel ﬁbers in SFRS is 1000 MPa.
28.10.8.2 Ribs
Rock load may be assumed to be transmitted to the ribs at blocking points, each blocking
point carrying the load of the mass of rock bounded by four planes, namely, the longitudi-
nal planes passing through mid-points between the blocks and transverse planes passing
through mid-points between the ribs to a height equal to the acting rock load. The blocking
points may be assumed to be held in equilibrium by forces acting on it in the same manner
as panel points in a truss. Values of thrust in the rib may be computed by drawing the
force polygon. Ribs should be designed for the thrust thus computed taking into account
Integrated method of tunnelling
429
Rock Profile in no
Lagging Provided
Load for
Lagging Design
Ribs
Fig. 28.16
Loading diagram for lagging.
the eccentricity of this thrust with reference to the rise of the arc between the blocking
points which will cause ﬂexural stresses in addition to direct stresses.
28.10.8.3 Lagging
Lagging may be designed for the load of rock mass as shown in Fig. 28.16.
28.10.8.4 Linear plates
Where only linear plates are used for support, their cross-sectional area and joints should
be designed to transmit the thrust. It should be ensured that linear plates are thoroughly in
contact with ground so that the passive resistance is developed and no bending moments
are induced. For tunnels with more than 3 m diameter linear plates may be reinforced by
I-beams. Where linear plates do not form a ring and are used in top half ribs they should be
designed as lagging. The thickness of linear plates may vary from 3 to 10 mm depending
upon the size of bore and loads encountered. The size of bolts may vary from 12 to 15 mm
diameter.
28.10.8.5 Joints
Butt joints should be preferred to spliced joints. In soft grounds and poor rock, welding
of joints in the ﬁeld should be avoided as far as possible.
28.11 GROUTING IN PRESSURE TUNNELS
28.11.1 General
Grouting is carried out to ﬁll discontinuities in the rock by a suitable material so as to
improve the stability of the tunnel roof or to reduce its permeability or to improve the
properties of the rock. Grouting is also necessary to ensure proper contact of rock face
of the roof with the lining. In such cases, the grouting may be done directly between
the two surfaces or the process of grouting may be used to ﬁll the voids in the rubble
430 Tunnelling in weak rocks
packing where used. All the three types of grouting may not be required in all cases.
The grouting procedures should aim at satisfying the design requirements economically
and in conformity with the construction schedules. The basic design requirement generally
involve the following:
(a) Filling up the voids, cavities, between the concrete lining and rock and/or between
the concrete and steel liner;
(b) Strengthening the rocks around the bore by ﬁlling up the joints in the rock system;
(c) Strengthening the rock shattered around the tunnel;
(d) Strengthening the rock, prior to excavation by ﬁlling the joints with cementing
material and thus improving its stability;
(e) Closing up water-bearing passages to prevent the ﬂow of water into the tunnel
and/or to concentrate the area of seepage into a channel from where it can be
easily drained out and
(f) To increase the capacity of grouted rock arch.
Before drawing up the speciﬁcations for grouting, the design requirements should be
established. In general for all underground structures, grouting is an universal requirement
for all concrete lined tunnels. Design requirements are only to establish the maximum
allowable pressure at which this grouting is to be carried out and the zone in the cross
section and the spacing of grout holes, both in the direction of the tunnel. For consolidation
grouting, the design requirement to be established is the thickness of the rock stratum
around the tunnel that is to be strengthened and made impermeable, the pressure and the
spacing pattern of holes. This will determine the depth to be grouted.
For tunnels, the commonly used procedures are to continue grouting to refusal at the
design pressure in each hole or to interrupt the grouting if there is heavy intake with little
or no pressure build up, indicating very open structures and escape of grout to a long
distance.
28.11.2 Pattern, depth and arrangement of holes
28.11.2.1 Backﬁll grouting
The purpose of backﬁll grouting is to ﬁll the space left unﬁlled (with concrete) between
the concrete lining and the rock surface in the arch portion of any tunnel or cavity.
Backﬁll grouting should be done after the concrete lining has gained strength. The
period of waiting may be from 21 to 28 days. In case of precast lining segments, this
restriction of waiting will not apply and the grouting may be done immediately after
the segments are erected. Backﬁll grouting is limited to the arch portion of a tunnel or
cavity and may not be required in case of shafts if the concrete is poured vertically.
The grout holes at the crown should be placed 5 to 10◦from the crown, alternately
in the left and right of the crown. In addition to the crown hole there should be two
Integrated method of tunnelling
431
more holes, one on either side of the crown. These holes will be 90◦apart and will
be located such that one of these two holes are at 22.5◦from the crown alternately on
the right and left of the crown. Such sections shall be normally 3 m apart. The exact
location of the holes may be varied or additional holes provided depending upon the
actual excavation proﬁle at any section. The actual spacing of sections may also be varied
on similar considerations. It should, however, be also adjusted to suit the length of the
arch shutter used in such a way that there is no hole at the joint and the normal pattern of
holes is more or less uniform in the shutter length.
In the case of circular or horse-shoe tunnels, in addition to these holes, two holes
(one on either side), located roughly at 45◦on either side of the invert should be used.
The location should be such that the holes are about 45 to 60 cm, above the junction of
the invert and arch. The mortar used for backﬁll grout may normally consist of cement,
sand and water mixed in the proportion of 1:1:1 by weight. It may, however, be suitably
modiﬁed if its conditions so warrant. The size of grouting sand should be determined for
each job by actual experimentation as it would depend on the type of sand, equipment
available and fracture spacing. Backﬁll grouting should normally be done at a pressure
of 2 kg/cm2 (0.2 MPa).
28.11.2.2 Contact grouting
The aim of contact grouting is to fully pack up the space between the concrete lining
and the rock surface or the space between the steel liner and concrete lining caused by
shrinkage or left unﬁlled even after backﬁll grouting. This is required for fulﬁlling the
design assumption of the rock/concrete taking part of the load along with the lining of
water pressure tunnels and to prevent local accumulation of water, if any, and building up
local pressure (Chapter 23).
Contact grouting may be done after the concrete lining has gained strength to withstand
the pressure and shrinkage, if any, has taken place. The usual minimum period of 25 to
28 days of waiting should be allowed.
The contact grouting should be limited to only the top arch (90◦on either side of
the crown) of pressure tunnels. In case of vertical shafts and steel liner, contact grouting
should be done along the full periphery. In case of steel liners, the grouting should also
be done all round its periphery in the case of penstocks.
The holes at the crown should be placed 5 to 10◦from the crown, being alternately to
the left and right of the crown. In addition to the crown hole, there should be two more
holes one on either side of the crown in each section. These holes will be 90◦apart and
will be located such that one of the two holes is at 22.5◦from the crown, being alternately
on the right and left of the crown. Such holes may normally be 3 m apart.
In the case of circular or horse-shoe tunnels, in addition to these holes, two holes (one
on either side), located roughly at 45◦on either side of the invert should be used. The
location should be such that the holes are about 45 to 60 cm above the junction of the
invert and arch as in the case of backﬁll grouting. The depth of holes for contact grouting
432 Tunnelling in weak rocks
should be such that at each location, the holes extend 30 cm beyond the concrete lining
into rock.
28.11.2.3 Consolidation grouting
The aim of consolidation grouting is to ﬁll up the joints and discontinuities in the rock
up to the desired depth. Consolidation grouting should always be done after the backﬁll
grouting is completed in a length of at least 60 m behind the chainage of grouting (towards
the portal).
Consolidation grouting should be usually done all round the tunnel, and for a uniform
radial distance from the ﬁnished concrete face. The grout may be determined by the
designer based on the design of the concrete lining and the extent to which cracks are
assumed to extend in rock when the lining is stressed by internal water pressure. Usually
the depth should be between 0.75D and D where D is the ﬁnished diameter of the tunnel,
except in special reaches where it could be more. The maximum depth so far used in the
Himalaya is about 15 m.
The pattern of grout holes for consolidation may be a set of holes in one vertical plane,
such a plane being called the grout plane. The spacing of the grout planes will depend
upon the structural formation of rock and the travel of grout at the speciﬁed pressure.
The actual spacing as in the case of contact grouting should also be adjusted in the ﬁeld to
suit the length of the shutter used for concreting. In this plane, the number of holes may
normally be four for small size tunnels and six for large size tunnels. The arrangement
should be staggered in alternate grout planes, by about half the spacing between the
holes along the periphery in the plane. In special locations the number of holes may be
increased. The top three holes in grout pattern may be used for both backﬁll, contact and
consolidation grouting.
Around shafts and large opening like powerhouse, the grout pattern may be similar,
but the number of holes in the plane may be increased depending on the size, but the
spacing should generally exceed the depth of the hole.
Contact grouting would not generally be necessary where consolidation grouting had
been done. However, it should be decided by actual contact grouting in some holes after
consolidation grouting. Depending upon the rock formations and the grout intake, the
consolidation grouting should be done in one or more stages with increasing pressures.
Maximum grout pressure should not normally exceed twice the design load on lining or
support pressure systems as the case may be.
28.11.3 Pressure to be used for grouting
The pressures to be used for grouting will depend on the rock characteristics, the design
requirements and the rock cover. With adequate rock cover (more than three times the
diameter of the tunnel), the ﬁrst two parameters will govern. For backﬁll grouting the
maximum pressure recommended is 5 kg/cm2 (0.5 MPa). For consolidation grouting,
a maximum pressure of 7.0 kg/cm2 (0.7 MPa) is normally recommended but this may
Integrated method of tunnelling
433
be increased up to 20.0 kg/cm2 (2.0 MPa) in special cases, provided that there is adequate
cover and the joints in the rock are not likely to open up by this pressure.
The pressure gauge should be watched constantly so that the pressure on the grout
is regulated as long as grouting is in progress. Any desired increase or decrease in the
grouting pressure is obtained by changing the speed of the grout pump. When the grout
in the supply line becomes slugging, the grout hole valve should be closed and the blow
off valve is opened so that the supply line may be ﬂushed or washed.
28.11.4 Testing for efﬁcacy of grouting
This testing may be done by drilling the holes in between the grout planes and by testing
water intake in these test holes. If this is compared with the water test made before
the grouting, this water intake will give an indication of the efﬁcacy of grouting. Further
grouting of this test hole and intake in this hole will give further indications. It is only
after these tests that the engineer-in-charge may decide on increasing the number of grout
planes if required.
28.11.5 Capacity of grouted rock arch (Figs 28.17 and 28.18)
pgt = 2 · qgt · lgt
Fgt · B
(28.12)
where
qgt = uniaxial compressive strength of grouted rock mass (t/m2),
lgt = thickness of grouted arch (m),
B
= size of the opening (m),
Fgt = mobilization factor of grouted arch,
= 9.5 · p−0.35
roof
and
pgt = ultimate support pressure in roof (t/m2).
In case of water-charged rock mass or post-construction saturation of rock mass, heavy
support pressure and seepage pressure may develop on the concrete lining or shotcrete
lining. The extra high support pressures/seepage pressures may be taken care off by
grouted rock arch (equation (24.8)).
28.12 DESIGN OF INTEGRATED SUPPORT SYSTEM
28.12.1 General
A semi-empirical approach is used to determine the capacity of support system consisting
of shotcrete, reinforced rock arch, steel rib and grouted rock arch. In Fig. 28.17, the dotted
434 Tunnelling in weak rocks
tsc
2θ
B
lgt
T
l1
T
Rock
Bolt
Fig. 28.17
Capacity of reinforced rock arch.
line shows the effective width of the reinforced rock arch. The load carrying capacity
of the reinforced rock arch is dependent on the minimum uniaxial compressive strength
of the reinforced rock arch.
Fig. 28.17 shows that the total support pressure (proof + u) will be equal to the sum of
the capacities of shotcrete, reinforced rock arch, steel rib and grouted rock arch. Simple
hoop action is assumed as illustrated in Fig. 28.17. The arch subtends an angle of 2θ at its
center (=180◦for tunnels).
Ultimate support pressure = Total capacity of support system (Singh et al., 1995)
(u + proof) = psc + pbolt + prib + pgt
(28.13)
or
(u + proof) = 2 · qsc · tsc
Fsc · B
+ 2 · qcrm · l′
Fs · B
+
Prib
Srib · B + 2 · qgt · lgt
Fgt · B
(28.14)
In the above simple equation, it is assumed that shotcrete will shear along a length of
arch approximately equal to (Fsc· B). All the notations in the above equation have the
same meanings as described earlier. In the case of SFRS, notation “sc” is replaced
by “fsc.”
Integrated method of tunnelling
435
Ground
Arch
SFRS
B
L
Rock Bolt
Length = lw
Fig. 28.18
Design of wall reinforcement of caverns.
The following trends have been obtained:
(i) Pre-tensioned bolt is more effective in good rock conditions.The efﬁciency of
pre-tensioned bolt decreases slightly for poor rocks due to creep and loss of
tension.
(ii) The full-column-grouted untensioned anchors are more effective in poor rock
conditions than in good rock conditions. The reason may be that the anchors
are subjected to large radial strains in poor rock masses leading to more tension
induced in anchors. Fig. 28.18 illustrates better performance of grouted anchors.
28.12.2 Application of semi-empirical design approach
For tunnels located near faults/thrusts (with plastic gouge) in seismic areas, the ultimate
support pressures may be increased by about 25 percent to account for accumulated strain
in the rock mass along the fault. If the tunnel is away from the fault by a distance B,
the seismic effect is negligible (Chapter 21).
The support pressure, due to squeezing out of gouge from the shear zone, may be esti-
mated by applying Terzaghi’s theory of arching which indicates that the support pressure,
436 Tunnelling in weak rocks
with gouge, will increase with the width of the shear zone. As such, the treatment of shear
zone is essential to bear the high support pressure as shown in Fig. 28.5. However, in thin
shear zone (approx < 50 cm), the support pressure is very small and hence, there is no
cause of worry.
The capacity of shotcrete and reinforced rock arch is calculated by trial and error.
The design parameters are selected, so that the ultimate pressure is equal to the design
capacity. If support pressure is high, say more than 5 kg/cm2 (0.5 MPa), steel ribs may
be used and embedded in shotcrete. The spacing of steel ribs may be estimated until
equation (28.14) is satisﬁed. The design philosophy is illustrated in Fig. 28.19. In case
of water-charged rock mass, experience shows that the NGI design tables do not give
useful parameters as they neglect the seepage pressure. Equation (28.12) may then be
used to ﬁnd out the extent upto which the rock mass should be grouted. Grouting
is possible generally where thick shotcrete has been provided to take high grouting
pressure.
a. Non-squeezing Ground
b. Mild Squeezing Ground
c. Moderately Squeezing Ground
d. Moderately Squeezing Ground
Fig. 28.19
Design philosophy of rock reinforcement in tunnelling.
Integrated method of tunnelling
437
In very poor rock conditions, assumptions are generally invalid. Hence, special spec-
iﬁcations need to be followed to treat thick shear zones, rock burst conditions and highly
squeezing conditions.
Appendix II presents a software TM for design of support system for the tunnels and
caverns in the rock mass with and without shear zone on the basis of semi-empirical
method.
In case of water and power tunnels, seepage pressure may be assumed equal to the
internal water pressure and the worst case is when the tunnel is empty and seepage water
pressure acts on the shotcrete lining. If required, rock mass may be grouted to take high
support and seepage pressure. Alternatively, concrete lining may be designed according
to the design criteria.
28.12.3 Tunnel through intra-thrust zone
In Himalaya and other young mountains, the tunnel has to pass through intra-thrust zone
in some complex geological and tectonic situations. The faults and thrust are subjected to
slip over a long period of time due to very slow tectonic movement of Indian plate with
respect to Chinese plate. It is therefore essential to build a segmented concrete lining so that
segments of the concrete lining can slip with respect to each other with time. The design
decision should be taken on the basis of instrumentation data within the intra-thrust zone
(Chapter 20). Duddek and Erdmann (1985) have suggested a design approach for tunnel
in soil.
28.12.4 Experience in poor rock conditions
Fiber reinforced shotcrete has proved very successful in 6.5 km long tunnel in Uri Hydel
Project in India. The main advantage is that lesser thickness of ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
is needed. No weld mesh is required to reinforce shotcrete. Its rebound is less due to steel
ﬁbers provided shotcrete is graded properly and sprayed properly. It is costly but would
become cost-effective on the extensive demand for the steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete.
The experience with the use of mesh (weld mesh, etc.) has been unsatisfactory where
there were overbreaks in the tunnel after blasting. The weld mesh was spread between bolts
andshotcretewassprayed. Soonmeshstartedreboundingshotcreteandcouldnotpenetrate
inside the mesh and ﬁll the gap between mesh and the overbreak. Consequently, gaps
were left out above shotcrete and sound to hammering could indicate hollow gaps above.
Further, weld mesh started vibrating due to blast vibrations and it caused loosening of the
shotcrete. As such, the experience with mesh reinforced shotcrete has been unsatisfactory
in case of overbreak.
It is recommended that mesh should not be used where even surface of tunnel is not
available due to overbreak, provided shotcrete is used. However, the thickness of shotcrete
should be increased by 1 cm (approx).
438 Tunnelling in weak rocks
28.12.5 Flowing ground
The crushed rock/sand may ﬂow down like a ﬂuid rapidly when the tunnel passes through
a water-charged wide shear zone (>1 m) unexpectedly. Naturally it is squeezing ground
condition also. The broken zone expands further with time and the process of ﬂow is
repeated again and again until the water gushes out and the tunnel is ﬁlled by rock debris
upto its roof.
Fig. 28.20 shows a strategy to tackle the ﬂowing ground condition. First the water
should be drained out by making advance probe hole within the tunnel face. The rate
of discharge should be monitored with the help of “V” notch at the end of the tunnel.
Experience suggests that shear zone should be drained and grouted well before tunnelling.
Fortunately crushed rock is groutable in most cases. The face of the tunnel should also be
grouted as the face is unstable.
The serious ﬂowing ground conditions were met in Maneri Bhali Stage I Head Race
tunnel, Satluj–Beas Link tunnel, Dulhasti Hydroelectric project and Tala Hydroelec-
tric Project (Bhutan) in upper Himalaya. The tunnelling work has to be stopped for
many months. The discharge was so unprecedented that workers were washed away.
In all cases, wide shear zones were punctured unexpectedly.
The experience is that the rock ring of thickness of about radius of tunnel should be
grouted well in advance of puncturing a possible shear zone. Then the tunnel face should
be excavated by smooth blasting. The rock mass should be obviously further grouted until
shear zone is crossed safely. It is easy to say but challenging to achieve. In ﬁeld, the
grout holes are inclined and cone of grouted rock mass may be formed ahead of tunnel
face. Grouting is done such that successive cones are formed with minimum thickness lgt
equal to a.
The analysis also proves that suggested thickness of grouted rock ring should be able
to withstand support pressure which is equal to the overburden pressure.
Grouted rock ring
Grouted rock ring
Probe hole
Probe hole
Probe hole
Full-column-grouted anchors
Flowing ground
or shear zone
lgt
a
SFRS
lgt
lgt
2a for pressure tunnels
a
Grouted rock ring
lgt
gt
lgt
Fig. 28.20
Grouting ahead of ﬂowing ground.
Integrated method of tunnelling
439
28.13 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
(i) Scaling of loose pieces of rock should be done thoroughly ﬁrst of all.
(ii) The ﬁrst layer of 25 mm thick shotcrete is sprayed immediately to make open-
ing reasonably smooth. Then weld mesh is spread and nailed into this shotcrete
layer. Next rock anchors (or rock bolts) are provided. Finally, additional layers
of shotcrete are sprayed according to the design. Perfect bond between shotcrete
and rock mass is the trick of the trade. A strong bond results in more effective
thickness of shotcrete depending on the size of rock blocks.
(iii) Sometimes the grouting of long bolts is not done satisfactorily because of lack
of supervision and difﬁculties with the expanding agent (aluminum powder or
expanding agent is seldom added). Therefore, pull-out tests should be conducted
on at least 5 percent of the bolts to check their quality. If required, extra bolting
should be done to strengthen the support system. (Pre-tensioned bolts must
be tensioned again due to loss of pre-tension after initial round of blasting
to excavate the tunnel face. Then they are grouted with cement mortar for
long life).
(iv) For deep and long tunnels in complex geological conditions, a 20 m long probe
hole of 75 mm diam. should be drilled inside the tunnel face in order to obtain
an accurate picture of geological conditions in advance of the tunnelling. The
probe hole will also dissipate seepage pressure slowly within the water-charged
rock mass, which is likely to be punctured during tunnelling. This technique
will also avoid ﬂash ﬂoods soon after blasting and consequent loss of life and
damage to the support system, provided the side drain is of adequate capacity.
(v) In poor rock masses, spiling bolts (inclined towards the tunnel face) may be
installedbeforeblastingtoincreasethestand-uptimeofthetunnelroof(Bischoff
et al., 1992). Shotcrete is then sprayed on roof, and then the spiling bolts are
installed. In the ﬁnal cycle, roof bolts are installed.
(vi) In cases involving argillaceous rocks and swelling rocks, where the bond with
shotcrete is poor, the thickness of the shotcrete should be increased by about
30 percent.
(vii) At the intersection of the approach tunnel and the main tunnel, the support
capacity of the reinforced rock arch of the approach tunnel should be strength-
ened by 100 percent, up to a distance equal to three times the bolt length of the
main tunnel. This will help the reinforced rock arch of the approach tunnel to
bear the thrust from the reinforced arch of the main tunnel.
(viii) In highly squeezing ground conditions (H ≫350 Q1/3 m and Jr/Ja < 0.5), steel
ribs with struts should be used when the SFRS fails repeatedly despite the
addition of more layers. With steel ribs, excavation by forepoling is easily
accomplished by pushing steel rods into the tunnel face and welding the opposite
ends to the ribs. Floor heaving can be prevented by rock bolting of the ﬂoor.
Some delay, but less than the stand-up time, is necessary to release the strain
440 Tunnelling in weak rocks
energy of the broken zone. Smaller blast holes will also be helpful and broken
zones should be instrumented. In such cases, the tunnel closure must be arrested
before it reaches 4 percent of the width of the tunnel.
(ix) For very poor rock masses, steel ribs should be installed and embedded in the
shotcrete to withstand the high support pressures.
(x) In the case of steel ribs in large tunnels and caverns, haunches should be
strengthened by installing more anchors to help withstand the heavy thrust
due to the ribs.
(xi) For treatment of shear zones, crossed rock anchors/bolts should be provided
across the shear zones. After the gouge has been cleaned to the desired extent,
anchors are connected to the weld mesh and, ﬁnally, dental shotcrete is back-
ﬁlled. In wide shear zones, shotcrete reinforcement is also placed to help
withstand high support pressure, except in case of SFRS. The anchors should be
inclined according to the dip of the shear zone to stop squeezing of the gouge,
and thereby stabilize the deformations (Fig. 28.5).
(xii) In the case of an unstable portal, horizontal anchors of equal length should
be provided inside the cut slope, so that it acts as a reinforced rock breast
wall.
(xiii) In rockburst-prone regions, resin anchors and steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
should be used to increase the ductility of the support system and thus convert
the brittle mode of failure into the ductile mode of failure. Rock anchors should
be installed immediately on the rock burst side of the tunnel.
(xiv) The concrete lining for water/pressure tunnels should be laid far away from the
tunnel face within the squeezing ground where the broken zone is stabilized
(i.e., about four times the radius of the broken zone). In addition, the concrete
lining should be segmented within an active thrust zone to allow relative move-
ment along the faults/thrust. The concrete/RCC lining may be built after the
rate of deformation has reduced to less than 2 mm/month.
(xv) The thickness of SFRS should not be less than 70 mm in the under sea
tunnels.
Example
Two parallel road tunnels are being constructed for 6 lanes in the basalts. The tun-
nels are D-shaped with diameter (B) of around 16 m and 2 m high side walls with clear
spacing of 20 m. The maximum overburden (H) is 165 m. The rock mass parameters are,
RMR = 73, Q = 10, Ja = 1.0, Jr = 3.0 and Jw = 1.0 (minor seepage from side walls). The
construction engineers want rapid rate of tunnelling and life of support system should be
100 years. The uniaxial compressive strength of SFRS is 30 MPa and its ﬂexural strength
is 3.7 MPa.
Integrated method of tunnelling
441
The short-term support pressure in roof may be assessed by the following correlation
(equation (4.6)) for arch opening given by Goel and Jethwa (1991).
proof = 7.5B0.1 H 0.5 −RMR
20 RMR
= 7.5 × 160.1 × 1650.5 −73
20 × 73
= 0.037 MPa
The ultimate support pressure is read by the chart (Fig. 5.2) of Barton et al. (1974)
as follows (the dotted line is observed to be more reliable than correlation).
proof = 0.9 × 1 × 1 kg/cm2
or
0.09 MPa
(The rock mass is in non-squeezing ground condition (H < 350 Q1/3) and so f ′ = 1.0.
The overburden is less than 320 m and so f = 1.0.)
It is proposed to provide the steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) [and no rock bolts
for fast rate of tunnelling]. The SFRS thickness (tfsc) is given by the following correlation
(equation (28.1)).
tfsc = 0.6Bproof
2qfsc
= 0.6 × 1600 × 0.09
2 × 5.5
= 8 cm
= 16 cm (near portals)
The tensile strength of SFRS is considerd to be about one-tenth of its UCS and so its
shear strength (qsc) will be about, 2 × 30/10 = 6.0 MPa, approximately 5.5MPa (UTS is
generally lesser than its ﬂexural strength). Past experience is also the same.
The life of SFRS may be taken same as that of concrete in the polluted environment
that is about 50 years. Life may be increased to 60 years by providing extra cover of SFRS
of 5 cm. If SFRS is damaged latter, corroded part should be scrapped and new layer of
shotcrete should be sprayed to last for 100 years. So recommended thickness of SFRS is
tfsc = 13 cm
= 21 cm (near portals)
The width of pillar is more than the sum of half-widths of adjoining openings in the
non-squeezing grounds. The width of pillar is also more than the total height of the larger
of two caverns (18 m), hence proposed separation of 20 m is safe.
The following precautions need to be taken:
(i) The loose pieces of rocks should be scrapped thoroughly before shotcreting for
better bonding between two surfaces.
(ii) Unlined drains should be created on both the sides of each tunnel to drain out the
ground water and then should be covered by RCC slabs for road safety.
442 Tunnelling in weak rocks
(iii) The tunnel exits should be decorated by art and arrangement should be made
for a bright lighting to illuminate well the tunnels to generate happy emotions
among road users.
REFERENCES
Barton, N. (2002). Some new Q-value correlations to assist in site characterisation and tunnel design.
Int. J. Rock Mech. and Min. Sci., 39, 185-216.
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, Springer-Verlag, 6, 189-236.
Bischoff, J. A., Klein, S. J. and Lang, T. A. (1992). Designing reinforced rock. Civil Engineering,
ASCE, 72, January.
Bhasin, R., Singh, R. B., Dhawan, A. K. and Sharma, V. M. (1995). Geotechnical evaluation and a
review of remedial measures in limiting deformations in distressed zones in a powerhouse
cavern. Conf. Design and Construction of Underground Structures, New Delhi, India,
145-152.
Duddeck, H. and Erdmann, J. (1985). On structural design models for tunnels in soft soil.
Underground Space, 9, 246-259.
Goel, R. K. and Jethwa, J. L. (1991). Prediction of support pressure using RMR classiﬁcation.
Proc. Indian Getech. Conf., Surat, India, 203-205.
IS 15026:2002, Tunnelling Methods in Rock Masses-Guidelines. Bureau of Indian Standards,
New Delhi, India, 1-24.
Samadhiya, N. K. (1998). Inﬂuence of anisotropy and shear zones on stability of caverns.
PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India, 334.
Singh, Bhawani,Viladkar, M. N., Samadhiya N. K. and Sandeep (1995). A Semi-empirical method
for the design of support systems in underground openings. Tunnelling and Underground
Space Technology, 10(3) 375-383.
Zhidao, Z. (1988). Waterprooﬁng and water drainage in NATM tunnel. Symp. Tunnels and Water,
Ed: Serrano, Rotterdam, 707-711.
29
Critical state rock mechanics
and its applications
“All things by immortal power near or far, hiddenly to each other are linked.”
Francis Thompson
English Victorian Post
29.1 GENERAL
Barton (1976) suggested that the critical state for initially intact rock is deﬁned as the
stress condition under which Mohr envelope of peak shear strength reaches a point of zero
gradient or a saturation limit. Hoek (1983) suggested that the conﬁning pressure must
always be less than the unconﬁned compression strength of the material for the behavior
to be considered brittle. An approximate value of the critical conﬁning pressure may,
therefore, be taken equal to the uniaxial compressive strength of the rock material.
Yu et al. (2002) have presented a state-of-the-art on strength of rock materials and
suggested a uniﬁed theory. The idea is that the strength criterion for jointed rock mass
must account for the effect of critical state in the actual environmental conditions.
The frictional resistance is due to the molecular attraction of the molecules in contact
between smooth adjoining surfaces. It is more where molecules are closer to each other due
to the normal stresses. However, the frictional resistance may not exceed the molecular
bond strength under very high conﬁning stresses. Hence, it is no wonder that there is a
saturation or critical limit to the frictional resistance (Prasad, 2003). There should be limit
to everything in the nature.
Singh and Singh (2005) have proposed the following simple parabolic strength
criterion for the unweathered dry isotropic rock materials as shown in Fig. 29.1.
σ1 −σ3 = qc + Aσ3 −Aσ2
3
2qc
for 0 < σ3 ≤qc
(29.1)
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
444 Tunnelling in weak rocks
qc
σ1− σ3
σ3
σ3=qc
Fig. 29.1
Parabolic strength criterion.
where
A
=
2 sin φp
1−sin φp
φp = the peak angle of internal friction of a rock material in nearly unconﬁned
state (σ3 = 0) and
qc = average uniaxial compressive strength of rock material at σ3 = 0.
It may be proved easily that deviator strength (differential stress at failure) reaches a
saturation limit at σ3 = qc that is,
∂(σ1 −σ3)
∂σ3
= 0
at σ3 = qc
(29.2)
Unfortunately, this critical state condition is not met by the other criteria of strength.
It is heartening to note that this criterion is based on single parameter “A” which makes
a physical sense. Sheorey (1997) has compiled the triaxial and polyaxial test data for
different rocks which are available from the world literature. The regression analysis was
performed on 132 sets of triaxial test data in the range of 0 ≤σ3 ≤qc.
The values of the parameter A, for all the data sets were obtained. These values were
used to back-calculate the σ1 values for the each set for the given conﬁning pressure. The
comparison of the experimental and the computed values of σ1 is presented in Fig. 29.2.
It is observed that the calculated values of σ1 are quite close to the experimental values.
An excellent coefﬁcient of correlation, 0.98, is obtained for the best ﬁtting line between
the calculated and the experimental values.
For comparing the predication of the parabolic criterion with those of the others,
Hoek and Brown (1980) criterion was used to calculate the σ1 values. The coefﬁcient of
correlation(0.98)forHoek–Brownpredictionsisobservedtobeslightlylowerandpoorfor
weak rocks, when compared with that obtained for the criterion proposed in this chapter.
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
445
10
100
1000
10000
10
100
1000
10000
Experimental σ1 (MPa)
Calculated σ1 (MPa)
R2 = 0.9848
Fig. 29.2
Comparison of experimental σ1 values with those calculated through the proposed
criterion (equation (29.1)) (Singh & Singh, 2005).
In addition to the higher value of coefﬁcient of correlation, the real advantage of proposed
criterion, lies in the fact that only one parameter, A is used to predict the conﬁned strength
of the rock and A makes a physical sense.
A rough estimate of the parameter A may be made without conducting even a single
triaxial test. The variation of the parameter, A, with the uniaxial compressive strength
(UCS), qc is presented in Fig. 29.4. A deﬁnite trend of A with UCS (qc) is indicated by
this ﬁgure and the best ﬁtting value of the parameter A may be obtained as given below:
A ∼= 7.94
q0.10
c
for qc = 7 −500 MPa
(29.3)
Fig. 29.3 compares experimental σ1 values with those predicted by using equa-
tion (29.3) without using the triaxial data. A high coefﬁcient of correlation of 0.93 is
obtained. Thus, the proposed criterion appears to be more faithful to the test data than
Hoek and Brown (1980) criterion. This criterion is also better ﬁt for weak rocks as the
critical state is more important for rocks of lower UCS. The law of saturation appears to
be the cause of non-linearity of the natural laws.
29.2 SUGGESTED MODEL FOR ROCK MASS
The behavior of jointed rock mass may be similar to that of the rock material at criti-
cal conﬁning pressure, as joints then cease to dominate the behavior of the rock mass.
446 Tunnelling in weak rocks
10
100
1000
10000
10
100
1000
10000
Experimental σ1 (MPa)
Calculated σ1 (MPa)
R2 = 0.9287
Fig. 29.3
Comparison of experimental σ1 values with those predicted using present criterion
without using triaxial test data (Singh & Singh, 2005).
A/2qc
qc (MPa)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
100
200
300
0
0.0
400
Fig. 29.4
Variation of parameter A/2qc with UCS of the intact rocks (qc).
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
447
Therefore, one may assume that the deviator strength will reach the critical state at σ3 = qc.
As such, this critical conﬁning pressure may be independent of the size of specimen.
Perhaps the deviator strength may also achieve a critical state when intermediate princi-
pal stress σ2 ∼= qc (equation (8.2)). Thus an approximate simple parabolic and polyaxial
criterion is suggested for the underground openings as follows,
σ1 −σ3 = qcmass + A(σ2 + σ3)
2
−A
4qc
(σ2
2 + σ2
3)
(29.4)
for 0 < σ3 ≤qc and 0 < σ2 ≤qc
where
qcmass = uniaxial compressive strength of the rock mass,
= 7γQ1/3 MPa,
(29.5)
γ
= unit weight of rock mass in gm/cc or t/m3,
Q
= post-construction Barton’s rock mass quality just before
supporting a tunnel,
A
=
2 sin φp
1−sin φp ,
(29.6)
φp
= the peak angle of internal friction of a rock mass and
qc
= average uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), upper bound of UCS for
anisotropic rock material of jointed rock masses under actual environment.
It may be veriﬁed by differentiating equation (29.4) that
∂(σ1 −σ3)
∂σ3
= 0 at σ2 = σ3 = qc
∂(σ1 −σ3)
∂σ2
= 0 at σ2 = qc for any value of σ3
The triaxial test data (σ2 = σ3) on models of jointed rocks was collected from
Brown (1970), Brown and Trollope (1970), Ladanyi and Archambault (1972), Einstein
and Hirshfeld (1973), Hoek (1980), Yazi (1984), Arora (1987) and Roy (1993). The
parameter A was computed by the least square method as was done for the rock materials.
An approximate correlation between A and qc was found as given below.
A = 2.46 q0.23
c
(29.7)
The polyaxial tests on cubes of jointed rocks at IIT Delhi suggest that the mode of
failure at high σ2 is brittle and not ductile as expected. This is seen in tunnels in medium
to hard rocks.
Theangleofinternalfriction(φp)inequation(29.6)maybechosenfromthecorrelation
of Mehrotra (1993) (cited by Singh & Goel, 2002), according to RMR both for the nearly
dry and saturated rock masses (Fig. 29.5). It is based on the extensive and carefully
conducted block shear tests at various project sites in the Himalaya. It may be seen
that φp is signiﬁcantly less for the saturated rock mass than that for the nearly dry rock
mass for the same ﬁnal RMR. So the parameter A will be governed by the degree of
448 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Rock Mass at nmc
Bieniawski (1982)
50
30
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Angle of Internal Friction
(φ), degree
Rock Mass Rating (RMR)
Saturated Rock Mass
Bieniawski (1982)
50
30
10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Angle of Internal Friction
(φ), degree
Rock Mass Rating (RMR)
Fig. 29.5
Relationship between rock mass rating (RMR) and angle of internal friction (φp)
(Mehrotra, 1992) [nmc: natural moisture content].
saturation in equation (29.7). Hoek and Brown (1997) have developed a chart between
friction angle φp and geological strength index (GSI = RMR −5 for RMR ≥23) for the
various values of rock material parameter mr. It is seen that φp increases signiﬁcantly
with increasing value of mr for any GSI. In the case of rock mass with clay-coated joints,
equation (29.13) may be used to estimate φp approximately. Equation (29.13) takes into
account approximately the seepage erosion and piping conditions in the weak rock masses
(Barton, 2002). Seepage erosion (ﬂow of soil particles from joints due to the seepage,
especially during rainy seasons) rapidly deteriorates the rock mass quality (Q) with time.
Seepage may be encountered at great depths even in granite unexpectedly, due to the
presence of a fault. “Uncertainty is the law of nature.”
It should be mentioned that Murrell (1963) was the ﬁrst researcher who predicted that
major principal stress (σ1) at failure increases with σ2 signiﬁcantly, but it reduces when
σ2 is beyond σ1/2 and σ3 = 0. The three sets of polyaxial test data cited by Yu et al.
(2002) shows a negligible or small trend of peaking in σ1 when σ2 ≫qc. The attempt
was made to ﬁt in the proposed polyaxial strength criterion (equation (29.4)) in the above
test data for rock materials (Dunham dolomite, trachite and coarse gained dense marble).
The recent polyaxial test data on tuff (Wang and Kemeny, 1995) was also analyzed. The
equation (29.4) was found to be fortunately rather a good ﬁt into all the polyaxial test data
at σ2 < qc and σ3 < qc.
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
449
Kumar (2002) has collected data of 29 km NJPC tunnel in gneiss in Himalaya as
mentioned in Table 29.1. It may be noted that the rock mass strength (qcmass) is too less
than the expected tangential stress (σθ) along the tunnel periphery. The qcmass from linear
criterion is some what less than σθ. It is interesting to know that the parabolic polyaxial
criterion predicts the rock mass strength (q′′
cmass in equation (29.8)) in the range of 0.64
to 1.4 σθ generally. In one situation, the rock mass was found to be in the critical state
locally. It matches with the failure conditions in the tunnel beyond overburden of 1000 m
where (mild rock burst or) spalling of rock slabs was observed. So the proposed simple
polyaxial strength criterion (equation (29.4)) ﬁts in the observations in the tunnels in the
complex and fragile geological conditions in a better way than other criteria. Better ﬁt
also suggests that the peak angle of internal friction of rock mass may be nearly the same
as that for its rock material in the case of unweathered rock mass.
The equation (29.4) suggests the following criterion of failure of rock mass around
tunnels and openings (σ3 = 0 on excavated face and σ2 = Po along tunnel axis),
σθ > q′′
cmass = qcmass + A · Po
2
−A · P2
o
4 · qc
≤qcmass + A · qc
4
(29.8)
where q′′
cmass is the biaxial compressive strength of rock mass, corrected for greater depths.
29.3 RESIDUAL STRENGTH
Mohr’s theory will be applicable to residual failure as a rock mass would be reduced
to non-dilatant soil like condition. Thus, residual strength (σ1 −σ3)r of rock mass is
likely to be independent of the intermediate principal stress. So, the following criterion is
suggested.
(σ1 −σ3)r = qcr + Ar · σ3 −Ar · σ2
3
2 · qc
for 0 < σ3 ≤qc
(29.9)
where
qcr
= UCS of rock mass in the residual failure,
= 2cr cos φr
1−sin φr
(29.10)
Ar
= 2 sin φr
1−sin φr ,
(29.11)
cr
= residual cohesion of rock mass,
= 0.1 MPa
= 0 if the deviator strain exceeds 10 percent,
φr
= φp −10◦≥14◦
(29.12)
tan φp = (Jr · Jw/Ja) + 0.1
(based on Barton, 2002).
(29.13)
Singh and Goel (2002) have analyzed 10 tunnels in the squeezing ground condition
considering linear criterion (Jr/Ja < 0.5, Jw = 1.0 and γH ≪qc). There is a rather good
Table 29.1 Comparison of tangential stress (σθ) and rock mass strength (q′′
cmass) considering intermediate principal stress.
S.
Overburden
Q after
UCS, qc
φp
A
qcmass =
q′
cmass =
q′′
cmass = qcmass + APo
2
−AP2
o
4qc
σθ = 2γH
No.
H(m)
Tunnelling
(MPa)
(deg)
=
2 sin φp
1−sin φp
7γQ1/3 (MPa)
Po = γH
qcmass + APo
2
≤qcmass + Aqc
4 (MPa)
(MPa)
1
1430
4.7
50
45
4.8
31.6
38.6
124.2
88.4
77.2
2
1420
4.0
32
37
3.0
30.0
38.3
87.5
53.1
76.6
3
1420
4.5
50
45
4.8
31.1
38.3
123.0
87.8
76.6
4
1320
1.8
32
37
3.0
23.1
35.6∗
76.5
47.1
71.2
5
1300
3.5
50
45
4.8
28.7
35.1
112.9
83.4
70.2
6
1300
2.0
60
45
4.8
23.8
35.1
108.0
83.4
70.2
7
1300
1.8
55
45
4.8
23.1
35.1
107.3
80.5
70.2
8
1300
3.3
50
45
4.8
28.0
35.1
112.2
82.7
70.2
9
1230
2.2
50
45
4.8
24.7
33.2
104.4
77.9
66.4
10
1180
4.7
42
55
9.1
31.6
31.9
176.1
121.0
63.8
11
1180
2.0
34
30
2.0
23.8
31.9
55.7
40.7
63.8
12
1180
3.4
42
45
4.8
28.3
31.9
104.9
75.8
63.8
13
1100
7.5
42
45
4.8
37.0
29.7
108.3
83.1
59.4
14
1090
7.0
50
45
4.8
36.2
29.4
106.8
86.0
58.8
15
1060
3.8
50
45
4.8
29.4
28.6
98.0
78.4
57.2
Note: In NJPC tunnel, no rock burst was observed except slabbing and noises due to cracking at overburden (H) above 1000 m. The angle of internal friction φp for rock
mass was assumed same as that for the rock material (gneiss) approximately.
∗Rock mass is in the critical state locally as in situ stress along tunnel axis (Po) is more than UCS.
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
451
cross-check between the proposed theory and the observed support pressures in the squeez-
ing ground conditions except in a few cases. Thus residual cohesion was back-analyzed
to be 0.1 MPa approximately and zero where deviatoric strain exceeded 10 percent. Sim-
ilarly, the residual angle of friction was inferred to be about 10◦less than the peak angle
of internal friction but more than 14◦.
This model explains the likely mode of failure of rock mass in the deep tunnels. For
example, severe rock burst condition may be encountered where A or φp is high (where
Jr/Ja > 0.5). It is because the peak deviator strength or differential stress (σ1 −σ3) is
very high compared to the residual deviator strength (σ1 −σ3)r. The locked-up strain
energy may be dissipated in the form of seismic waves. On the other hand, the squeezing
condition or plastic failure may develop where A or φp is very low, as there may not be
any signiﬁcant difference in the peak and residual deviatoric strengths.
As such, the following criteria for the heavy rock burst in deep tunnels in the hard
rocks is suggested.
σθ
q
′′
cmass
> 2
(29.14)
Jr · Jw
Ja
> 0.5
(29.15)
and
H > Hcr = 2.5qc
γ
(29.16)
Thus severe rock burst conditions may develop in hard rocks which has entered into the
critical state (Po > qc) and where the overburden (H) exceeds the limit of equation (29.16).
It is assumed that the ratio of in situ minimum principal stress and overburden pressure (K)
is about 0.4 ± 0.10 at great depths in equation (29.16).
The thermic zones (of high temperatures) are also likely to be encountered at greater
depths. So the tunnel face may have to be air-conditioned like in very deep mines (Kolar
Gold Field, India). The efﬁciency of the workers is very low and they cannot work for
more than a few hours under high temperatures. In addition, the thermic zone may also
be in critical state and the tunnelling hazard may be doubly serious. So it will be better to
realign the tunnel to by-pass the rock mass in at least the critical state or in thermic zone
or both, to be on the safe side and avoid severe tunnelling hazards.
In case of rock mass in the critical state, pre-tensioned rock bolts or resin grouted bolts
may be effective, as radial stresses will be released. It is also suggested that one may try to
use thick SFRS (steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete) lining which has good bond with the rock
mass and its compressive strength is higher than that of the rock material. Resin anchors
may make rock mass ductile.
The understanding of critical state rock mechanics is essential for (i) deep tunnels
for the underground nuclear waste disposal and (ii) also in the petroleum engineering.
452 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Very deep drill-holes may be unstable in the weak rock layers (shale) in the critical
state (H > Hcr).
29.4 EFFECT OF CONFINING PRESSURE ON FRICTION ANGLE
Sometimes a fault or thrust passes through deep tunnels. A non-linear analysis is preferred
by the incremental method. The Mohr’s envelope based on equation (29.1) gives the slope
of angle of friction (φ) at any initial stress condition. The shear strength criterion for fault
in terms of increase in shear strength (∆τ) for expected rise in the effective normal stress
(∆σ) is simply as follows:
∆τ = (∆σ −∆u) tan φ
(29.17)
where ∆u is increase in seepage pressure.
If ∆τ exceeds the incremental shear strength of weaker rock adjoining to a fault under
high conﬁning stresses, earthquakes may occur in that area.
The friction angle (φ) along any point of deep-seated fault may be predicted accurately
from the following empirical equation for tan φo < 2 and any value of UCS > 10 MPa
which is derived from equation (29.1) (Singh et al., 2004).
tan φ = tan φo

1 −(σ3/qc)π/2
for tan φo < 2
and qc > 10 MPa
(29.18)
= 0
for σ3 > qc
Where φo is the friction angle in the nearly unconﬁned state (σ3 = 0). It is interesting to
know that φ will be negligible along a boundary between earth-plates beyond a great depth
due to the critical state conditions. Shankar et al. (2002) have back-analyzed a friction
angle of only 5◦beyond a depth of 40 km below the ground surface along the plate
boundary in the Tibet Himalayan plate. It is interesting to note that lesser the frictional
resistance along colliding inter-plate boundaries, lesser will be the locked-up strain energy
in the large earth plates and so lesser are the chances of great earthquakes in that area.
Infact, highest earthquake of only M7 on Richter’s scale had taken place in the Tibetan
plateau. Thus there is a balancing mechanism in the nature to avoid too high intensity of
earthquakes in a planet.
In weak rocks, the high conﬁning stress may reduce porosity of rock material and so
increase its UCS (qc in equation (29.18)). For all practical purposes, the coefﬁcient of fric-
tion(∆τ/∆σ)maybeassumedtobenegligiblebeyondaconﬁningstressofUCSatσ3 = qc.
REFERENCES
Arora, V. K. (1987). Strength and deformational behaviour of jointed rocks. PhD thesis, IIT Delhi,
India.
Critical state rock mechanics and its applications
453
Barton, N. (1976). Rock mechanics review: The shear strength of rock and rock joints. Int. J. Rock
Mech. Min. Sci. & Geomech. Abstr., 13, 255-279.
Barton, N. (2002). Some new Q-value correlations to assist in-situ characterisation and tunnel
design. Int. J. Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, 39(2), 185-216.
Brown, E. T. (1970). Strength of models of rock with intermittent joints. J. of Soil Mech. & Found.
Div., Proc. ASCE, 96(SM6), 1935-1949.
Brown, E. T. and Trollope, D. H. (1970). Strength of a model of jointed rock. J. of Soil Mech. &
Found. Div., Proc. ASCE, 96(SM2), 685-704.
Einstein, H. H. and Hirschfeld, R. C. (1973). Model studies on mechanics of jointed rock. J. of Soil
Mech. & Found. Div. Proc. ASCE, 90, 229-248.
Hoek, E. (1983). Strength of jointed rock masses. Geotechnique, 33(3), 187-223.
Hoek, E. (1980). An empirical strength criterion and its use in designing slopes and tunnels in
heavily jointed weathered rock. Proc. 6th Southeast Asian Conf. on Soil Engg, 19-23, May,
Taipei, 111-158.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1980). Empirical strength criterion for rock masses. J. Geotech. Div.,
ASCE, 106 (GT9), 1013-1035.
Hoek, E. and Brown, E. T. (1997). Practical estimates of rock mass strength. Int. J. Rock Mechanics
and Mining Sciences, 34(8), 1165-1186.
Kumar, Naresh (2002). Rock mass characterisation and evaluation of supports for tunnels in
Himalayas. PhD thesis, WRDTC, IIT Roorkee, 295.
Ladanyi, B. and Archambault, G. (1972). Evaluation of shear strength of a jointed rock mass.
Proc. 24th Int. Geological Congress, Montreal, Section 13D, 249-270.
Mehrotra, V. K. (1992). Estimation of Engineering Parameters of Rock Mass. PhD Thesis, IIT
Roorkee, India, 267.
Murrell, S. A. K. (1963). A criterion for brittle fracture of rocks and concrete under triaxial stress and
the effect of pore pressure on the criteria. Vth Sym. on Rock Mech., University of Minnesota,
Ed: C. Fairhurst, Oxford, Pergamon, 563-577.
Prasad, Rajendra (2003). Personal communication, IIT Roorkee.
Roy, N. (1993). Engineering Behaviour of Rock Masses Through Study of Jointed Models.
PhD thesis, IIT Delhi, India.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslides and
Tunnelling Hazards. Chapter 6, A. A. Balkema (Swets & Zetpinger), The Netherlands, 344.
Singh, Mahendra and Singh, Bhawani (2005). A strength criterion based on critical state mechanics
for intact rocks. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, 38(3), 243-248.
Shankar, Daya, Kapur, N. and Singh, Bhawani (2002). Thrust-wedge mechanics and doeval devel-
opmentofnormalandreversewedgefaultsintheHimalayas. J.GeologicalSociety, London,
159, 273-280.
Sheorey, P. R. (1997). Empirical Rock Failure Criteria. A. A. Balkema, The Netherlands, 176.
Singh, Bhawani, Shankar, D., Singh, Mahendra, Samadhiya, N. K. and Anbalagan, R. N. (2004).
Earthquake rick reduction by lakes along active faults. 3rd Int. Conf. on Continental
Earthquakes, III ICCE, APEC, Beijing, China, July, 11-14.
454 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Wang, R. and Kemeny, J. M. (1995). A new empirical failure criterion under polyaxial compressive
stresses, Eds: J. J. K. Daemen and A. Richard, Schultz, Proc. 35th U.S. Symposium on Rock
Mechanics, A. A. Balkema, 950.
Yaji, R. K. (1984). Shear strength and deformation response of jointed rocks. PhD thesis,
IIT Delhi, India.
Yu, Mao-Hong, Zan, Yzee-Wen, Zhao, Jian and Yoshimine, Mitsutoshi (2002). A uniﬁed strength
criterion for rock material. Int. Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences, 39,
975-989.
Appendix I
Tunnel mechanics
“Experiments should be reproducible – they should all fail in the same way.”
Murphy Law
AI.1 ELASTIC STRESS DISTRIBUTION AROUND
CIRCULAR TUNNELS
Study of rock mechanics has fascinated many researchers. One of the reasons for fascina-
tion is that distribution of stresses and displacement gives valuable insight on the stability
of underground openings.
There is a difference in the elastic solutions for displacements around tunnels and
circular holes in the steel plate. In the case of tunnels, the opening is made in the stressed
state of the medium, whereas hole is ﬁrst made in the stress-free state of steel plate and
then loaded along its boundaries. It is interesting to note that solutions for stresses are the
same in both the cases, but displacements are different.
The following assumptions are made in the analysis (Fig. AI.1):
(i) The rock mass is homogeneous, isotropic, dry, linearly elastic and inﬁnite medium.
(ii) The tunnel is circular in shape having radius a.
(iii) The in situ stress ﬁeld is homogeneous and non-hydrostatic. The vertical stress is P
and the horizontal stress is λP. The vertical stress P is generally assumed equal to
the overburden pressure (γH). The horizontal in situ stress is higher than vertical
stress in most of the cases in civil engineering projects.
(iv) The modulus of elasticity (or deformation Ed) is the same in loading and unloading
condition. In other words, there is no stress induced anisotropy.
Terzaghi and Richart (1952) have derived the solution with respect to the stressed
state. The compressive stresses are positive. The radial displacement is positive in the
direction of radius vector. The following solution is for plane stress case.
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
456 Tunnelling in weak rocks
45°
θ
P
λP
(3λ-1)P
(3-λ)P
1
2
Fig. AI.1
Stress concentration around circular tunnel in non-hydrostatic state of in situ stress.
σr = P
2

(1 + λ)

1 −a2
r2

+ (1 −λ)

1 + 3a4
r4 −4a2
r2

cos 2θ

(AI.1)
σθ = P
2

(1 + λ)

1 + a2
r2

−(1 −λ)

1 + 3a4
r4

cos 2θ

(AI.2)
τrθ = P
2 (1 −λ)

1 + 2a2
r2 −3a4
r4

sin 2θ
(AI.3)
ur = −Pa2
2Edr

(1 + ν)

1 −a2
r2 cos 2θ

+ 4(1 −ν2) cos 2θ

−Pλa2
2Edr

(1 + ν)

1 + a2
r2 cos 2θ

−4(1 −ν2) cos 2θ

(AI.4)
u12 = −P(1 + λ)
2Ed
(1 + ν)a

1 −a
r2

(AI.5)
It is interesting to note that the stress distribution is independent of modulus of
deformation (Ed), as expected. It should be noted that the radial displacement ur is half
of that in opening in stress-free state. Sometimes extensometers are installed to monitor
Tunnel mechanics 457
relative displacements u12 between point 1 at r = a and point 2 at r = r2 (Fig. AI.1).
Equation (AI.5) gives the expression for u12.
Let us suppose that the tunnel is internally pressurized by radial stress pi. The solution
for induced additional stresses is simple as follows:
σr = pi
a2
r2
(AI.6)
σθ = −pi
a2
r2
(AI.7)
ur = (1 + ν) a pi
Ed
(AI.8)
It may be seen that tangential stresses are tensile in nature.
Since the principle of superposition is valid in the elastic body, the ﬁnal solution for
internally pressurized tunnel is the sum of equations (AI.1) and (AI.6) for radial stresses;
and equations (AI.2) and (AI.7) for tangential stresses.
In the special case of hydrostatic in situ stresses, the ﬁnal solution is simple as shown
in Fig. AI.2. It is fascinating to note that the sum of radial and tangential stresses is equal
to twice the vertical in situ stress everywhere in the rock mass.
σr = P

1 −a2
r2

+ pi
a2
r2
(AI.9)
σθ = P

1 + a2
r2

−pi
a2
r2
(AI.10)
σr + σθ = 2 P
(AI.11)
ua = (1 + ν)(P −pi) a
Ed
(AI.12)
The above equations have been derived for plane stress state (stresses along the tunnel
axis is zero). The solution would be modiﬁed slightly for displacements for plane strain
case by substituting Poisson’s ratio in the above equations (Jaeger & Cook, 1969),
ν →
ν
(1 −ν)
(AI.13a)
Ed →
Ed
(1 −ν2)
(AI.13b)
Fortunately, equations (AI.5), (AI.8) and (AI.12) remain unaltered in the plain strain
case. These laws of transformations may be easily deduced by comparing the strains in
a cube subjected to the principal stresses for plane stress (σ2 = 0) and plain strain case
[ε2 = 0 or σ2 = ν(σ1 + σ3)].
Recently, Carranza and Fairhurst (2000) presented the following empirical equation
for estimation of radial displacement ur at a distance x ahead of tunnel face (x ≤0) and
458 Tunnelling in weak rocks
P
P
2P
2P
a
σr
σθ
P
P
pi
pi
pi
σr
σθ
Fig. AI.2
The stress distribution around circular tunnel in hydrostatic stress condition and plain
strain condition.
behind the face (x > 0) towards portal in the case of circular tunnel within a hydrostatic
in situ stress ﬁeld.
ur
ur∞
=

1 + exp
−x/a
1.10
−1.70
(AI.14)
= 0.31 at x = 0 (tunnel face)
= 1.0 at x →∞
= 0 at x →−∞
The radial displacement ur∞= ua (for pi = 0) in equation (AI.12). Thus, signiﬁcant
displacement may be lost during monitoring even near the face.
It can be noted that above equations and elasto-brittle-plastic solutions in subsequent
articles are also applicable for the nearly vertical shafts in rock masses.
Tunnel mechanics 459
AI.2 PROPOSED ELASTO-PLASTIC THEORY
OF STRESS DISTRIBUTION IN BROKEN ZONE
IN SQUEEZING GROUND
Fig. AI.3 shows a concentric circular broken zone or plastic zone within squeezing
ground. The following assumptions are made to get approximate solutions for the stress
distribution.
(i) Rock mass is isotropic and homogeneous and dry. Tunnel is circular having
radius a.
(ii) Rock mass follows the polyaxial strength criterion within the elastic zone
(Section 8.4)
σ1 −σ3 = qcmass +
σ2 + σ3
2

· A
(AI.15)
(iii) Rock mass strength is reduced to residual state within the broken zone and obeys
Mohr’s theory as follows:
σ1 −σ3 = qcr + σ3 · α
(AI.16)
P
σr
σθ
r
b
(3λ-1)P-pb
pb
pv
a
ph
(3-λ)P-pb
Broken Zone
Elastic Zone
λP
λP
P
Fig. AI.3
Stress distribution in squeezing ground.
460 Tunnelling in weak rocks
α =
2 sin φr
1 −sin φr
qcr = 2 crcos φr
1 −sin φr
tan φp = (Jr/Ja) + 0.1
cr = 0.1 MPa
φr = φp −10◦≥14◦
(iv) Broken zone is circular and concentric with the tunnel, and the gravity is assumed
to act radially for simplifying analysis. The tunnel is supported uniformly and
there are no rock bolts.
(v) In situ principal stress along tunnel axis is Po. The vertical in situ stress is P and
horizontal in situ stress is λP.
(vi) Tunnel supports are provided and they exert support pressure pv and ph in the
vertical and horizontal directions, respectively.
(vii) There is no rock burst or brittle failure [(Jr/Ja) < 0.5]
The proposed analysis is more rigorous than those suggested by other researchers to
the best knowledge of the authors. It is partially veriﬁed by case histories in Himalaya.
Elastic Zone
The tangential stress in horizontal direction is
σ1 = σθ = (3 −λ)P −pb
σ3 = pb
(AI.17)
The radial stress pb at r = b is obtained from equations (AI.15) and (AI.17) as follows:
(3 −λ)P −pb −pb = qcmass +
Po + pb
2

· A
∴pb = (3 −λ) · P −qcmass −Po · (A/2)
	
2 + (A/2)
(AI.18)
Similarly the radial stress at r = b along vertical axis is given by
pb = (3λ −1) · P −qcmass −Po · (A/2)
	
2 + (A/2)
(AI.19)
Tunnel mechanics 461
Broken Zone
The equilibrium equation within the broken zone is as follows:
dσr
dr −σθ −σr
r
= −γ
(AI.20)
where γ is the unit weight of rock mass. Substituting σθ −σr from equation (AI.16) in
equation (AI.20), one gets (σ1 = σθ, σ3 = σr),
dσr
dr −qcr + ασr
r
= −γ
(AI.21)
The assumption of radial gravity is not serious, as the inﬂuence of gravity on support
pressure is insigniﬁcant.
The solution of equation (AI.21) is
α · σr + qcr = c · rα −α · γ · r
1 −α
(AI.22)
σr = −cr · cot φr + c
α · rα −γ · r
1 −α
(AI.23)
At r = b, σr = pb. So this solution becomes
pb = −cr · cot φr + c
α · bα −γ · b
1 −α
c
α =

pb + cr cot φr +
γb
1 −α

· 1
bα
or
σr =

pb + cr cot φr + γ · b
1 −α

·
 r
b
α
−cr cot φr −γ · r
1 −α
(AI.24)
The wall support pressure is thus derived as follows (r = a, γ = 0)
ph = [ pb + cr cot φr]
a
b
α
−cr cot φr
(AI.25a)
ph =
(3 −λ) P −qcmass −APo/2
2 + (A/2)
+ cr cot φr
 a
b
α
−cr cot φr
(AI.25b)
Thus squeezing will take place where hydrostatic in situ stress ﬁeld exists and
A < 4 −
2 qcmass
P

(AI.26)
A < 1 or 2
(AI.27)
462 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Similarly, the roof support pressure is obtained from equations (AI.19, AI.24) (r = a):
pv =
(3λ −1) P −qcmass −Po · A/2
2 + (A/2)
+ cr cot φr
 a
b
α
−cr cot φr + γMγ(b −a)
(AI.28)
= ph + γMγ (b −a)
for λ = 1
(AI.29)
Mγ =
a
(b −a) ·
1 −sin φr
1 −3 · sin φr
a
b
α−1
−1

(AI.30)
The equations (AI.25b) and (AI.28) are same as derived by Daemen (1975) for λ = 1
except the expression for radial stress pb at the outer boundary of the broken zone. It is
easy to derive the complicated expression for pb using Hoek and Brown’s criterion.
The same may be substituted in equations (AI.24), (AI.25a) and (AI.29) to get support
pressures. It may be noted that γ is negative at the bottom of a tunnel.
AI.3 SHORT-TERM SUPPORT PRESSURE ON CLOSELY
SPACED TUNNELS IN SQUEEZING GROUND CONDITION
Sometimes several tunnels are required in a hydelproject to carry a given quantity of
water because the size of a single tunnel becomes too large to be economical. Besides the
considerations of economy, these tunnels may have to be closely spaced due to constraints
of topography on a river side. It is, therefore necessary to analyze stresses on the rock
pillar between two adjacent tunnels (or road tunnels). Jethwa (1981) derived the following
closed form elasto-plastic solution.
The following assumptions have been made:
(i) The tunnels are circular in shape and their center to center spacing is 2b (Fig.
AI.4).
(ii) The rock mass around the tunnels has failed due to overstressing and the thickness
of the broken zone of rock mass is equal to half the pillar width (Fig. AI.4).
The stress distribution has been assumed to be axi-symmetric around each tunnel.
(iii) The short-term support pressure on the support is pho in the horizontal direction.
(iv) The effect of gravity is neglected.
(v) There are no cross openings connecting the tunnels.
The relationship between the tangential stress
	
σbro
θ
and radial stress
	
σbro
r
within the
broken zone according to Coulomb’s law is given by,
σbro
θ
= σbro
r
1 + sin φr
1 −sin φr
+ 2 · cr
cos φr
1 −sin φr
(AI.31)
Tunnel mechanics 463
Broken Zone
Broken Zone
P
Elastic Zone
Pillar
a
b
a
b
σθ
bro
σr
bro
P
P
P
Fig. AI.4
Stresses on the pillar between two adjacent tunnels in squeezing ground condition.
The radial stress within the broken zone (Daemen, 1975) is given by equation (AI.23)
	
σbro
r
= pho at r = a and γ = 0
,
σbro
θ
=
1
sin φr

( pho · sin φr + cr · cos φr)(r/a)α −cr · cos φr

(AI.32)
The expression for tangential stress
	
σbro
θ
may be obtained from equation (AI.31)
after substituting for σbro
r
from equation (AI.32). So,
σbro
θ
= 1 + sin φr
1 −sin φr
·
1
sin φr

( pho · sin φr + cr cos φr)(r/a)α −cr cos φr

+ 2cr cos φr
1 −sin φr
(AI.33)
The strength (Sp) of the pillar per unit length may be determined by integrating the
tangential stress
	
σbro
θ
along the pillar width (2b) as follows:
Sp = 2
b

a
σbro
θ
dr
(AI.34)
Substituting for σθ from equation (AI.33) one gets,
Sp = 1 + sin φr
1 −sin φr
·
2
sin φr
b

a

( pho · sin φr + cr cos φr)(r/a)α −cr cos φr

dr
+ 2cr cos φr
1 −sin φr
b

a
2 dr
(AI.35)
464 Tunnelling in weak rocks
or
Sp = 2 · J
sin φr

( pho · sin φr + cr cos φr) · a
J ·

(b/a)J −1

−(b −a) · cr cos φr

+ 4(b −a) · cr cos φr
1 −sin φr
(AI.36)
where J = 1 + sin φr
1 −sin φr
= α + 1
On simpliﬁcation, equation (AI.36) could be reduced to,
Sp = 2 · J
sin φr

( pho · sin φr + cr cos φr) · a
J ·

(b/a)J −1

−2 · (b −a) · cr cot φr

(AI.37)
The actual load Lp acting on the pillar is given by,
Lp = 2 P (b −a)
(AI.38)
Finally, the factor of safety (Fp) of the pillar is obtained as the ratio between the pillar
strength and the actual load on it, that is
Fp = Sp
Lp
(AI.39)
Substituting for Sp and Lp from equations (AI.37) and (AI.38) respectively, equa-
tion (AI.39) yields,
Fp = (J/sin φr) · [( pho · sin φr + cr cos φr)] · (a/J) ·

(b/a)J −1

−(b −a) · cr cot φr
P(b −a)
(AI.40)
≥3
For the failed rock mass, cr may be assumed to be zero. Equation (AI.40) then
simpliﬁes to,
Fp = pho · (bJ −aJ)
P · aα(b −a)
(AI.41)
Solving for pho
pho = FP · P · aα(b −a)
(bJ −aJ)
(AI.42)
Equation (AI.42) may be used to determine the short-term horizontal support pressure
(Pho) for the design of supports in the case of two adjacent tunnels using an appropriate
factor of safety (about 3) for the pillar. Alternately, the factor of safety may be calculated
if Pho is known. Equation (AI.42) has actually been adopted in the design of the main
Tunnel mechanics 465
roadways of the Noonidih-Jitpur Colliery for improving the factor of safety of shaft pil-
lar which was practically crushed (Jethwa et al., 1979). The short-term vertical support
pressure “pvo” may be predicted approximately by equation (AI.28) (λ = 1). The implicit
assumption in the above derivation is that stresses at the broken zone boundary remain
practically unaffected by the adjacent tunnels.
AI.4 SEISMIC SUPPORT PRESSURES
Shotcrete lining is found to fail due to horizontal seismic support pressure within a clayey
fault zone. Equation (AI.28) suggests that the horizontal body force αh ·γ may act towards
tunnel center and a vertical body force may act vertically downwards during earthquake.
Thus the additional seismic support pressures may be of the following order,
phseismic = αh · γ · Mγ · (b −a)
(AI.43)
pvseismic = αv · γ · Mγ · (b −a)
(AI.44)
where
phseismic = horizontal seismic support pressure for squeezing ground,
pvseismic = vertical seismic support pressure for squeezing ground,
αh
= coefﬁcient of horizontal peak ground acceleration at level of tunnel during
earthquake and
αv
= coefﬁcient of vertical peak ground acceleration at level of tunnel during
earthquake.
REFERENCES
Carranza Torres, C and Fairhurst, C. (2000). Application of the convergence-conﬁnement method
of design to rock masses that satisfy Hoek-Brown failure criterion. Tunnelling and
Underground Space Technology, 15, 187-213.
Jaeger, J. C. and Cook, N.G.W. (1969). Fundamentals of Rock Mechanics. Methuen and Co. Ltd.
Art.5.3, 513.
Terzaghi, K. and Richart, F. E. (1952). Stresses in rock around cavities. Geotechnique, 3, 57-99.
Jethwa, J. L. (1981). Evaluation of rock pressures in tunnels through squeezing ground in lower
Himalayas. PhD thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, IIT Roorkee, India, 272.
Daemen, J. J. K. (1975). Tunnel Support Loading caused by Rock Failure. PhD thesis, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, U.S.A.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
Appendix II
Software TM for empirical design of support
system for caverns and tunnels
“Realistic solutions to rock mechanics problems must involve a combination of general
principles of mechanics with a mature physical insight developed through intelligent
observations and experiment both in laboratory and the ﬁeld.”
Charles Fairhurst (1968)
University of Minnesota, USA
AII.1 GENERAL
The aim of supporting underground opening is to reinforce the rock mass so that it can
act as an inherently stable, ductile and robust structural system to support unstable zones
in the rock mass. This objective may be achieved by constructing a reinforced rock arch,
i.e., an array of (perfo/resin) rock anchors in both the roof and the side walls, according
to the overall ground conditions. Weld mesh should also be used to provide local stability
to rock blocks hanging in between the rock anchors, together with normal shotcrete.
Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) should be provided where squeezing ground
conditions are likely to be encountered. However, in highly squeezing ground conditions
(H ≫350 Q1/3 m and Jr/Ja ≪0.5; H is the overburden in meters and Q is Barton’s rock
mass quality), steel ribs with struts should be installed when the shotcrete lining begins to
fail again and again, despite the addition of extra layers of shotcrete. Another advantage
of steel ribs is that excavation by forepoling is easily done by pushing iron bars into the
tunnel and welding their opposite ends to the ribs. The ﬂoor heaving problem in highly
squeezing grounds may be easily solved by bolting the ﬂoor. Cutting the ﬂoor to maintain
proper level is of no use, since heaving will redevelop.
However, it would be wiser to realign the tunnel to pass through safer zones (H <
350 Q1/3 m). Alternatively, a larger tunnel may be divided into smaller tunnels in the
squeezing ground to reduce construction problems.
In the case of openings within a water-charged rock mass, steel ribs may be used
to support the rock mass after it has been reinforced by Swellex rock bolts. Continuous
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
468 Tunnelling in weak rocks
shotcrete should not be used because it will act as a barrier to underground water. Generally
when shotcrete is applied to rock masses with well-deﬁned water bearing joints, it is
important to provide drainage through the shotcrete layer in order to relieve high water
pressure. Drain holes, ﬁtted with plastic pipes are commonly used for this purpose. Water-
charged rock masses may also be grouted to form a grouted arch with drainage holes.
Advantages of an integrated NATM–NMT approach to support rock masses are: a
faster rate of tunnelling; ﬂexibility with regard to construction and general strategy for a
wide variety of ground conditions and weak zones; built-in stability and greater economy.
Further, this type of support system can always be strengthened easily by adding more
rock anchors and shotcrete layers as and when required.
In potentially unstable portals, horizontal rock anchors of equal length should be
provided inside the cut slope of the portal so that it acts as a reinforced-rock-breast wall.
The rock cover should be at least equal to the width of the tunnel.
The aim, in a nutshell, is to construct an inherently stable, ductile and robust struc-
tural system to support a wide variety of ground conditions and weak zones, keeping in
mind basic tunnel mechanics and the inherent uncertainties in the exploration, testing and
behavior of geological materials.
It has been difﬁcult to convince Asian engineers to adopt modern methods of tunnel
support. Failure of the rock bolt support system in caverns of the Sardar Sarovar (Narmada)
Project (Gujrat, India) and the tunnel of the Chamera Dam Project (Himachal Pradesh,
India) have also undermined the conﬁdence of engineers. Their hesitation is also due, in
part, to confusion about the function of rock bolts.
AII.2 SOFTWARE TM
The advantage of SFRS is that a thinner layer of shotcrete needs to be applied, in com-
parison to conventional shotcrete. Furthermore, ﬁber-reinforced shotcrete is especially
necessary in poor rock conditions where support pressure is high.
The use of ﬁber-reinforced shotcrete together with resin anchors is also recommended
for controlling rock burst conditions because of the high fracture toughness which espe-
cially long steel ﬁbers provide (NGI, 1993). It appears that this type of system may also be
successful in highly squeezing ground conditions, such as those encountered in the lower
Himalaya. Therefore, a simple semi-empirical theory is proposed by Singh et al. (1995)
to illustrate how rock bolts and shotcrete/SFRS resist the support pressures. The cor-
relations for various types of support system have been deduced from extensive tables
and charts of Norwegian Geological Institute (NGI). Thakur (1995) evaluated critically
this semi-empirical method on the basis of over 100 case histories and found it satisfac-
tory. Park et al. (1997) used this design method for four food storage caverns in Korea.
Samadhiya (1998) has veriﬁed the semi-empirical theory for shotcrete support by three-
dimensional stress analysis of cavern with a shear zone in the Sardar Sarovar Project.
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has adopted this design method for code on Tunnelling
Software TM for empirical design of support system for caverns and tunnels
469
in Rocks. Kumar (2002) has found that the proposed semi-empirical theory is applicable
upto support capacity of 27 t/m2. The method is conservative beyond this capacity. Gen-
erally support pressures are much less than this limit in rock masses. Support pressures
may be estimated according to Section 5.6.2.
As such the software TM is developed on the basis of above semi-empirical method for
tunnels and large caverns. It also takes into account the adverse effect of shear zones on the
stability of support system (Grimstad & Barton, 1993; Bhasin et al., 1995). The program
TM has been used in three case histories. It gives realistic designs of support systems even
in complex geological conditions. This program has also been used successfully for the
design of rock bolt and shotcrete system at Ganwi mini Hydelproject, H. P., India, and
many other very wide tunnels.
The software TM can be copied from CD in the book of Singh and Goel (2002). The
ﬁle names are Software/Tunnel/Source/TM.FOR and Software/Tunnel/TM/*.*. Source
program is TM.FOR in Fortran.
The length of anchors/rock bolts in the wall of cavern is designed to prevent the
buckling of reinforced rock wall column. This length depends also upon the depth of
damage (d) due to blasting (Fig. AII.1). The following correlation between d and weight
of charge W (kg/m);
d = 1.94 W 1.23 meters
(AII.1)
The output of TM is (i) the optimum angle of roof arch in cavern, (ii) thickness
of shotcrete/SFRS and (iii) design of rock bolt system for both roof and the walls, and
suggested special speciﬁcations.
The thickness of shotcrete (tsc) may be estimated rather easily from equations (28.1)
and (28.3). It needs to be realized that shotcrete lining of adequate thickness and quality is
a long-term support system. This is true for rail tunnels also. It must be ensured that there
is a good bond between shotcrete and rock surface. Tensile bending stresses are not found
to occur even in the irregular shotcrete lining in the roof due to a good bond between
shotcrete and rock mass in an arched roof opening. Rock bolts help in better bonding.
Similarly, contact grouting is essential behind the concrete lining to develop a good bond
between the lining and rock mass to arrest its bending. However, bending stresses can
develop within the fault zones. The SFRS can bear bending stresses due to steel ﬁbers.
In the over-stressed brittle hard rocks, resin anchors should be installed to make the
reinforced rock arch a ductile arch. Thus, mode of failure is designed to be ductile from
the brittle failure (rock burst). Hence, failure would be slow giving enough time for local
strengthening (or retroﬁtting) of the existing support system.
AII.3 EXPERIENCE IN POOR ROCK CONDITIONS
Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS) has proved very successful in the 6.5 km long
tunnel for the Uri Hydelproject and desilting underground chambers of NJPC in Himalaya.
470 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Steel fibre reinforced
shotcrete (SFRS)
Rock bolt
(dia = ds)
Shear failure at points of
maximum shear stress
(a) Reinforced rock arch
Grout
arch
Shear zone
Damaged
zone due to
blasing
SFRS
(b)  Reinforced rock frame
0.6B
L
Fig. AII.1
Design of support system for underground openings.
The main advantage is that a smaller thickness of SFRS is needed. No weld mesh is
required to reinforce the shotcrete. If the shotcrete is graded and sprayed properly, there
is less rebound, thanks to the steel ﬁbers. This method is now economical, safer and faster
than the conventional shotcrete. Controlled blasting technique is adopted to excavate the
tunnel where SFRS is to be used. Further, selection of right ingredients and tight quality
control over application are key to the success of SFRS.
Software TM for empirical design of support system for caverns and tunnels
471
AII.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS
The following conclusions are offered on the basis of modelling and design experiences
of support systems in poor rock masses.
1. In a poor rock mass, the support pressure resisted by the rock bolts is small in
comparison to that taken by shotcrete, which is generally the main element of the
long-term support system for resisting heavy support pressure in tunnels.
2. The proposed semi-empirical method and TM software are based on an integrated
approach in the design of shotcrete, rock bolts/anchors, steel ribs and grouted arch,
taking into account both seepage pressure and support pressure. The mobilization
factors for each member have been derived from NGI tables and charts of support
systems for both shotcrete and ﬁber-reinforced shotcrete.
3. The data analysis suggests that untensioned full-column grouted bolts are likely
to be more effective than the pre-tensioned bolts in supporting poor rock masses.
AII.5 USERS MANUAL – TM
PLEASE TYPE THE FOLLOWING PARAMETERS IN THE CASE OF NO SHEAR
ZONE (SEE FIG. AII.1)
1. TITLE (<80 CHARACTERS)
2. SPAN OF UNDERGROUND OPENING (M)
SLIDING ANGLE OF FRICTION ALONG JOINTS = ATAN(Jr/Ja) (DEG)
AVERAGE SPACING OF JOINTS APPROXIMATELY (M)
SEEPAGE PRESSURE IN ROOF (T/SQ.M)
MINIMUM UNIAXIAL COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF GROUTED ROCK
MASS (T/SQ.M)
SHEAR STRENGTH OF SHOTCRETE/FIBRE REINFORCED SHOTCRETE
(T/SQ.M)
(SAY 300 FOR SHOTCRETE & 550 FOR FIBRE REINFORCED SHOT-
CRETE)
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE SUPPORT PRESSURE IN ROOF (T/SQ.M)
{Increase support pressure by 25 % for seismic region}
3. LENGTH OF ROCK BOLT/ANCHOR IN ROOF (L) (M)
FIXED ANCHOR LENGTH (100Ds/ACTUAL< L & < 1 m FOR PRE-
TENSIONED BOLT)
SPACING OF BOLT/ANCHOR (< L/2 AND 2.25 M) (M)
{SQUARE ROOT OF AREA OF ROCK MASS SUPPORTED BY ONE ROCK
BOLT}
472 Tunnelling in weak rocks
BOLT/ANCHOR
CAPACITY
(REDUCE
PROPORTIONATELY
IF
L < ACTUAL FAL) (T)
CAPACITY OF STEEL RIB (T)
SPACING OF STEEL RIBS (T)
THICKNESS OF GROUTED ROCK MASS (M)
{PLEASE OMIT THIS LINE No. 4 OF DATA IF SPAN OF OPENING < 10M}
4. HEIGHT OF WALL OF CAVERN (M)
MODULUS OF DEFORMATION OF ROCK MASS (T/SQ.M)
AVERAGE VERTICAL STRESS ABOVE HAUNCH ALONG BOLT (T/SQ.M)
SEEPAGE PRESSURE IN WALL (T/SQ.M)
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE WALL SUPPORT PRESSURE (T/SQ.M)
SHEAR STRENGTH OF GROUTED ROCK MASS
THICKNESS OF GROUTED ROCK MASS IN WALL (M)
DEPTH OF DAMAGE TO ROCK MASS DUE TO BLASTING (1-3 M)
5. SAFE BEARING PRESSURE OF ROCK MASS IN WEAK ZONE (T/SQ.M)
(see Table 4.3)
6. TYPE NN EQUAL 1 FOR REDESIGN AT SAME LOCATION, 2 FOR
REDESIGN OF WALL SUPPORT AT SAME LOCATION, 0 FOR STOP, -1
FOR NEW LOCATION AND -2 FOR AREA OF SHEAR ZONE
{RESTART INPUT DATA FROM THE BEGINNING FOR NN = -1 OR PARA
3 FOR NN = 1 AND 2
OR
PLEASE TYPE THE FOLLOWING PARAMETERS IN CASE OF LOCATION
NEAR THE SHEAR ZONE WITH NN = -2}
TITLE
ROCK MASS QUALITY IN SHEAR ZONE
JOINT ROUGHNESS NUMBER IN SHEAR ZONE
JOINT ALTERATION NUMBER IN SHEAR ZONE
MODULUS OF DEFORMATION OF SHEAR ZONE (T/SQ.M)
WIDTH OF SHEAR ZONE (M)
STRIKE DIRECTION OF SHEAR ZONE (DEG.)
{WITH RESPECT TO AXIS OF TUNNEL/CAVERN}
ROCK MASS QUALITY IN SURROUNDING ROCK MASS
JOINT ROUGHNESS NUMBER IN SURROUNDING ROCK MASS
JOINT ALTERATION NUMBER IN SURROUNDING ROCK
MODULUS OF DEFORMATION OF ROCK MASS (T/SQ.M)
HEIGHT OF OVERBURDEN OF ROCK MASS (M)
{PLEASE CONTINUE FROM PARA 2}
Software TM for empirical design of support system for caverns and tunnels
473
(a) Input File – TM.DAT
DESIGN OF SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR CAVERN OF SARDAR SAROVAR
PROJECT (SSP)
23. 57. 0.8 0. 0. 300. 8.8
6. 2. 1.75 32. 0. 0. 0.
52. 750000. 250. 0. 1. 0. 0. 3.
200.
0
(b) Output File: TM.OUT
DESIGN OF SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR CAVERN OF SARDAR SAROVAR PROJECT
SPAN OF UNDERGROUND OPENING (M)
= 23.000
SLIDING ANGLE OF FRICTION ALONG JOINTS (DEG)
= 57.000
AVERAGE SPACING OF JOINTS (M)
= 0.800
AVERAGE VALUE OF SEEPAGE PRESSURE IN ROOF (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF GROUTED ROCK (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
SHEAR STRENGTH OF SHOTCRETE (T/SQ.M)
= 300.000
ESTIMATED ULTIMATE ROOF SUPPORT PRESSURE (T/SQ.M)
= 8.800
LENGTH OF ROCK BOLT/ANCHOR IN ROOF (M)
= 6.000
FIXED ANCHOR LENGTH (M)
= 2.000
SPACING OF BOLT/ANCHOR IN ROOF (M)
= 1.750
BOLT/ANCHOR CAPACITY (T)
= 32.000
CAPACITY OF STEEL RIB (T)
= 0.000
SPACING OF STEEL RIBS (M)
= 0.000
THICKNESS OF GROUTED ROCK MASS (M)
= 0.000
CAPACITY OF SHOTCRETE LINING IN ROOF (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
CAPACITY OF REINFORCED ROCK ARCH (T/SQ.M)
= 9.167
CAPACITY OF STEEL RIBS (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
CAPACITY OF GROUTED ROCK ARCH (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
THICKNESS OF SHOTCRETE IN ROOF (M)
= 0.026
RECOMMENDED ANGLE OF ARCH AT CENTRE (APPROXIMATE) = 104.
HEIGHT OF WALL OF CAVERN (M)
= 52.000
MODULUS OF DEFORMATION OF ROCK MASS (T/SQ.M)
= 750.000
AVERAGE VERTICAL STRESS ABOVE HAUNCH (T/SQ.M)
= 250.000
AVERAGE VALUE OF SEEPAGE PRESSURE IN WALL (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
ESTIMATED WALL ULTIMATE SUPPORT PRESSURE (T/SQ.M)
= 1.000
SHEAR STRENGTH OF GROUTED ROCK (T/SQ.M)
= 0.000
474 Tunnelling in weak rocks
THICKNESS OF GROUTED ROCK MASS IN WALL (M)
= 0.000
DEPTH OF DAMAGE TO ROCK MASS DUE TO BLASTING (M) = 3.000
SUGGESTED LENGTH OF BOLT/ANCHOR FOR WALL (M)
= 6.000
SPACING OF BOLTS/ANCHORS FOR WALL (M)
= 1.750
THICKNESS OF SHOTCRETE IN WALL (M)
= 0.052
*
THE REINFORCED ROCK WALL COLUMN MAY NOT BUCKLE, SO THE
SPACING OF ROCK BOLTS/ANCHORS MAY BE INCREASED AND THICK-
NESS OF SHOTCRETE/SFRS REDUCED IN WALLS ON THE BASIS OF PAST
EXPERIENCE AND UNDERGROUND WEDGE ANALYSIS.
SAFE BEARING PRESSURE OF ROCK MASS (T/SQ.M) = 200.000
SIDE OF BASE PLATE OF BOLT/ANCHOR (M)
= 0.40000
SPECIAL SPECIFICATIONS
1. FOR TREATMENT OF SHEAR ZONES, CROSSED ROCK ANCHORS/
BOLTS SHOULD BE PROVIDED ACROSS SHEAR ZONES. FIRST
GOUGE SHOULD BE CLEANED TO DESIRED EXTENT. ANCHORS ARE
PROVIDED AND CONNECTED TO WELD MESH. FINALLY DENTAL
SHOTCRETE IS BACK-FILLED. IN WIDE SHEAR ZONE, REINFORCE-
MENT IN SHOTCRETE IS ALSO PLACED TO WITHSTAND HIGH SUP-
PORT PRESSURE. ANCHORS SHOULD BE INCLINED ACCORDING TO
DIP OF SHEAR ZONE TO STOP SQUEEZING OF GOUGE AND THEREBY
STABILISE DEFORMATIONS.
2. IN CASE OF POOR ROCK MASS, SPILING BOLTS (INCLINED TOWARDS
TUNNEL FACE) SHOULD BE INSTALLED BEFORE BLASTING TO
INCREASE THE STAND-UP TIME OF TUNNEL ROOF. SHOTCRETE IS
THEN SPRAYED ON ROOF. NEXT SPILING BOLTS ARE INSTALLED. IN
FINAL CYCLE, ROOF BOLTS ARE INSTALLED.
3. IN CASES OF ARGILLACEOUS ROCKS AND SWELLING ROCKS WHERE
ITS BOND WITH SHOTCRETE IS POOR, THICKNESS OF SHOTCRETE
MAY BE INCREASED BY ABOUT 30%.
4. INCASEOFUNSTABLEPORTALS,HORIZONTALANCHORSOFEQUAL
LENGTH SHOULD BE PROVIDED INSIDE THE CUT SLOPE, SO THAT IT
ACTS AS A REINFORCED ROCK BREAST WALL.
5. ALL BOLTS SHOULD BE GROUTED AS PROTECTION FROM CORRO-
SION. AT LEAST 5% BOLTS SHOULD BE PULLED OUT TO CHECK
THEIR PULL OUT CAPACITY PARTICULARLY NEAR SHEAR/ FAULT
ZONES.
Software TM for empirical design of support system for caverns and tunnels
475
REFERENCES
Barton, N., Lien, R. and Lunde, J. (1974). Engineering classiﬁcation of rock masses for the design
of tunnel support. Rock Mechanics, 6, 189-236.
Bhasin, R., Singh, R. B., Dhawan, A. K. and Sharma, V. M. (1995). Geotechnical evaluation and a
review of remedial measures in limiting deformations in distressed zones in a powerhouse
cavern. Conf. Design and Construction of Underground Structures, New Delhi, India,
145-152.
Grimstad, E. and Barton, N. (1993). Updating of the Q-system for NMT. Proc. Int. Sym. On Sprayed
Concrete – Modern Use of Wet Mix Sprayed Concrete for Underground Support, Fagernes,
Norwegian Concrete Association, Oslo.
Kumar, N. (2002). Rock mass characterisation and evaluation of supports for tunnels in Himalaya.
PhD thesis, Water Resources Development Training Centre, IIT Roorkee, India, 295.
Norwegian Geological Institute. (1993). Manual for mapping of rocks, prepared by rock engineer-
ing and reservoir mechanics section of NGI, for a Workshop on Norwegian Method of
Tunnelling, Sept. 1993, New Delhi, 12-54.
Park, E. S., Kim, H. Y. and Lee, H. K. (1997). A study on the design of the shallow large cavern
in the Gonjiam underground storage terminal. Proc. Ist Asian Rock Mechanics Sym. On
Environmental and Strategy Concerns in Underground Construction, Seoul, 345-351.
Samadhiya, N. K. (1998). Inﬂuence of anisotropy and shear zones on stability of caverns. PhD thesis,
Civil Engineering Department, IIT Roorkee, India, 334.
Singh, Bhawani and Goel, R. K. (2002). Software for Engineering Control of Landslide and
Tunnelling Hazards. A. A. Balkema, Swets & Zeitlinger, Chapter 26, 344.
Singh, Bhawani, Viladkar, M. N., Samadhiya N. K. and Sandeep (1995). A semi-empirical method
for the design of support systems in underground openings. Tunnelling and Underground
Space Technology, 10(3), 375-383.
Thakur, B. (1995). Semi-empirical method for design of supports in underground excavations.
ME thesis, Civil Engineering Deptt., IIT Roorkee, India, 126.
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
Appendix III
Capacity of blocked steel beam sections in the
roof of tunnel
Tunnelling in Weak Rocks
B. Singh and R. K. Goel
© 2006. Elsevier Ltd
Capacity in pounds per foot of tunnel width of various blocked continuous steel beam sections in the roof of tunnel (Proctor & White, 1946).
Beam
B = Width of tunnel to outside design concrete line (in feet)
Nominal
14′–0′′
16′–0′′
18′–0′′
20′–0′′
22′–0′′
24′–0′′
26′–0′′
28′–0′′
30′–0′′
32′–0′′
34′–0′′
depth and
Weight
S = Maximum blocking point spacing (in inches)
ﬂange
per foot
As
width
Type
(lbs)
(in2)
40′′
42′′
44′′
46′′
48′′
50′′
52′′
54′′
56′′
58′′
60′′
4′′
I
7.7
2.26
2750
2470
4′′ × 4′′
Stanchion
10.0
–
3750
3370
4′′ × 4′′
H
13.0
3.83
4780
4310
3910
3570
5′′
I
10.0
2.94
4030
3620
3280
2990
5′′ × 5′′
Stanchion
13.5
–
5760
5180
4690
4270
5′′ × 5′′
Stanchion
16.0
4.68
6920
6220
5630
5130
5′′ × 5′′
H
18.9
5.54
7860
7060
6390
5820
6′′
I
12.5
3.67
5590
5030
4540
4130
3790
6′′
I
17.25
5.07
7100
6380
5770
5260
4830
4450
6′′ × 4′′
Light beam
12.0
3.55
5510
4940
4460
4060
3730
6′′ × 4′′
Light beam
16.0
4.74
7540
6760
6110
5570
5100
4470
6′′ × 6′′
Stanchion
15.5
–
7450
6670
6030
5490
5033
4650
6′′ × 6′′
Stanchion
18.0
–
8690
7780
7040
6410
5870
5420
6′′ × 6′′
Stanchion
27.5
–
12010
10860
9890
9060
8370
6′′ × 6′′
H
20.0
5.87
9550
8560
7740
7050
6460
5960
6′′ × 6′′
H
25.0
–
11800
10570
9570
8710
8040
7360
6830
6350
5930
7′′
I
15.3
4.50
5990
5450
4990
4610
8′′
I
18.4
5.41
7640
6950
6370
5860
5450
8′′
I
23.0
6.77
8640
8290
7600
7010
6500
6040
5640
5280
4960
8′′ × 4′′
Light beam
15.0
4.44
6320
5750
5270
4860
8′′ × 5.25′′
Wide ﬂange
17.0
5.00
7310
6680
6120
5650
5240
8′′ × 5.25′′
Wide ﬂange
21.0
6.16
9210
8390
7680
7090
6570
6100
5700
8′′ × 6.5′′
Wide ﬂange
24.0
7.08
10600
9650
8400
8150
7560
7020
6560
6150
5770
8′′ × 6.5′′
Wide ﬂange
27.0
7.95
11920
10850
9930
9160
8500
7900
7380
6910
6480
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
31.0
9.13
13820
12590
11530
10640
9860
9160
8560
8020
7530
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
35.0
10.3
15640
14250
13110
12040
11160
10370
9690
9070
8530
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
40.0
11.7
17870
16270
14890
13750
12740
11840
11050
10360
9740
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
48.0
14.1
18150
17990
16600
15390
14290
13360
12510
11760
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
58.0
17.1
21700
20030
18560
17240
16110
15110
14210
8′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
67.0
19.7
25100
23190
21840
19970
18650
17470
16420
10′′
I
25.4
7.46
9610
8860
8210
7630
7130
6680
6280
10′′
I
35.0
10.3
12520
11540
10740
9940
9290
8700
8170
10′′ × 5.75′′
Wide ﬂange
21.0
6.4
8220
7580
7020
6520
6090
5710
5370
10′′ × 5.75′′
Wide ﬂange
26.0
7.6
10320
9500
8820
8180
7640
7160
6740
10′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
33.0
9.71
13130
12080
11210
10430
9740
9130
8580
10′′ × 8′′
Wide ﬂange
41.0
12.4
16460
15170
14070
13060
12210
11440
10760
10′′ × 10′′
Wide ﬂange
49.0
14.4
18290
16970
15770
14730
13820
12990
10′′ × 10′′
Wide ﬂange
54.0
15.8
20200
18750
17410
16270
15260
14340
10′′ × 10′′
Wide ﬂange
66.0
19.4
24950
22900
21280
19870
18630
17520
10′′ × 10′′
Wide ﬂange
77.0
22.6
26760
24840
23230
21760
20480
10′′ × 10′′
Wide ﬂange
89.0
26.0
30930
28710
26850
25160
23650
Conversion Factors: 1 lb/in2 = 0.00703 MPa; 1 lb = 0.4536 kg; 1 ft. = 0.3048 m.
480 Tunnelling in weak rocks
Notes:
(i) The above table will be helpful in making a preliminary selection of steel rib size.
It shows the allowable vertical load, in pounds per linear foot of rib, projected
on the horizontal, when applied to the rib at blocking points spaced as indicated.
Thus, the product of vertical load shown in the table above and spacing of rib
in ft. should be approximately equal to ultimate support pressure in the roof for
selection of the steel rib section.
(ii) Data given is for tunnels with a semi-circular roof. Ribs for tunnels of other shapes
should be investigated separately.
(iii) In the table, values are based on a maximum ﬁber stress of 24,000 p.s.i.
(iv) Deductions have been made for tie rod holes in the web. If additional holes in the
web or ﬂanges are desired, the allowable loads should be reduced accordingly.
(v) It is assumed that all wedges and blocks will be kept tight. No side loads are
considered to be acting on the vertical legs.
(vi) Blocking point spacing cannot be exceeded without reducing the rib capacity.
Capacity will decline in proportion to the square of the blocking point spacing
as it is increased; hence the capacity falls off sharply if the spacing shown is
exceeded. Conversely, closer spacing resulting from additional blocking points
will increase the capacity rapidly.
(vii) If the blocking point spacing is reduced to zero by concrete packing, there will be
no bending stresses in the curved portion of the rib and the capacity of arch rib
(prib) in lbs/ft2 can be approximately estimated by prib = (2As · σy/Fs · B · Srib) =
proof, where As is the cross-sectional area of the steel rib in square inch; σy is the
yield strength of steel in p.s.i = 24,000; B is the width of the tunnel in feet; Srib is
the spacing of steel ribs in feet and Fs is factor of safety = 1.5.
REFERENCES
Proctor, R. V. and White, T. L. (1946). Rock tunnelling with steel supports. The Commercial
Shearing & Stamping Company, USA, 271.
Index
Allowable bearing pressure, 46
Ammonium nitrate fuel oil (ANFO), 169–170,
175–6
Anisotropy of rock mass, 72
Arched roof:
reinforcement, 198–201
stand-up time, 43
Backﬁll grouting, 430–1
Blast loading, support system for, 332–3
Blasting, 151–77
blast design, 167–77
burden, 171
charge per hole, 170–1
computer-aided blast design, 176
contour blasting, 172–6
depth of round, 167–8
explosives and accessories, 169–70
holes per round, 168–9
optimum tunnel blast design, 177
type, delay and sequence of initiation,
171–2
blast holes nomenclature, 153–4
mechanics, 152–3
metro tunnel construction, 263
impact on structures, 263–5
models for prediction of tunnel blast
results, 162–7
holistic models, 166–7
rock mass damage, 163–6
speciﬁc charge, 162–3
throw, muck proﬁle and fragmentation,
166
parameters inﬂuencing results, 156–62
blast hole deviation, 161–2
rock mass properties, 156–60
shafts, 361
tunnel blast performance, 156
tunnel depth, 161
tunnel size, 160–1
Bolting, See Rock bolting
Bolu tunnel, Turkey, 275
Borehole deformation gauge, 227–9
Borehole extensometer, 233–4,
236–8
large underground cavity, 238
squeezing ground condition, 236–7
Bracing, 425
Broken zone, 279, 315
compaction zone within, 284–5
rock burst, 337–8
stabilization, 285
stress distribution, 459–62
Burden, 171
Chain link mesh, 146, 192
Chaos theory, 69
Chimney formation, 214
Cofﬁn cover, 29, 315
Cohesion, 43–4
Collapse, See Tunnel failure
Computer-aided blast design, 176
Concrete:
packing, 427
plain cement concrete (PCC)
lining, 345, 347–9
self-compacting concrete (SCC), 362–3
solid concrete lining, 347
Consolidation grouting, 432
Construction planning, 385–6
time and cost estimates, 386
Contact grouting, 431–2
Contour blasting, 172–6
Contracting, 376–9, 399–400
risk management, 379–84
482 Index
Cost:
estimates, 394
minimization, 382–3
Critical path analysis, 398
Critical state condition, 443–52
conﬁning pressure effect on frictional
angle, 452
model for rock mass, 445–9
residual strength, 449–52
See also Rock burst; Tunnel failure
Critical strain of rock mass, 111–13
Crown bars, 424
Cut, 152
types of, 154–6
Cutter life index (CLI), 253–4
Data requirement, 224–5
Discontinuities:
condition of, 39
orientation of, 40–1
spacing of, 39
strength of, 91
tensile strength across discontinuous
joints, 114–15
Double beam wall plates, 423
Drainage measures, 148
in shotcrete, 410
Drilling, 151–2
jumbo drills, 152, 242–4
line drilling, 174
shafts, 361
Dry pack, 427
Dynamic strength of rock mass, 115–16
Earthquakes, See Seismic activity
EGO (Extraordinary Geological Occurrences),
1, 136, 217
Elastic stress distribution around circular
tunnels, 455–8
Elasto-plastic pressure, See Squeezing rock
Electrical resistivity survey, 11
Exploration, 2
See also Geophysical exploration
Explosive gases, 214–16
Explosives, 169–70
See also Blasting
Extensometers:
borehole, 233–4, 236–8
rock mass behavior measurement around
underground opening, 233–4
stress measurement at rock face, 229–30
support pressure measurement, 232–3
Failure, See Rock burst; Tunnel failure
Fault tree analysis, 384
Feedback, 397–8
Flooding, 213–14
Floor bolting, 201
Flowing ground, 438
Forward analysis, 6
Friction set, 146
Frictional angle, 43–4
conﬁning pressure effect on, 452
residual, 97
Full-column grouted bolts, 183–7
Full-column-grouted resin (TMT)
bolts, 133
Gases, 214–16
Geomechanics classiﬁcation system, See Rock
mass rating (RMR) system
Geophysical exploration, 5–7
applications, 7–22
geological information required before
tunnelling, 9–11
looking ahead of a tunnel face, 9
seismic refraction method, 12–22
strength improvement of thin ground
layers, 11–12
forward analysis, 6
inverse analysis, 6
resolution, 6–7
techniques, 8
Geothermal gradient, 214–17
Ground conditions, 204
non-squeezing, 204, 206–7
prediction of, 81
squeezing, 204, 206–7
tunnelling methods and, 210–11
tunnelling rate and, 398
combined effect of ground and
management conditions, 400–5
See also Rock mass quality; Squeezing rock;
Swelling ground
Ground reaction curve (GRC), 86–8, 315
Ground water assessment, 39–40
Index
483
Grouting, 73, 120, 136, 427
boltholes, 186, 194
metro tunnels, 262–3
pressure tunnels, 429–33
backﬁll grouting, 430–1
capacity of grouted rock arch, 433
consolidation grouting, 432
contact grouting, 431–2
efﬁcacy testing, 433
pressure used, 432–3
Haggloader 10 HR, 244
Half cast factor (HCF), 172–3
Half tunnels, 365
rock mass classiﬁcation, 365–71
stress distribution around, 372
wedge analysis, 366–72
Hazards, 205–22
chimney formation, 214
gases, 214–16
geothermal gradient, 214–17
interaction between rock parameters,
217–21
sudden ﬂooding, 213–14
See also Risk; Squeezing rock
Head race tunnel (HRT), 349
hydraulic fracturing, 352
surge shaft, 360
Helicopter-borne electromagnetic survey, 9–11
High-resolution Seismic Refraction
Method, 13
application to construction site, 17–22
method, 13–14
numerical example, 14–17
Hydrofracturing test, 229
In-tunnel seismic reﬂection method, 12–13, 18
See also Seismic refraction method
Instrumentation, 226, 404–5
applications, 225, 234–8
squeezing ground, 236–7
tunnel closure observation, 235–6
data requirement, 224–5
rock mass behavior measurement around
underground opening, 233–4
stress ﬁeld, 226–30
interior of rock mass, 227–9
rock face, 229–30
virgin and induced stresses, 227–8
support pressure in tunnels, 230–3
measurement by extensometers, 232–3
measurement by load cells and pressure
cells, 230–2, 234–5
measurement by strain gauges, 233
test section layout, 238–9
Integrated tunnelling method, 403–42
grouting in pressure tunnels, 429–33
instrumentation, 404–5
probe holes, 404
seismic areas, 404
shear zone treatment, 411–12
special requirements, 439–42
support system design, 433–8
ﬂowing ground, 438
poor rock conditions, 437
semi-empirical design approach, 435–7
tunnel through intra-thrust zone, 437
support system selection, 405
rock/roof bolts, 414–18
shotcrete, 412–13
steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS),
406–10
steel ribs, 418–29
Intermediate principal stress, 104–6
Internal friction, angle of, 43–4
conﬁning pressure effect, 452
Inverse analysis, 6
Invert struts, 422
Joint alteration number (Ja), 52–3
Joint matching coefﬁcient (JMC), 96–7
Joint roughness number (Jr), 52–3, 94
Joint set number (Jn), 52
Joint wall compressive strength (JCS), 95–6
Joint wall roughness coefﬁcient (JRC), 92–4
Joint water reduction factor (Jw), 53–4
Joints:
discontinuous, tensile strength across,
114–15
jointed rock mass reinforcement around
openings, 195–201
reinforced beam, 195–8
reinforced rock arch, 198–201
orientation, 58
tunnel blast results and, 157–60
shear strength, 97–9
at very high conﬁning stress, 99–101
dynamic shear strength of rough joints, 99
484 Index
Joints: Continued
stiffness, 101
Jumbo drills, 152, 242–4
Lagging, 426, 429
Lining, See Tunnel lining methods
Load cells, 230–2, 234
Malgovert tunnel, France, 274–5
Management conditions, 3, 397–8
tunnelling rate and, 390–2
combined effect of ground and
management conditions, 392–7
Metro tunnels, 257–66
blasting impact on structures, 263–5
building condition survey, 263
International Tunnelling Association
ﬁndings, 259–60
portal and cut slopes, 265–6
precast linings, 262–3
shielded tunnel boring machines, 260–2
subsidence and, 265
vibration limit, 263
Modulus of deformation, 44–6, 69–71
Modulus reduction factor (MRF), 44–5
Muck hauling equipment, 244
New Austrian Tunnelling Method (NATM), 2,
29, 119–32
ﬁnal dimensioning by measurement,
128–30
philosophy, 124–8
Nitroglycerine (NG), 169
NONEL (non-electric detonator) system, 169
Non-squeezing, 204, 206–7
Norwegian Method of Tunnelling (NMT), 2,
29, 133–50
drainage measures, 148
poor rock conditions, 148
steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete design,
136–47
support design, 135–6
unsupported span, 134
Packing, 427
Pea gravel packing, 427
Perfobolts, 146, 187, 415–16
Plain cement concrete (PCC) lining, 345,
347–9
Point-anchored bolts, 183
pre-tensioning, 191
Pre-splitting contour blasting, 175
Pressure cells, 230–2, 235
Pressure tunnels, 345–52
cracked plain cement concrete lining, 347–9
grouting, 429–33
capacity of grouted rock arch, 433
efﬁcacy testing, 433
pattern, 430–2
pressure, 432–3
hydraulic fracturing, 352
minimum overburden, 346
solid concrete lining, 347
steel liner in penstock, 349–51
Probe holes, 404
Pull-out tests, 192–5
Q-system, 51–74, 249–50
ﬁeld data collection, 59–61
for tunnel boring machines (QTBM),
249–53
versus penetration and advance
rate, 254
joint alteration number (Ja), 52–3
joint orientation and, 58
joint roughness number (Jr), 52–3, 94
joint set number (Jn), 52
joint water reduction factor (Jw), 53–4
Q interrelation with RMR, 78–81
Q from RMR, 81
RMR from Q, 80
rock mass characterization, 69–73
anisotropy, 72
improvement in Q by grouting, 73
modulus of deformation, 69–71
Q vs P-wave velocity, 72–3
rock mass classiﬁcation, 61
rock quality designation (RQD), 52
stress reduction factor (SRF), 54–8
support pressure estimation, 61–7
limitations, 67
short-term support pressure, 63–6
ultimate support pressure, 66–7
unsupported span estimation, 67–8
updating, 58–9
Quality management, 400–1
Residual frictional angle, 97
Residual strength, 116, 449–52
Index
485
Resin bolts, 187, 190
Resolution, 6–7
Risk, 375–9
assessment, 376–7
construction planning and, 385–6
management of, 3, 379–85
fault tree analysis, 384
International Tunnelling Association
recommendations, 384–5
risk sharing, 378, 380, 382, 386
conceptual model, 380–2
time and cost estimates, 386
See also Hazards
Rock bolting, 120–1, 183–201, 439
bolting pattern, 201
capacity, 417–18
design, 416–17
ﬂoor bolting, 201
in Norwegian method of tunnelling,
133–7
installation of rock bolts, 190–2
pre-tensioning, 191–2
rock bolt ties, 192
scaling, 190–1
wire mesh, 192
jointed rock mass reinforcement around
openings, 195–201
reinforced beam, 195–8
reinforced rock arch, 198–201
pull-out tests, 192–5
roof bolt types, 414–16
selection of rock bolts, 188–90
shafts, 355
shear zone, 411
types of rock bolts, 183–8
Rock burst, 335
conditions for, 336–8
criterion, 113–14
prediction, 339–43
seismic energy released, 339
severity reduction, 343–4
strain energy release rate, 338
See also Critical state condition; Tunnel
failure
Rock classes, 25–6
Rock condition rating (RCR), 77–8
Rock face:
stress evaluation, 229–30
See also Tunnel face
Rock load factor (Hp), 25, 27–32
limitations, 29–32
Rock mass number (N), 77–8
obtaining ground reaction curve (GRC),
86–8
prediction of ground conditions, 81
support pressure prediction, 81–2
tunnel depth effect, 86
tunnel size effect, 82–5
tunnel closure estimation, 85–6
tunnel depth effect, 86
Rock mass quality, 51, 61
for tunnel boring machines (QTBM),
249–55
half tunnels, 365–73
rock quality designation (RQD),
38–9, 52
tunnel blast results and, 156–60
See also Ground conditions; Q-system
Rock mass rating (RMR) system, 37, 77–8
applications, 43–7
allowable bearing pressure, 46
average stand-up time for arched roof, 43
cohesion and angle of internal friction,
43–4
modulus of deformation, 44–6
shear strength of rock masses, 46
support pressure estimation, 46–7
estimation of RMR, 41–2
ﬁeld data collection, 38–41
condition of discontinuities, 39
ground water condition, 39–40
orientation of discontinuities, 40–1
rock quality designation (RQD), 38–9
spacing of discontinuities, 39
uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), 38
half tunnels, 365
precautions, 47–9
RMR interrelation with Q, 78–81
Q from RMR, 81
RMR from Q, 80
Rock quality designation (RQD), 38–9, 52
Roof bolts, 414–18
See also Rock bolting
Safety management, 247–8
metro tunnels, 257–8
Scaling, 190–1
Schmidt hammer, 95–6
486 Index
Seismic activity, 303, 325, 404
energy released in rock burst, 339
response to dynamic loading, 326
support pressure, 465
pseudo-static theory, 330–1
tectonic stress, 229
Uttarkashi earthquake case history, 328–30
Seismic refraction method, 12–17
application to construction site, 17–22
method, 13–14
numerical example, 14–17
with source at tunnel face, 18–21
Self-compacting concrete (SCC), 362–3
Shafts, 355–63
excavation, 361–2
self-compacting concrete, 362–3
self-supporting, 357
shapes of, 356
support pressures, 358–7
support system design, 359–60, 421–2
surge shaft, 360–1
Shear strength:
joints, 97–9
at very high conﬁning stress, 99–101
dynamic shear strength of rough
joints, 99
rock masses, 46
Shear zone treatment, 411–12
Shotcrete, 120–4, 412–13
applications, 141–3
in Norwegian method of tunnelling, 136
mix, 413
reinforced ribs of shotcrete (RRS), 134
shafts, 360
support capacity, 413
thickness, 421
See also Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete
(SFRS)
Single beam wall plates, 423
Slashing, 174
Smooth blasting, 173
Software TM, 468–9
users manual, 471–4
Split set, 146
Split tube bolts, 187–8
Squeezing ground condition, 204, 206–7
Squeezing rock, 25, 203–5, 279–92
borehole extensometer observations, 236–8
compaction zone within broken zone, 284–5
criterion of, 113–14, 280–1
elasto-plastic theory, 281, 313–20, 459–62
face advance for broken zone stabilization,
285
ground response curve, 285–8
precautions in tunnelling, 292
predicting degree of squeezing, 212–13
strain criterion, 288–90
support design, 291–2
steel-arch supports, 317–19
support pressure, 279–80, 281, 317
closely spaced tunnels, 462–5
tunnel depth and, 315–7
tunnel closure, 279, 285–8, 289–91
rate of, 319
tunnel wall displacements, 282–4
versus swelling, 212
Stand-up time, arched roof, 43
Steel ﬁber reinforced shotcrete (SFRS), 2, 29,
133, 406–10
advantages of, 408
capacity, 410
design, 136–47
drainage provision, 410
in poor rock conditions, 137, 469–70
squeezing ground, 291–2
selection of steel sets, 30–1
shotcrete ingredients, 407–8
software TM, 468–9
support system for blast loading, 332
Steel liner in penstock, 349–51
Steel supports, 120, 418–29
capacity of blocked, 478–80
components, 422–7
blocking, 425
bracing, 425
crown bars, 424
grouting, 427
invert struts, 422
lagging, 426
packing, 427
posts, 422
ribs, 422
truss panels, 424–5
wall plates, 422–4
design, 428–9
joints, 429
lagging, 429
linear plates, 429
Index
487
Steel supports Continued
design Continued
ribs, 428–9
stresses, 428
factors determining spacing and layout,
427–8
selection of type of system, 418–21
continuous ribs, 419
full circle rib, 420
rib and post, 419
rib and wall plate, 419–20
rib, wall plate and post, 420
shafts, 421–2
spacing of ribs, 420
Strain energy release rate, 338
Strain gauges, 229–30, 233
Strength improvement:
causes of, 103
dynamic strength of rock mass, 115–16
reason for, 108–9
thin ground layers, 11–12
Strength of discontinuities, 91
Stress distribution:
broken zone in squeezing ground, 459–62
elastic stresses around circular tunnels,
455–8
Stress ﬁeld evaluation, 226–30
half tunnels, 372
interior of rock mass, 227–9
rock face, 229–30
virgin and induced stresses, 227, 228
Stress reduction factor (SRF), 54–8
Subsidence, 265
Support pressure:
from Q-system, 61–7
limitations, 67
short-term support pressure, 63–6
ultimate support pressure, 66–7
from rock mass number (N), 81–2
from rock mass rating (RMR), 46–7
measurement, 238–41
extensometers, 232–3
load cells and pressure cells, 230–3, 234–5
strain gauges, 233
modiﬁed rock load theory, 32–5
seismic, 465
pseudo-static theory, 330–1
shafts, 357–9
squeezing ground, 279–80, 281, 317
closely spaced tunnels, 462–5
ground response curve, 285–8
swelling ground, 270–2
variation with time, 272–4
tunnel depth effect, 86, 315–17
tunnel size effect, 32, 82–5
Supports, 467–8
for blast loading, 332–3
load on, tunnel closure and, 236
Norwegian method of tunnelling, 133–4,
143–7
rock conditions and, 189–90
selection of, 405
shafts, 359–60
squeezing ground, 291–2, 317–19
temporary, 121–4
See also Speciﬁc support systems
Surge shaft, 360–1
Swellex bolts, 188, 416
Swelling ground, 212, 269
support pressures, 270–2
variation with time, 272–4
tunnelling in swelling rocks, 269–70,
274–6
Bolu tunnel, 275
design approach, 276
Malgovert tunnel, 274–5
Systems approach, 241–2
Tangential stress, 104–6
Tectonic stress, 229
Temperature hazard, 214–17
Tendering, 398–9
Terzaghi, Karl, 25
rock load theory, 25–32
for tunnels and caverns, 32–5
rock classes, 25–6
rock load factor (Hp), 25–32
Timber lagging, 119
Time estimates, 254–5, 386, 389
TM software, 468–9
users manual, 471–4
Toxic gases, 214, 215–6
Tracer blasting, 175–6
Trimming, 174
Truss panels, 424–5
Tunnel alignment, 49
Tunnel blasting, See Blasting
Tunnel blasting index (TBI), 167
488 Index
Tunnel boring machine (TBM), 2, 245–7, 249
advance rate (AR), 250, 253–4
cutter wear, 253–4
penetration rate (PR), 250, 253–4
rock mass quality for (QTBM), 249–53
shielded TBMs for metro tunnels, 260–2
time for completion estimation, 254–5
Tunnel closure, 85–6
load on supports and, 236
observation of, 235
squeezing ground, 279, 285–7, 288–90
rate of, 319
tunnel depth effect, 86
Tunnel depth:
blast results and, 161
support pressure and, 86, 315–17
tunnel closure and, 86
Tunnel face:
cut, 152
types of, 154–6
looking ahead, 9
with source placed on face, 12–17, 18–21
stress measurement, 229
Tunnel failure, 279, 315
critical strain of rock mass, 111–13
dynamic strain at, 115
intermediate principal stress effect on
tangential stress, 104–6
new failure theory, 108–11
inhomogeneous geological materials, 111
laminated rock mass, 111
poor rock masses, 110–11
quality aspects, 208–212
residual strength, 116, 449–51
squeezing/rock burst criterion, 113–14
See also Critical state condition; Rock burst
Tunnel lining methods:
development of, 120
old tunnelling practice, 119–20
precast linings for metro tunnels, 262–3
pressure tunnels, 345, 347–49
cracked plain cement concrete lining,
347–8
solid concrete lining, 347
Tunnel management, 397–8
See also Management conditions
Tunnel mechanics, 2
Tunnel size:
blast results and, 160–1
support pressure and, 32, 82–5
Tunnelling:
design considerations and requirements,
223–4
hazards, See Hazards
integrated method, See Integrated tunnelling
method
modern methods, 120–1
old tunnelling practice, 119–20
quality management, 400–1
rate of, See Tunnelling rate
risks, 375–9
management of, 379–85
safety management, 247–8
squeezing ground condition, 279–80,
282–92
compaction zone within broken zone,
284–5
face advance for stabilization of broken
zone, 283
ground response curve, 285–88
precautions, 302
strain criterion, 288–300
support design, 301–2
tunnel wall displacements, 282–4
See also Yamuna hydroelectric scheme,
India
swelling ground condition, 269–70, 274–6
Bolu tunnel, 275
design approach, 276
Malgovert tunnel, 274–5
See also Speciﬁc methods
Tunnelling machines:
muck hauling equipment, 244
systems mis-match, 241–2
tunnel jumbo, 242–4
See also Tunnel boring machine (TBM)
Tunnelling rate, 389–90
ground conditions and, 390, 392–7
management conditions for, 392–7
Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), 38, 96,
106–7
Unsupported span estimation, 67–8, 134
Uttarkashi earthquake, 328–30
Velocity of detonation (VOD), 170
Wall plates, 422–4
Wedge analysis, 366–72
Index
489
Wedge and sleeve bolts, 415
Wedge and slot bolts, 414–15
Weld mesh, 147, 192
Wire mesh, 192
Yamuna hydroelectric scheme, India, 295–313,
320–2
alternate layouts, 298–9
Chhibro intra-thrust zone, 311–13
instrumentation, 313
tunnel construction, 311–13
Kalawar intra-thrust zone, 306–13
instrumentation, 306–8
support behavior, 306
support design, 310–13
test sections, 308–10
tunnel construction, 306
regional geology, 295–8
lithology, 297–8
structural features, 298
tectonic sequence, 297
tectonic activity, 303–6
ﬂexible tunnel lining, 304–6
measurement of tectonic movement,
303–4
seismic history, 303
Uttarkashi earthquake, 328–30
tunnelling problems, 298–303
ﬂooding at Kalawar, 299–301
recurrence of intra-thrust zones, 299
rock mass properties, 301–3
This Page is Intentionally Left Blank
