This article appeared in a journal published by Elsevier. The attached
copy is furnished to the author for internal non-commercial research
and education use, including for instruction at the authors institution
and sharing with colleagues.
Other uses, including reproduction and distribution, or selling or
licensing copies, or posting to personal, institutional or third party
websites are prohibited.
In most cases authors are permitted to post their version of the
article (e.g. in Word or Tex form) to their personal website or
institutional repository. Authors requiring further information
regarding Elsevier’s archiving and manuscript policies are
encouraged to visit:
http://www.elsevier.com/copyright
Author's personal copy
Two-dimensional deep-seated slope stability analysis of embankments over stone
column-improved soft clay
Sari W. Abusharar, Jie Han ⁎
Dept. of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering (CEAE), the University of Kansas, 1530 West 15th St., Lawrence, Kansas 66049–7609, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 5 July 2010
Received in revised form 26 March 2011
Accepted 1 April 2011
Available online 13 April 2011
Keywords:
Embankment
Factor of safety
Finite difference method
Slope stability
Soft clay
Stone column
A two-dimensional (2D) ﬁnite difference method was adopted in this study to estimate the factor of safety
(FS) against deep-seated failure of embankments over stone column-improved soft clay based on individual
column and equivalent area models. In the equivalent area model, the equivalent parameters (unit weight,
cohesion, and friction angle) for the improved area were estimated based on the area average of the
parameters from stone columns and soft clay. The factors inﬂuencing the FS against deep-seated failure of
embankments over stone column-improved soft clay were investigated including the spacing, size, and
friction angle of stone columns, cohesion of soft clay, friction angle and height of embankment ﬁll, and
existence of ground water. Based on the numerical results, a reduction factor was proposed to account for the
difference in the FS when the individual column model is converted to the equivalent area model. The effects
of the inﬂuence factors on the reduction factor were also investigated. The comparative study shows that the
FS values obtained by the equivalent area model are higher than those by the individual column model. The
results of these analyses are summarized into a series of design charts, which can be used in engineering
practice. A reduction factor for FS of 0.90 is appropriate to convert the calculated FS by the equivalent area
model to that by the individual column model based on the current study. Furthermore, the existence of the
water table results in lower FS values than the cases without considering a water table because the
groundwater reduces the shear strength of the improved foundation.
© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Problems of slope instability present design and research challenges
to geotechnical engineers. Slope stability analysis can be carried out by
the limit equilibrium method (LEM), the limit analysis method (LAM),
the ﬁnite element method (FEM), and the ﬁnite difference method
(FDM) (Han and Leshchinsky, 2006; Cheng and Lau, 2008).
In recent years, ﬁnite difference method has been widely used for
analyzing slope stability including the computation of its factor of safety
(FS) (for example, Dawson et al., 1999; Cala and Flisiak, 2001; Han et al.,
2002; Cala and Flisiak, 2003a,b; Shukha and Baker, 2003; Han and
Leshchinsky, 2004; Han et al., 2004; Richards and Reddy, 2005; Apuani
et al., 2005; Han et al., 2005; Won et al.;, 2005; Cheng et al., 2007; Han et
al., 2008; Sun et al., 2008; Srivastava and Sivakumar Babu, 2009).
Dawson et al. (1999) indicated that the FS values of unreinforced slopes
obtained using theﬁnite difference method in the FLAC software were in
good agreement with those using the limit equilibrium method with a
log-spiral slip surface. Han et al. (2002) used the same ﬁnite difference
software (FLAC) to obtain the identical corresponding FS values of
unreinforced and geosynthetic-reinforced slopes as the Bishop's
simpliﬁed method. Han and Leshchinsky (2004) obtained similar
results for mechanically stabilized earth (MSE) walls using the ﬁnite
difference method and Bishop's simpliﬁed method incorporated in the
ReSSA software.
The ﬁnite difference method is perhaps one of the oldest numerical
techniques used for solving sets of differential equations. In the ﬁnite
difference method, every derivative in the set of governing equations
is replaced directly by an algebraic expression written in terms of
the ﬁeld variables at discrete points in space; these variables are
undeﬁned within elements (Itasca Consulting Group, Inc., 2006). As
compared with limit equilibrium methods, ﬁnite difference methods
have the following advantages for calculating the factor of safety of
slope stability (Dawson and Roth, 1999; Cala and Flisiak, 2001): (1) no
need to deﬁne a range of trial surfaces and possible failure modes or
critical slip zones determined from the numerical results (e.g., strain
rate, plasticity); (2) no need to assume any functions for inter-slice
force; (3) different failure surfaces possibly occurring at the same
time; (4) structural elements used to better simulate inclusions (e.g.,
rock bolt, soil nail or geogrid) instead of equivalent forces; and (5) the
solution consisting of kinematically feasible mechanisms.
The slope instability of embankments may develop locally, near
the facing, within the embankment, or through the foundation soil as
local, surﬁcial, general, or deep-seated failure, as shown in Fig. 1. The
deep-seated slope failure is also referred to as a global slope failure,
Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 785 864 3714; fax: +1 864 5631.
E-mail addresses: engsariw@hotmail.com (S.W. Abusharar), jiehan@ku.edu (J. Han).
0013-7952/$ – see front matter © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.enggeo.2011.04.002
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Engineering Geology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/enggeo
Author's personal copy
mainly induced by a weak foundation existing under the embank-
ment. Local and surﬁcial failures develop at a shallow depth (mostly
less than 1.2 m) due to low overburden stress, low density, low
strength, and seepage force when the slope becomes saturated after
rain. The general slope failure typically occurs through the toe of the
slope (Han et al., 2004).
A number of ground improvement techniques have been success-
fully adopted to prevent deep-seated slope failure, such as sand
compaction piles, stone columns, and deep mixed columns. Stone
columns have been commonly used as an alternative to solve deep-
seated slope stability problems (Hughes et al., 1975; McKenna et al.,
1975; Rathgeb and Kutzner, 1975; Aboshi et al., 1979; Datye and
Nagaraju, 1981; Bergado et al., 1988; Bergado et al., 1990; Christoulas
et al., 1997; Cooper and Rose, 1999). The stone column technique was
adopted in European countries in the early 1960s and thereafter it has
been used successfully worldwide to increase bearing capacity, reduce
settlement, and accelerate consolidation (Hughes et al., 1975; Priebe,
1995; Han and Ye, 2001). Stone columns can be installed using a wet
or dry method. The wet method employs a vibrating probe with
jetting water to form holes to be backﬁlled with stones from a ground
surface while the dry method uses a vibrating probe with jetting air
down to a depth and a feed pipe to supply stone to the bottom of the
probe. The stone columns improve the ground mainly due to their
higher strength and stiffness compared to the soil. Stone columns
have higher strength and stiffness than sand compaction piles because
of the quality difference between stone and sand. Different from deep
mixed columns, the strength of stone columns depends on the friction
angle of the stones and the conﬁning stress in the ﬁeld. The deep-
seated slope stability of embankments over deep-mixed columns was
investigated by Han et al. (2005). Ambily and Gandhi (2007)
considered that the most critical factor which controls the design of
the stone column-improved ground is the stiffness of the column and
load sharing between column and soil. Christoulas et al. (1997)
investigated the stability of embankments over stone columns using a
limit equilibrium method with a slip circle, in which individual stone
column and equivalent area models were analyzed. They concluded
that the computed factor of safety from the individual column method
was greater than that from the equivalent area method. Han et al.
(2005, 2008) found that the slip surfaces for the improved foundation
with individual deep mixed columns are not continuous and non-
circular. Therefore, whether the limit equilibrium method with slip
circles is suitable for analyzing the stability of embankments over
individual stone columns is questionable.
This paper presents a series of two-dimensional (2D) ﬁnite difference
analyses to investigate the factors inﬂuencing the FS against deep-seated
failure of embankments over stone column-improved soft clay. Theﬁnite
difference method incorporated in thesoftware – FLAC/Slope Version 5.0
is designed speciﬁcally to perform factor of safety calculations for slope
stability analysis. The parameters investigated are the spacing, size, and
friction angle of stone columns, the cohesion of soft clay, and the friction
angle and height of embankment ﬁll. The effect of the water table on the
stability of the slope was also evaluated. The results of these analyses are
summarized into a series of design charts, which can be used in
engineering practice. Based on the numerical results, a reduction factor
was proposed to account for the difference in the FS when the individual
column model is converted to the equivalent area model.
2. Two-dimensional ﬁnite difference analysis
2.1. Problem dimensions
Fig. 2 shows that the model considered here consists of an
embankment supported by stone columns in soft clay under a two-
dimensional (2D) plane strain condition. The foundation soil consists
of 10 m thick clay overlying 2 m thick sand. Due to the symmetry of
the model, half of the cross-section was analyzed using the software
FLAC/Slope Version 5.0 developed by Itasca Consulting Group, Inc. The
stone columns were modeled as continuous walls parallel to the
centerline of the embankment as shown in Fig. 2a. The dimensions
and spacing of stone columns and the overall embankment and
foundation dimensions were selected based on a common practice in
the ﬁeld. Similar dimensions were used by Han et al. (2007) in
another study. These parameters of the baseline case are provided as
follows: width of columns=0.8 m, length of columns=10 m; crest
width of embankment=20 m (half width is shown in Fig. 2), height
of embankment=5 m, angle of side slope=2 H:1 V. The clear spacing
between adjacent columns was set at 3.2 m. The groundwater table
was at the ground surface. An “Exclude” function included in the
FLAC/Slope software was adopted to prevent the potential failure
surface from entering a 0.5 m thick surﬁcial soil layer on the slope. In
other words, any failure above the foundation was prevented. The
above values were used throughout this study unless otherwise
speciﬁed.
Deep seated failure
Local failure
Surficial failure
General slope failure
Fig. 1. Potential slope stability failures (Han et al., 2004).
Sand
Backfill
Stone columns
water level
Clay
a
Backfill
Equivalent area
Sand
water level
Clay
b
10
10
20
10
10
20
10
5
2
Fig. 2. Cross sections of calculation models for the ﬁnite difference analysis of
(a) individual columns and (b) an equivalent area (all dimensions in meters).
104
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
In practice, the stone column-improved zone is often converted to
an equivalent area with weighted average properties as shown in
Fig. 2b. The determination of these equivalent properties will be
discussed later.
2.2. Model size
The sizes of the model and mesh were determined on the basis of
several trials, during which the mesh was progressively reﬁned to
0.25 m and its horizontal boundary was extended such that zones did
not inﬂuence the development of the failure surface. The size of the
mesh is presented in Fig. 3 for the individual column and equivalent
area cases. Results from these trials showed that the side boundary on
the right should be extended to 20 m beyond the toe of the
embankment.
2.3. Boundary conditions
It was assumed that the sand was underlain by a rigid and ﬁrm soil
or bedrock and the contribution of the ﬁrm layer was considered to be
negligible for the instability of the embankment. Thus, the bottom
boundary was set at this depth. Nodes on the two vertical boundaries
were ﬁxed against horizontal movement but allowed to move freely
in the vertical direction.
2.4. Material model and parameters
The embankment ﬁll, the foundation soils, and the columns were
modeled as linearly elastic-perfectly plastic materials with Mohr–
Coulomb failure criteria. The elastic properties have an insigniﬁcant
effect on the factor of safety calculation and, therefore, these properties
are not required by the FLAC/Slope software (Dawson and Roth, 1999).
The equivalent parameters for the improved area were estimated based
on the area average of these parameters from stone columns and the soft
clay (Terashi et al., 1991; Cooper and Rose, 1999; Han et al., 2005;
Madhyannapu et al., 2006) as follow:
ceq = cc:as + cs 1−as
ð
Þ
ð1Þ
ϕeq = tan−1 astanϕc + 1−as
ð
Þtanϕs
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
γeq = γcas + γs 1−as
ð
Þ
ð3Þ
where as is the area replacement ratio by the stone columns over the
overall soft soil area; ceq, cc, and cs are the equivalent cohesion and the
cohesions of the column and the soft soil, respectively; ϕeq, ϕc, and ϕs
are the equivalent friction angle and the friction angles of the column
and the soft soil, respectively; and γeq, γc, and γs are the equivalent
unit weight and the unit weights of the column and the soft soil,
respectively. In Eq. (2), no stress concentration on the stone columns
is considered. A stress concentration ratio (i.e., the ratio of the stress
on the columns to that on the soft soil) of 2.0 to 4.0 has been
commonly used for a stone column-treated ground under a rigid
foundation (Han and Ye, 2001). Under an embankment (close to a
ﬂexible foundation), however, the stress concentration ratio of 1.0 is
reasonable and conservative.
Since soft clay is mostly normally or under-consolidated, it is more
critical for an embankment over the soft clay under an undrained
condition than under a drained condition. Therefore, undrained
cohesion was assumed for the soft clay in this study. The installation
of stone columns may change the properties of the soft clay; however,
ﬁeld studies have shown that such property changes are minimum,
especially when a wet method is used to install stone columns.
Therefore, the change of the properties of soft clay is ignored in this
Fig. 3. Finite difference meshes of an embankment supported by (a) individual columns and (b) an equivalent area (all dimensions in meters).
105
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
study. Consideringstonecolumnsare formed by a cohesionless material,
they have zero cohesion and their shear resistance is inﬂuenced by pore
water pressure. The effect of the ground water on the stability was
evaluated in this study. The FLAC software has the option to activate or
de-activate the water table. When the water table option is not selected,
only the unsaturated unit weight is assigned. When the water table
option is selected, however, either unsaturated unit weight and porosity
or saturated unit weight must be input. The saturated unit weight of soil
can be calculated as follows (Itasca Consulting Group, Inc., 2006):
γsat = γunsat + n ⋅γw
ð4Þ
where γsat, γunsat, and γw are saturated, unsaturated soil, and water
unit weights, respectively. For the case with a ground water table, the
soil above the water table was assigned an unsaturated unit weight.
The material properties used in the baseline case are shown in Table 1.
Some of these properties were deviated during the parametric study.
2.5. Computation of factor of safety
In the ﬁnite difference program, a shear strength reduction
technique was adopted to solve for the factor of safety (FS) value of
slope stability. Dawson et al. (1999) exhibited the use of the shear
strength reduction technique in this ﬁnite difference program. In this
technique, a series of trial FS values are used to adjust the cohesion, c,
and the friction angle, ϕ, of soil as follows:
ctrial = c= FStrial
ð5Þ
ϕtrial = arctan tanϕ = FStrial
ð
Þ
ð6Þ
For each trial analysis by FLAC, the same FS value is applied to the
strength parameters of soil and columns in the individual columns
method or the composite in the equivalent area method. Adjusted
cohesion and friction angle of soil layers are used in the model for
equilibrium analysis. The factor of safety is determined by adjusting the
cohesion and friction angle to make the slope become unstable from a
verge stable condition or verge stable from an unstable condition.
3. Analysis of results
A number of factors inﬂuencing the factor of safety against deep-
seated failure of embankments over stone column-improved soft clay
were investigated in this study, including the spacing, size, and friction
angle of stone columns, the cohesion of soft clay, and the friction angle
and height of embankment ﬁll. The inﬂuence of each factor on the FS is
presented below. The results from both individual column and
equivalent area models are compared.
3.1. Critical slip surface
Fig. 4 shows the maximum shear strain rates (i.e., the shaded dark
regions for the individual column model only) and the factors of safety
for the embankment over the area improved by individual columns
and the equivalent area. The critical slip surface for the equivalent
Table 1
Material properties of the embankment, subsoil, stone column, and equivalent area.
Parameter
Unit
Embankment
ﬁll
Clay
Sand
Stone
column
Equivalent
area
Thickness
m
5
10
2
10
10
Unsaturated Unit
weight
kN/m3
18
16
18
17
16.2
Porosity
–
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
0.25
Cohesion
kPa
0
20
0
0
16
Friction angle
o
32
0
30
38
8.9
Fig. 4. Stability of the embankment over stone columns (a) with considering the water table and (b) without considering the water table.
106
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
area model was plotted based on the maximum shear strain rates. It is
shown that the equivalent area model had typical continuous circular
slip surfaces. The critical slip surface and the minimum factor of safety
from the equivalent area model do not match well with those from the
individual column model, in which there was no continuous and
circular slip surface. The equivalent area model resulted in a higher
factor of safety than the individual column model. This result is
opposite to that obtained by Christoulas et al. (1997). This difference
may result from the assumption of a slip circle by Christoulas et al.
(1997) in their analysis of the individual column model. Fig. 4 also
shows that the factors of safety decreased from 1.69 to 1.60 for the
equivalent area model and from 1.53 to 1.49 for the individual column
model when the ground water was considered. This comparison
demonstrates the importance of including the water table in the
stability analysis of the embankment over the stone column-improved
foundation.
3.2. Friction angle of stone column
The stone column was modelled as a cohesionless material, which
only has a friction angle. The inﬂuence of the friction angle of the
stone column material on the factor of safety of the embankment over
stone column-improved soft clay is shown in Fig. 5. The results show
that a better quality stone column material yielded a higher factor of
safety for the embankment system. In addition, the equivalent area
model yielded higher FS values than the individual column model.
Furthermore, the consideration of the ground water resulted in lower
FS values than that without a water table, because water pressure
reduced the shear strength of the stone columns.
3.3. Size of stone column
The inﬂuence of the thickness of stone column walls on the factor
of safety is shown in Fig. 6. It is shown that an increase of the thickness
of the stone column walls increased the FS value of the embankment
system. The thickness of the stone column walls ranging from 0.4 to
1.2 m corresponds to the area replacement ratio of 10% to 30%, which
is commonly used in practice. The results from the equivalent area
model had the similar trend as those from the individual column
model; however, the FS values calculated by the equivalent area
model were higher than those by the individual column model.
Furthermore, the consideration of the water table resulted in lower FS
values than that without a water table.
3.4. Spacing of stone column
The inﬂuence of the spacing of stone columns on FS values is
shown in Fig. 7. It is shown that an increase of the stone column
spacing reduced the FS value. The investigated center-to-center
spacing of stone columns ranging from 2.67 to 8 m represents the
area replacement ratio of 30% to 10%, which is typically used in
practice. The results from the equivalent area model had the similar
trend as those from the individual column model; however, the FS
values calculated by the equivalent area model were higher than
those by the individual column model. Furthermore, the consider-
ation of the water table resulted in lower FS values than that without a
water table.
3.5. Cohesion of soft soil
The inﬂuence of the undrained cohesion of the soft clay on the
factors of safety is shown in Fig. 8. An increase of the undrained
cohesion of the soft clay increased the FS value of the embankment
over stone columns. The equivalent area model yielded higher FS
values than the individual column model. Their difference became
larger when the undrained cohesion of the soft clay increased. It is
shown that the beneﬁt of the undrained cohesion of the soft clay
became less signiﬁcant when the cohesion was higher than 25 kPa,
because the slip surface developed was shallower in the improved
foundation and the contribution of the foundation became less
Fig. 5. Inﬂuence of friction angle of stone column.
Fig. 6. Inﬂuence of size of stone column.
Fig. 7. Inﬂuence of spacing of stone column.
107
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
important. In addition, the inﬂuence of the ground water is not that
signiﬁcant as that in the cases discussed earlier because undrained
cohesion is not inﬂuenced by pore water pressure.
3.6. Friction angle of embankment ﬁll
The embankment ﬁll was modelled as a cohesionless ﬁll. The
inﬂuence of the friction angle of the embankment ﬁll on the factor of
safety of the embankment over stone columns is shown in Fig. 9. The
results show that a better quality embankment ﬁll yielded a higher
factor of safety for the embankment system. It is shown that the
beneﬁt of the friction angle of the embankment ﬁll became less
signiﬁcant when the friction angle was higher than 30o, because the
slip surface developed was deeper in the improved foundation and
the contribution of the foundation became more important. In
addition, the equivalent area model resulted in higher FS values
than the individual column model. Furthermore, the consideration of
the ground water resulted in lower FS values than that without
ground water.
3.7. Height of embankment ﬁll
The inﬂuence of the height of the embankment on the factor of
safety is shown in Fig. 10. It is intuitively correct that the factor of
safety decreased with an increase of the height of the embankment.
The factors of safety computed by the equivalent area model were
higher than those by the individual column model. Their difference
became larger when the height of the embankment increased.
3.8. Reduction factor for FS
Modeling individual columns in a design is a tedious task when the
number of columns becomes large. Therefore, the equivalent area
method is more commonly used than the individual column method.
As presented above, the equivalent area method resulted in a higher
factor of safety than the individual column method. In other words,
the equivalent area method is not conservative. To rectify this
problem, a reduction factor is proposed herein. The reduction factor,
β, is deﬁned as the ratio of FS of the individual column model to that of
the equivalent area model. Fig. 11 presents the inﬂuence of the factors
on the reduction factor for FS, against deep-seated failure of
embankments over stone columns-improved foundations. The results
show that the FS reduction factor varies between 0.86 and 0.96. The
reduction factor considering groundwater is slightly higher than that
without considering groundwater. The average reduction factor
considering groundwater is 0.92 while that without considering
groundwater is 0.90. Hence, the following equation should be used to
modify the FS value calculated by the equivalent area model to obtain
the FS value for the individual column model:
FSid = β ⋅FSeq
ð3Þ
where FSid and FSeq are the factors of safety against the deep-seated
failure of the embankment over stone column-improved foundations
based on the individual column model and the equivalent area model,
respectively; and β is the reduction factor.
4. Summary and conclusions
In this study, two-dimensional ﬁnite difference analyses were
conducted to evaluate the factor of safety (FS) against deep-seated
failure of embankments over stone columns based on the individual
column model and the equivalent area model. In the equivalent area
model, the equivalent parameters for the improved area were estimated
based on the area average of these parameters from stone columns and
soft soil. Based on the numerical results, the following conclusions can be
drawn:
1. The strength, spacing, and size of stone columns, the cohesion and
thickness of soft soil, and the friction angle and height of
embankment ﬁll all affected the FS values against deep-seated
failure of the embankment.
Fig. 8. Inﬂuence of cohesion of soft soil.
Fig. 9. Inﬂuence of friction angle of embankment ﬁll.
Fig. 10. Inﬂuence of height of embankment ﬁll.
108
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
2. The calculated factors of safety using the equivalent area model
were higher than those calculated using the individual column
model.
3. The consideration of ground water resulted in lower FS values than
that without ground water because pore water pressure reduced
the frictional shear strength of the improved foundation.
4. A reduction factor of 0.90 is suggested to modify the FS value
calculated based on the equivalent area method used in practice.
The above conclusions are only applicable to a two-dimensional
stability analysis of embankments over stone-column-improved soft
clay due to deep-seated failure, in which stone columns are considered
Fig. 11. Inﬂuence of factors on the FS reduction factor: (a) friction angle of stone column material;(b) size of stone column; (c) spacing of stone column; (d) cohesion of soft soil; (e) friction
angle of embankment ﬁll; and (f) height of embankment ﬁll.
109
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
Author's personal copy
as walls in the individual column model. Further research is needed to
evaluate the effect of three-dimensional conﬁgurations of stone
columns used in ﬁeld.
References
Aboshi, H., Ichimoto, E., Harada, Y., Enoki, M., 1979. The compozer, a method to improve
characteristics of soft clays by inclusion of large diameter sand columns. Proc. of 1st
Int. Conf. on Soil Reinforcement, Paris, 1, pp. 211–216.
Ambily, A.P., Gandhi, S.R., 2007. Behavior of stone columns based on experimental and
FEM analysis. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 133 (4),
405–415.
Apuani, T., Corazzatob, C., Cancelli, A., Tibaldi, A., 2005. Stability of a collapsing volcano
(Stromboli, Italy): limit equilibrium analysis and numerical modelling. Journal of
Volcanology and Geothermal Research 144 (1–4), 191–210.
Bergado, D.T., Panichayatum, B., Sampaco, C.L., Miura, N., 1988. Reinforcement of soft
Bangkok clay using granular piles. Int. Geotech. Symp. on Theory and Practice of
Earth Reinforcement, Kyushu, Japan, In. 179–184.
Bergado, D.T., Singh, N., Sim, S.H., Panichayatum, B., Sampaco, C.L., Balasubramaniam,
A.S., 1990. Improvement of soft Bangkok clay using vertical geotextile band drains
compared with granular piles. Geotextiles and Geomembranes 9 (3), 203–231.
Cala, M., Flisiak, J., 2001. Slope stability analysis with FLAC and limit equilibrium
methods. In: Bilaux, Rachez, Detournay, Hart (Eds.), FLAC and Numerical Modelling
in Geomechanics. A.A. Balkema Publishers, pp. 111–114.
Cala, M., Flisiak, J., 2003a. Complex geology slope stability analysis by shear strength
reduction. In: Brummer, Andrieux, Detournay, Hart (Eds.), FLAC and Numerical
Modelling in Geomechanics. A.A. Balkema Publishers, pp. 99–102.
Cala, M., Flisiak, J., 2003b. Slope stability analysis with numerical and limit equilibrium
methods. In: Burczynski, Fedelinski, Majchrzak (Eds.), Computer Methods in
Mechanics. CMM-2003.
Cheng, Y.M., Lau, C.K., 2008. Slope Stability Analysis and Stabilization: New Methods
and Insight. Routledge, UK.
Cheng, Y.M., Lansivaara, T., Wei, W.B., 2007. Two-dimensional slope stability analysis by
limit equilibrium and strength reduction methods. Computers and Geotechnics 34
(3), 137–150.
Christoulas, S., Giannaros, C., Tsiambaos, G., 1997. Stabilization of embankment
foundations by using stone columns. Geotechnical and Geological Engineering 15
(3), 247–258.
Cooper, M.R., Rose, A.N., 1999. Stone column support for an embankment on deep
alluvial soils. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Geotechnical
Engineering 37 (1), 15–25.
Datye, K.R., Nagaraju, S.S., 1981. Design approach and ﬁeld control for stone columns.
Proc. of 10th Int. Conf. on SMFE, Stockholm, 3, pp. 637–640.
Dawson, E.M., Roth, W.H., 1999. Slope Stability Analysis with FLAC. In FLAC and Numerical
Modeling in Geomechanics. In: Detournay, C., Hart, R. (Eds.), Proceedings of the
International FLACSymposium on Numerical Modeling inGeomechanics,Minneapolis,
Minnesota, September 1999. A. A. Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 3–9.
Dawson, E.M., Roth, W.H., Drescher, A., 1999. Slope stability analysis by strength
reduction. Geotechnique 49 (6), 835–840.
Han, J., Leshchinsky, D., 2004. Limit equilibrium and continuum mechanics-based
numerical methods for analyzing stability of MSE walls. Proceedings of the 17th
Engineering Mechanics Conference, ASCE, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware, USA, June 13–16.
Han, J., Leshchinsky, D., 2006. Stability analyses of geosynthetic-reinforced earth
structures using limit equilibrium and numerical methods. Proceedings of the 8th
International Geosynthetics Conference, 18–22 September, Yokohama, Japan,
pp. 1347–1350.
Han, J., Ye, S.L., 2001. A simpliﬁed method for computing consolidation rate of stone
column reinforced foundations. Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental
Engineering, ASCE 127 (7), 597–603.
Han, J., Leshchinsky, D., Shao, Y., 2002. Inﬂuence of tensile stiffness of geosynthetic
reinforcements on performance of reinforced slopes. In: Delmas, Gourc, Girard (Eds.),
Proceedings of Geosynthetics – 7th ICG. Swets & Zeitlinger, Lisse, pp. 197–200.
Han, J., Sheth, A.R., Porbaha, A., Shen, S.L., 2004. Numerical analysis of embankment
stability over deep mixed foundations. ASCE Geotechnical Special Publication No.
126: Geotechnical Engineering for Transportation Projects, GeoTrans 2004, ASCE,
Los Angles, California, USA, July 26–31, pp. 1385–1394.
Han, J., Parsons, R.J., Sheth, A.R., Huang, J., 2005. Factors of safety against deep-seated
failure of embankments over deep mixed columns. Proceedings of Deep Mixing
2005 Conference, Sweden, Vol. 1.2, pp. 231–236. May 23–25.
Han, J., Oztoprak, S., Parsons, R.L., Huang, J., 2007. Numerical analysis of foundation
columns to support widening of embankments. Computers and Geotechnics 34,
435–448.
Han, J., Hong, Z.S., Shen, S.L., 2008. Stability of levees over soft soil improved by deep
mixing technology. GeoCongress 2008: Geosustainability and Geohazard Mitiga-
tion, ASCE, pp. 716–723.
Hughes, J.M.O., Withers, N.J., Greenwood, D.A., 1975. A ﬁeld trial of the reinforcing effect
of a stone column in soil. Geotechnique 25 (1), 31–44.
Itasca Consulting Group, Inc., 2006. FLAC/Slope User's Guide, Version 5.0. 84p.
Madhyannapu, R.S., Puppala, A.J., Hossain, S., Han, J., Porbaha, A., 2006. Analysis of
geotextile reinforced embankment over deep mixed soil columns: using numerical
and analytical tools. Proceedings of the ASCE GeoCongress 2006, Atlanta, GA.
McKenna, J.M., Eyre, W.A., Wolstenholme, D.R., 1975. Performance of an embankment
supported by stone columns in soft ground. Geotechnique 25 (1), 51–59.
Priebe, H.J., 1995. The design of vibro replacement. Ground Engineering 28 (12), 31–37.
Rathgeb, E., Kutzner, C., 1975. Some applications of the vibro-replacement process.
Geotechnique 25 (1), 45–50.
Richards, K.S., Reddy, K.R., 2005. Slope failure of embankment dam under extreme
ﬂooding conditions: comparison of limit equilibrium and continuum models.
Proceedings of the Geo-Frontiers 2005 Conference, ASCE, Austin, Texas.
Shukha, R., Baker, R., 2003. Mesh geometry effects on slope stability calculation by FLAC
strength reduction method – linear and non-linear failure criteria. In: Brummer,
Andrieux, Detournay, Hart (Eds.), FLAC and Numerical Modelling in Geomechanics.
A.A. Balkema Publishers, pp. 109–116.
Srivastava, A., Sivakumar Babu, G.L., 2009. Effect of soil variability on the bearing
capacity of clay and in slope stability problems. Engineering Geology 108 (1–2),
142–152.
Sun, J., Tian, X., Guan, X., Yu, Y., Yang, X., 2008. Stability analysis for loosened rock slope of
Jinyang Grand Buddha in Taiyuan, China. Earth Science Frontiers 15 (4), 227–238.
Terashi, M., Kitazume, M., Minagawa, S., 1991. Bearing capacity of improved ground by
compaction piles. In ASTM Special Technical Publication 1089, Deep Foundation
Improvement: Construction and testing, pp. 47–61.
Won, J., You, K., Jeong, S., Kim, S., 2005. Coupled effects in stability analysis of pile–slope
systems. Computers and Geotechnics 32 (4), 304–315.
110
S.W. Abusharar, J. Han / Engineering Geology 120 (2011) 103–110
